in
   West Midlands Police




        THE
       REPORT




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
                       THE REPORT




INTRODUCTION




On Saturday 15 April 1989 a football match to decide a

semi-final round of the Football Association (FA) Cup

was to be played between the Liverpool and Nottingham

Forest Football Clubs. The venue selected was the

Hillsborough Football Stadium, the home of Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club.




After six minutes of play at Hillsborough the game was

stopped when it became apparent that spectators on the

west terraces at the Leppings Lane end and behind the

Liverpool goal had been severely crushed.   As a

consequence 95 died and over 400 people underwent

hospital treatment for injuries they had received.     Two

of those injured are still in deep coma and are not

expected to recover.




The policing arrangements for the match were the

responsibility of the South Yorkshire Police,    In the

immediate aftermath of the disaster the efficiency of

those arrangements was called into question.    As a

result it was decided that the investigation should be
conducted by an independent force.   The Chief Constable

of the West Midlands Police was invited and he accepted

that investigation responsibility.   He appointed an

Assistant Chief Constable to take full-time charge.




THE INVESTIGATION




On Monday 17 April 1989 the Right Honourable Lord

Justice TAYLOR was appointed to carry out a Public Inquiry

into the circumstances.   His terms of reference were as

follows:-




     "To inquire into the events at Sheffield

     Wednesday Football Ground on 15th April

     1989 and to make recommendations about the

     needs of crowd control and safety at sports

     events."




The role of the West Midlands Police was to undertake

the gathering of evidence for Lord Justice TAYLOR by the

supplying of statements of evidence to Treasury Solicitors

supporting Counsel to the Inquiry.    Where West Midlands

Police Officers interviewed witnesses, the statements were

taken under the provisions of Section 9 of the Criminal

Justice Act 1967 (CJA).   However, because of the speed

with which the oral hearings were to take place - one

month after the disaster - some witnesses elected to
provide written recollections through their solicitors.

Notably were South Yorkshire Police officers who

supplied recollections without Criminal Justice

Act endorsements. Those recollections have not since

been converted.     From a criminal investigation

perspective this is clearly unsatisfactory but had such

a course not been pursued at the outset it would have

been impossible for Lord Justice TAYLOR to proceed.        He

deliberately set himself a tight timetable because the

disaster raised urgent questions of safety and there

was a need to report before the start of the following

football season.




West Midlands Police involvement was also to take

responsibility for the coronal enquiries.     These enquiries

were undertaken in conjunction with those for Lord Justice

Taylor and have continued since.     The objective of the

coronal inquiries has been the identification of the

deceased, the location where they died, the cause of death

and continuity issues.     Her Majesty's Coroner for

South Yorkshire (West District) in whose jurisdiction the

disaster occurred is Dr Stefan L POPPER, LLB, B Med Sci,

BM, BS, MRCGP.     Dr POPPER has opened the inquests and

has adjourned them pending the completion of the police

investigation.     However, since that decision it has been

agreed that the Inquests will be re-opened in Sheffield

on 18 April 1990 for the purposes of taking evidence of

medical cause of death, location of deceased and related

continuity issues.
The West Midlands Police investigation began on

Wednesday 19 April.   An early priority was to establish

contact with people who had evidence to give.

Consequently, an Incident Information Centre was opened

in Birmingham with a "freephone" number advertised

nationally for potential witnesses to make contact.        A

total of 2,666 persons responded.     Once witnesses had

started to be identified teams of police officers were

despatched to Sheffield, Liverpool and other parts of

the country to undertake interviews.     In each case a

questionnaire was used and in all nearly 8,000 have

been completed.   On the discretion of the officer

completing the questionnaire if the witness had

relevant evidence to give a CJA statement was taken.

A total approaching 5,000 statements and/or

recollections have been obtained.




Safety issues were obviously a major focus of

attention and consequently 1,740 relevant documents

have been seized, studied and catalogued.




An unusual feature of this disaster investigation has

been the amount of visual and oral evidence available to

record precisely what occurred during those fatal minutes

of Saturday afternoon.   As is well known the BBC were

recording and transmitting live pictures and sound of the

match on nationwide television.     In addition, Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club and South Yorkshire Police had

video cameras operating in and around the stadium.      A

total of 71 hours of film were recorded covering the

periods before, during and after the disaster.

Furthermore, press photographers were in abundance taking

photographs during the same periods and particularly once

the disaster had been recognised.     (It will be recalled

that some such activity was the subject of severe

criticism.)   In addition two South Yorkshire Police

officers were in attendance charged with the

responsibility of taking photographs for football

intelligence purposes, a normal and proper deployment.          A

total of 2,411 still photographs have been passed to the

investigation team.   These have been examined in great

detail and catalogued.     Copies of audio recordings of

police messages have also been obtained; a total of 905

forty minute tapes have been prepared, all of which     have

been examined and relevant parts transcribed.




With much of this evidence in hand Lord Justice TAYLOR's

hearings began on 15 May 1989-     They continued, sitting

long hours, for 31 days.     They were concluded on   29 June

followed by a half day of closing submissions on

14 July.   Lord Justice TAYLOR published the Interim

Report of his findings on 4 August 1989.     (The

Interim Report has been followed by a Final Report

which in no way materially affects this investigation.)
Lord Justice TAYLOR's Interim Report was based on his own

interpretation of what he heard and saw both before and

during his oral hearings.   Much of what he says is

uncontrovertible and therefore frequent reference is made

to relevant parts throughout this report.    The evidence

on which Lord Justice Taylor drew his conclusions has

not been added to significantly nor contradicted by our

investigation findings since the publication of his

Interim Report.   Notwithstanding there are aspects of

this disaster which in the opinion of the Investigating

Officer may not have been given sufficient prominence;

for example, the role of supporters.     (NB: Where

opinion, conjecture or the experience of the

Investigating Officer is recounted in this report, it

will be clearly identified as such.)




On the publication of the Interim Report, the Chief

Constable of South Yorkshire Police wrote to the Director

of Public Prosecutions and asked whether a criminal

investigation should follow.   As a consequence the Chief

Constable of the West Midlands Police was invited to

continue and pursue any complaints against police as

well as to establish whether there was any responsibility

in Criminal Law by any of the parties involved.       The

full criminal and disciplinary investigation formally

commenced on Wednesday 27 September 1989.    Those

investigations have continued and this submission

represents the findings at this stage.    No formal

interviews under caution of persons who could be

construed as "principles" have yet taken place.
COMPLAINTS AGAINST POLICE




A total of 17 complaints have been made against 19

police officers, of whom 12 individuals - all South

Yorkshire Police Officers - have been identified.     Later

in this report where those complaints relate to the

main criminal matters they will be considered.




The Police Complaints Authority are overseeing the

conduct of this investigation.   Captain E N TAYLOR of

that Authority is the supervisor.




OBJECTIVE OF THE SUBMISSION




The objective of the submission is to summarise the

evidence as it relates to criminal matters and the

culpability of individuals.   It is stressed that it is

not intended to replicate Lord Justice TAYLOR's Interim

Report, rather to review the evidence which relates

solely to the principal criminal matters drawing on

Lord Justice TAYLOR's work where appropriate.    It is

not for this report, however, to re-examine issues

which are not related to this central concern.
It will be recalled in an Introduction to Part I of the

West Midlands Police submission to the Director of

Public Prosecutions, the Investigating Officer summarised

his preliminary thoughts about the responsibilities or

otherwise of various parties to the disaster.      Briefly

the following comments were made.




(A)   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE




      The control of the football fans outside the

      football stadium, in Leppings Lane, the crushing

      outside the turnstiles and the opening of gate 'C *

      all have a bearing on the later overcrowding in

      pens 3 and 4.




      The monitoring of those two pens, knowledge of

      crowd capacity and restrictions applied, could be

      primary features of the deaths.   The police

      responsibilities for these aspects need to be

      examined.   Parties, other than South Yorkshire

      Police, may also have some responsibility.

      Precisely whose responsibility monitoring was

      seems to have been in doubt.
The planning and control of the football match

identifies senior police officers who, by their

actions or failures, may feature.   They are:-




  (i)   Walter JACKSON

        Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)




 (ii)   David DUCKENFIELD

        Chief Superintendent




(iii)   Bernard MURRAY

        Superintendent




 (iv)   Roger MARSHALL

        Superintendent




  (v)   Roger GREENWOOD

        Superintendent




All were present at the match and took a part in

directing the policing operation.   Specific

allegations have been levelled at each of the above

in formal police complaint terms by relatives who

lost members of their families.
In addition, two police constables, by virtue of

their alleged actions or failings, also have to be

considered.   They are:-




  (i)   Peter Edward SMITH

        Police Constable 1285




 (ii)   David Alfred ILLINGWORTH

        Police Constable 417




In each instance specific allegations have been

made against these two officers by individuals in

pens 3 and 4, that their failure to open the

perimeter fence gates to those pens 'caused' a

death or deaths.




Sheffield Wednesday Football Club




All the deaths occurred within the Hillsborough

stadium.   There is a responsibility, both legally

and morally, upon those connected with ownership or

in management to consider the safety of the public

who use the facility.      The following are identified

as having that responsibility:-




  (i)   Herbert McGEE, Chairman

 (ii)   Graham MACKRELL, Club Secretary
      and in addition, other Directors of the Club:-




       (iii)      Matthew SHEPPARD, Vice Chairman

        (iv)      Stanley SPEIGHT

          (v)     Clifford WOODWARD

        (vi)      Keith ADDY

       (v i i )   Ernest BARRON

      (viii)      Geoffrey HULLEY




      Depending upon the level of responsibility it may

      be thought necessary to investigate further the

      role of some or all of the above named.




(C)   EASTWOODS AND PARTNERS, CONSULTANTS




      Eastwoods and Partners were first retained by

      Sheffield Wednesday in 1978 as consultant engineers

      to the Club.       Dr Wilfred EASTWOOD took the lead

      responsibility for the work at the ground since

      that time.




      The involvement of Eastwoods initially with South

      Yorkshire County Council (later Sheffield City

      Council) and Sheffield Wednesday Football Club is

      particularly important.




                                                             176
      The testing of barriers, ground improvements,

      alterations and the setting of crowd capacities are

      all relevant.




      Also of concern are the erection of the radial

      fences creating pens 3, 4 and the void 5, the

      removal of barrier 144 and the failure of barrier

      124A.




      No further enquiry has commenced at this stage in

      relation to Dr Eastwood or any of his employees.




(D)   SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL




      The Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 gave

      responsibility in the case of Hillsborough, to

      South Yorkshire County Council, for the issue and

      control of the General Safety Certificate.   South

      Yorkshire County Council was abolished on 1 April

      1986 and the new licensing authority became Sheffield

      City Council.




      An 'Officer Working Party' consisting of

      representatives of the City Council, South

      Yorkshire Police, South Yorkshire Fire Service

      and the Club met on a regular basis to discuss

      issues of safety at Hillsborough.




                                                              177
Mr David BOWNES is the Chief Licensing Officer for

Sheffield City Council.     He gave oral evidence at

Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.




The overcrowding in the pens is an important

feature of the disaster.     The earlier removal of a

crush barrier, number 144, may be relevant to the

collapse of barrier 124A.    Mr BOWNES may have

'approved' the removal of this barier.




THE SUPPORTERS




No evidence has been found to prove that an

individual or a group of supporters is responsible

for a major criminal offence.




Nevertheless, the role of the supporters in the

build up to the disaster needs to be examined in

order to set into context the police action

subsequently taken.




The extent to which the effects of alcohol played a

part, the late arrival of many thousands of

Liverpool supporters and even perhaps their own

failure to recognise the distress of fellow

supporters in pens 3 and 4 are important issues in

this disaster investigation.
FORMAT OF SUBMISSION




The wealth of evidence obtained during the course of

this investigation in respect of the foregoing discussion

has been examined in great detail.     It has been sorted

into the categories of material and non-material

evidence.   The material evidence has then been

organised into the accompanying six parts, as follows




Part I      Ground   Staff - Sheffield Wednesday Football

            Club officials, stewards, turnstile

            operators, programme sellers and food vendors.




Part II     Ground   Characteristics - history of Sheffield

            Wednesday Football Club, layout of stadium

            and approaches, safety considerations and

            fencing.




Part III    Visual   Evidence - relevant video film and

            still photographs pictorally describing the

            disaster.




Part IV     Supporters - behaviour of fans as reported by

            themselves, local residents, local

            shopkeepers, local publicans and local off

            licensees.




Part V      Police - their observations and actions as

            presented in their non CJA recollections,

            documents and other submissions.
Part VI       Emergency Services - other than the Police.

              Their actions and observations.




These sections collectively form a "library" to

which this report will frequently cross-refer.     Part

VII of the submission is this Report.     The document

section of each Part of the submissions must be

examined in conjunction with the written Report.     In

many instances documents are included with a full

description because they are not referred to in the

main text.     It would be repetitive to produce such a

Report in the normal manner and hence this descriptive

document index system has been adopted.




After this Introduction the report will summarise the

Key Issues of the disaster before moving to consider

the responsibilities of organisations and later

individuals. The organisations to be considered are:-




     (A)     South Yorkshire Police




     (B)     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club



     (C)     Eastwood and Partners, Consultant Engineers

             to the Club.




     (D)     Sheffield City Council
The discussion will include Interim Conclusions which

can be drawn at this stage in the investigation.     Of

course, the product of any subsequent interviews may

change any of the conclusions drawn in this report.




The report will conclude with Recommendations as to

further action and interviews to be undertaken under

caution.




At the conclusion of the report an appendix details

a Sequence of Events, with dates and, where appropriate,

the timings of important events both before and during

the disaster.




OTHER CONSIDERATIONS



It has already been indicated in this report that

many of the statements of witness obtained have been in

the form on non-CJA recollections.    Amongst these are

accounts from individuals who may be considered to have

some culpability in Criminal Law.    None of these

recollections has at this time been converted into a

CJA statement or admitted under caution.




Recollections, whilst a very efficient method of

collecting evidence early for Counsel to the Inquiry,

are very unsatisfactory for a criminal investigation.

This is not only because they are not protected by the

provisions of the Criminal Justice Act, but also

because they lack thoroughness which invariably follows
an efficient one-to-one interview.   Secondly, they have

been subjected to review and possible editing by

persons who may be more minded to protect the liability

interests of the individual or organisation at Civil Law.




A related issue centres on the evidence taken from

individuals at the Public Inquiry oral hearings and the

transcripts made of what was said.   (These transcripts

are referred to frequently throughout this report.)

As far as witnesses are concerned, their accounts, as

recorded in transcripts, have not been converted into

statements.   It is also worth noting that the method

adopted to obtain the evidence at the oral hearings

through examination-in-chief, cross-examination and

re-examination was not subject to the rigour of the

rules of evidence as they would apply in a criminal law

context.




The latter point is particularly relevant in respect

of those who could be considered culpable.     At no time

in supplying a recollection did any person indicate that

he/she had been formally warned with a caution against

self-incrimination. Furthermore, in giving evidence at

the oral hearings no person was put on oath nor was

anyone warned about making statements which could

amount to self-incrimination, although it is

appreciated that certain organisations did receive

warnings in the form of Salmon letters.
This difficulty was possibly further compounded in

the opinion of the Investigating Officer by legal

representation at the hearings being afforded solely to

the South Yorkshire Police and not to individual police

officers or their representative bodies.   With all due

respect to Queen's Counsel representing the South

Yorkshire Police there was clear potential for a

conflict of interests.




Whilst there is no suggestion that in the absence of

the administering of an oath there was prevarication at

the oral hearings, nevertheless the admissability of much

of the evidence on which this report and supporting

sections is based is, to say the least, questionable.




Indeed it is the opinion of the Investigating Officer

that if a case is made out to undertake a prosecution based

on the evidence so far adduced, much of it will     haveto be

converted in some way in order for it to become

admissable.   Without that being achieved - for example,

an individual under caution refusing to answer

questions or giving a different account - it is

unlikely that a prosecution could succeed beyond

committal.




The role of the media must also be mentioned.     The

disaster and its immediate aftermath was subjected to

enormous media attention.   Much speculation followed in
which individuals, particularly senior police officers,

were singled out, later analysis rendering them

blameworthy.




However, that was not the end of it.    Lord Justice

TAYLOR's oral hearings followed and again the media

machirte went into operation.   As can be seen from the

transcripts of the evidence given by certain individuals

at the hearings, admissions were made which received

widespread circulation on nationwide television and in

newspapers.




More recently, on Tuesday 6 February 1990, a documentary

was transmitted by Yorkshire Television nationwide in

the "First Tuesday" series entitled "Hillsborough

Disaster."    This film, obviously using Lord Justice

TAYLOR's Interim Report as the basis of the script,

makes damning criticism of the police officer in

command at Hillsborough, Chief Superintendent David

DUCKENFIELD.




In the opinion of the Investigating Officer if a

manslaughter prosecution is pursued against Chief

Superintendent David DUCKENFIELD it is seriously

questionable whether he could receive a fair trial.

That also applies, but to a lesser extent, to others as

well as to South Yorkshire Police as a body corporate.




In closing this discussion on the adverse effects of

a Public Inquiry, the Investigating Officer would like to
reinforce his belief on how unsatisfactory such Public

Inquiries are to the due criminal process.     Whilst not

denying the importance of promulgating as early as

possible the lessons from a disaster such as

Hillsborough, if there is criminal culpability then the

difficulties, perhaps insurmountable, of pursuing a

successful prosecution are totally unacceptable.     In

sum those difficulties are:-




   (i)     Insufficient time to conduct properly

           interviews of witnesses.




 (ii)      Inability to interview potential defendants

           according to proper protections afforded by

           Police and Criminal Evidence Act.




(iii)      Absence of evidence under oath as a protection

           to the integrity and quality of the evidence.




 (iv)      The relaxed "rules of evidence" at public

           hearings.




   (v)     The dangers of persons incriminating themselves

           at Public Inquiries without appropriate

           warnings.




 (vi)      Possible conflict of interests in legal

           representation.




(v i i )   Widespread media coverage.
                                                             1
CIVIL PROCEEDINGS




It is known that civil actions were begun in Liverpool

before Mr Justice Rose and later in Manchester before

Mr Justice Stein.        The plaintiffs were relatives of

the deceased Raymond Thomas CHAPMAN and David George

RIMMER.




The plaintiff cited the following defendents:-




          (i)   The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire

                Police




      (ii)      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club




     (iii)      Eastwood & Partners (Consulting

                Engineers)   (A firm)




      (iv)      Sheffield City Council.




A preliminary hearing was held in October 1989, a trial

being set for 19 June 1990.




In November 1989 South Yorkshire Police announced they

would meet claims from relatives of the deceased and

with the injured without admitting liability.
                       The Investigating Officer now understands that the

                       original actions are now stayed and will not be taken

                       further.   It is also understood that South Yorkshire

                       Police intend to pursue an action against Sheffield

                       Wednesday Football Club, Sheffield City Council and

                       Eastwoods and Partners as defendants.    Mr Justice Stein

                       has set a trial date for October 1990.




                       In respect of the original   trial date - 19 June 1990 -

                       it is understood that this   will now be used by the

                       Hillsborough Steering Group (co-ordinating the

                       activities of many of the solicitors representing

                       relatives of the deceased) to hear remoteness cases.




                       KEY ISSUES OR 'CAUSES'




Lord Justice Taylor    It will be recalled that in Lord Justice Taylor's

(LJT) Interim Report   Interim Report he usefully summarised a number

Page 20                of factors which give explanation to why he thought the

Paragraphs 115-117     disaster occurred.



                       In the opinion of the Investigating Officer they are the

                       key issues of the criminal   case, together with thepart

                       played by the behaviour of   the fans.




                       Lord Justice Taylor said that the overcrowding up to

                       1452 hours was due to a number of factors considered

                       broadly under three headings.
                      (i )   The Layout at the Leppings Lane End




                             He observed that the layout of the turnstile

                             area, of the terraces and the concourse between

                             them was the result of piecemeal changes.   He

                             discussed the fencing and the crush barriers and

                             concluded that without any means of limiting

                             entry numerically to pens 3 and 4 behind the

UT   Interim Report          goal, it was highly likely they would fill to

Paragraphs 118-135           capacity and exceed it unless preventive steps

                             were taken.



                             Part II of this submission catalogues and presents

                             evidence gathered on the ground layout.




                      ii)    Lack of Fixed Capacities for the Pens




U T Interim Report           Lord Justice Taylor discusses this issue

Paragraphs 136-159           and concluded:-


                             "The Safety Certificate contained no maximum
                             figures for individual pens.  There was,
                             therefore, no sanction or provision focussing
                             attention as to the need to limit entry to the
                             pens by numbers.  The layout at Leppings Lane as
                             it evolved made electronic or mechanical control
                             over numbers entering individual pens
                             impracticable if all pens were to be available.
                              Given an important match and a capacity
                              attendance, fans were likely to crowd into
                              popular sections like pens 3 and 4. Those pens
                              were likely to become overfull well before
                              warning came from the turnstiles that numbers were
                              approaching the terrace maximum of 10,100.
                              Control over numbers and the avoidance of
                              overcrowding, therefore, depended entirely on
LJT Interim Report            visual monitoring of the crowd."
Paragraph 159

                              Part II of this submission again addresses this

                              issue.




                      (iii)   Lack of Effective Monitoring of the Terraces




                              The Public Inquiry identified three problems in

                              respect of monitoring spectators on the terraces

                              so as to avoid overcrowding and taking preventive

                              action.   Those problems were (1) Who should

                              monitor and react?   (2) When is an area 'full'?

                              (3) Fear of hooliganism.




UT   Interim Report           This issue is dealt with in the Interim Report

Paragraphs 160-184            and in Parts I and V of this submission.




                              Lord Justice Taylor went on to discuss the

                              crushing and fatalities after 1452 hours under

                              six headings.
                     (iv)   The Build up at the Turnstiles




                            The decision to open gate 'C' and later gates 'A'

                            and 'B' was inevitable after the build up of

                            supporters in the courtyard approaches from

                            Leppings Lane to the turnstiles.      Crushing

                            occurred, injuries were suffered and there was a

                            genuine apprehension that deaths would follow.




                            Relevant to this issue is the layout of the

                            Leppings Lane approaches, the number of

                            turnstiles and the efficiency of them.      This is

                            dealt with in Part II.




                            Further, the behaviour of fans undoubtedly

                            contributed to the problems in the opinion of the

                            Investigating Officer.   Their behaviour,

                            demeanour and related factors are discussed in

                            Part IV.




                            Obviously the police responsibilities before and

                            during the crushing and immediately after are

                            crucial.   These are detailed in Part V.




LJT Interim Report          Lord Justice Taylor's debate is recorded in his

Paragraphs 185-228          Interim Report.   He concluded that

                            the decision to open the gates was correct, but

                            the possible effects of doing so required other

                            action.
                       (v)    The Blunder on Opening the Gates




U T Interim Report            This issue, dealt with in the Interim Report

Paragraphs 229-232            by Lord Justice Taylor, is perhaps the most

                              important of all in respect of possible criminal

                              culpability.




                              In sum, should Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD,

                              or possibly Superintendent MURRAY, have

                              considered the crowd density in pens 3 and 4 and

                              the likely effect of opening the gates,

                              particularly 'C' - the first to be opened - and

                              thought through the consequences?    Having thought

                              through the possible consequences would an

                              instruction have followed to close off access

                              to the tunnel and to pens 3 and 4?   Having failed

                              to do so, can that be construed as a criminal or

                              disciplinary offence?   Or is it imcompetence?

                              Or what?




                     (v i )   The Barriers in Pen 3




                              Barrier 124A in pen 3 collapsed sometime after

                              1452 hours and possibly as late as 1504 hours at

                              the time the Liverpool player, Beardsley, hit

                              the bar.




                                                                                    19
                             It is believed from West Midlands Police

                             enquiries on behalf of HM Coroner that 81

                             people died in pen 3 and most were found dead or

                             fatally injured in front of or close to barrier

                             124A; its importance, therefore, is self-evident.




                             Barrier 144, the one at the top of pen 3 near the

                             tunnel, was removed in 1986.   It is believed to

                             have influenced the pressure created in surges

                             from the tunnel, there being no retarding

                             influence as was previously afforded by this barrier.




U T Interim Report           The barriers are dealt with by Lord Justice

Paragraphs 233-243           TAYLOR and by the Investigating Officer in Part II.




                     (vii)   The Crushing not Recognised




                             Perhaps the second most important issue is the

                             time it took for the crushing to be recognised in

                             pens 3 and 4.   The specific complaints against

                             Police Constables SMITH and ILLINGWORTH relate.




                             Notwithstanding the responsibilities of these

                             two officers at the perimeter gates to pens 3

                             and 4, should others have recognised the

                             distress earlier and taken action which could

                             have saved a life or lives?
LJT Interim Report               Lord Justice Taylor concludes in his report

Paragraph 249                    that "there was a period during which the failure

                                 to recognise the problem and the inhibition

                                 against tackling it caused vital time to be

                                 lost."




                                 Does such a failure, for however long, to

                                 recognise the problem amount to a criminal

                                 offence?




                      (viii)     The Response of the Police




                                 The plight of those behind the perimeter fence

                                 was not recognised until immediately before play

                                 was stopped at 1505 hours 24 seconds.     Did the

                                 response taken by the police and other emergency

                                 services take place efficiently and effectively?

                                 Were there any neglects in the response which led

LJT Interim Report               to a life or lives failing to be saved?     Lord

 Paragraphs 250-257              Justice TAYLOR states that it was unlikely, but

                                 possible.




                        (i x )   The Perimeter Gates were too small




                                 The perimeter gates to pens 3 and 4 were 0.82

                                 metres and 0.79 metres wide.   These were a clear

                                 departure from the Green Guide standard which
                            recommended 1.1 metres.     The narrow width of

                            these gates caused them to be wholly inadequate

                            for rescue purposes.   (NB: These gates were

                            designed and fitted before the Green Guide

                            minimum widths were introduced in 1986) Interim

LJT Interim Report          Report and Part II refer.

Paragraphs 258-264




                     In the opinion of the Investigating Officer the above

                     described key issues are those to be considered in

                     relation to possible criminal and, where applicable,

                     police disciplinary responsibilities.     In the next

                     section of this report these key issues or 'causes'

                     will be considered as they relate to organisations and

                     individuals.   In criminal offence terms the main

                     emphasis is on the offence of Manslaughter.     However,

                     on occasions it is necessary to consider the offence of

                     Culpable Malfeasance.
                 (A)   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE




                       Mr Peter WRIGHT is the Chief Constable of South

                       Yorkshire Police and he is assisted in the running

                       of the Force by a Deputy and three Assistant Chief

                       Constables.




                       Mr Walter JACKSON, one of those Assistant Chief

                       Constables, and responsible for 'Police

                       Operations', was at Hillsborough Stadium on 15

                       April 1989-   Assistant Chief Constable Mr JACKSON

                       was the 'duty' Chief Officer for the Force that

                       day.   Mr WRIGHT was not in attendance.




                       The policing of football grounds throughout the

                       country has developed over many years and it is

                       true to say the main emphasis in the last decade

                       has been to concentrate police effort on

                       preventing crime and controlling disorder.

Part II

Document No 87         The introduction of the 1976 Guide to Safety at

Pages 463-480          Sports Grounds (Football) was the first advisory

                       code that set out to provide guidance and advice

                       for sporting organisations involved in such

                       events.   The guide was amended and published in a

                       new format in 1986.
                (NB: In referring to decisions made by-

                organisations in respect of safety, the timing and

                context of such should be contrasted with the

                appropriate Guide in operation at the time.     There

                are significant differences in the different

                editions) .



                The result has been that the respective parties

                with responsibility have formed liaison groups

                that meet at determined times to assess not only

                future fixtures, but also changes in ground design

                and structure.   South Yorkshire Police have taken

                part in such meetings with designated officers

                having responsibility, usually at Inspector level.

                For the Hillsborough ground this liaison group was

                known as the "Officer Working Party".




Part I          To some extent South Yorkshire Police, will have

Document No 3   taken guidance from the Association of Chief

Pages 13 ■262   Police (ACPO) on policing football events.     It is,

                however, a fact that the ultimate responsibility

                for policing of Hillsborough Stadium rests with

                the Chief Constable.




                South Yorkshire Police as an organisation can,

                therefore, be considered as the entity, the Chief
Constable at the helm, with individual police

officers acting for him. However, the Chief

Constable is ultimately liable in respect of their

actions based upon the policy he adopts and

authorises, the appointments he makes and the

training he gives.




In terms of possible culpability for the death of

the 95 people it is material that the deaths

resulted from a series of alleged acts, omissions

and decisions actually taken on the day of the

disaster.     Any recklessness, therefore, rests with

those indivduals charged with the responsibility

on the day.    However, it may be necessary, when

considering the possible culpability of individuals

as well as the corporate responsibility, to

consider if the organisation had significantly

influenced the events, the decisions and the acts

of individuals on 15 April 1989 and which led

directly to the disaster.




It is relevant to consider the history of crushing

problems identified in previous years.    The action

taken by South Yorkshire Police in response to

these earlier events is a relevant issue.
                   Examination of the evidence shows South Yorkshire

Part II            Police may have been aware of crushing problems at

Document No 45     the Leppings Lane end as long ago as 1956.         A.

Page 308           letter has been produced which was sent to the

                   Chief Constable of the then Sheffield City Police,

Part II            informing him of the problem.     A statement from

Statement          the writer, Mr                is included.   The

Pages 752-754      Investigating Officer is of the opinion that this

                   event, although of interest, is too far distant to

                   be considered evidentially important.




                   The next record of crushing and injuries on these

Part III           terraces happened at the Semi-final in 1981

Document No 148A   between Tottenham Hotspurs and Wolverhampton

(Video Tape)       Wanderers.    Evidence of the overcrowding at this

Page No 815A       game is available on video.




Part II            There is evidence of injuries to spectators as

Document No 47     described in the letter from Sheffield Wednesday

Pages 314-315      Football Club to South Yorkshire County Council

                   dated 15 April 1981.   South Yorkshire Police

                   recognised that the problem was one of safety.




                   Concern was such that the then Assistant Chief

Part II            Constable (Operations), Mr R J GOSLIN, held a

Document No 50     debrief of which a record has been kept.      (It

Pages 320-324      should be remembered the 1976 Green Guide was then

                   in effect.)
It is clear that at this time that South Yorkshire

Police contacted the football club who,

consulted with Eastwoods and Partners,

Consultants.     It appears that the action taken

to prevent similar incidents was the introduction

of the radial fences, initially creating three

separate pens.




Eventually, in 1985 another radial fence was

installed creating pens 3 and A divided from the

centre of the tunnel.     It is also evident that the

introduction of these separate pens was to assist

in the segregation of home and away supporters for

normal league games.     In semi-finals such

segregation is unnecessary, because the whole of

the Leppings Lane terrace and seating is given

over to the one club's supporters.




There are features of the 1981 match which bear a

remarkable resemblance to the disaster day in

1989.   The 1981 police debriefing clearly

indicates the problem of many spectators arriving

late, due to traffic hold-ups in 1981, causing

many still to be outside the ground at the time

the match commenced.    It seems that after three

minutes Tottenham scored at the Spion Kop end and

a surge of spectators desperate to see what had

happened caused a crush.
                       This may be similar to the 1989 event when after

                       just four minutes, at the same Spion Kop end, the

                       Liverpool player, Beardsley, hit the bar creating

                       a roar of excitement.   Perhaps this led to the

                       final surge in an already overcrowded situation

                       and which resulted in the eventual heavy number of

                       deaths in pen 3 perhaps when the barrier 124A

                       finally broke.




                       In both 1981 and 1989 the capacity figures for

                       Leppings Lane pens or terraces have been in excess

                       of the authorised figure.   A figure of 400 plus in

                       1981. In 1989 there was an excess of 50 per cent

Part II                in pens 3 and 4, based upon the calculations made

Document No 89         by the Health and Safety Executive.   However, it

Pages 555-566          must be pointed out that the capacity figure for

                       Leppings Lane terraces remained an overall figure,

                       there being no separate capacity figure for the

                       individual pens created by the installation of the

                       radial fences post 1981.




                       The date of the next semi-final after 1981 to be

                       held at Hillsborough was in 1987.   It seems this

Part II                match passed without incident, although at the

Statement              request of the police the kick-off was delayed.

Pages 1123-1128        Inspector CALVERT, the Liaison Officer, refers to

Transcript - 22.6.89   this point as does Mr KIRTON of the Football

Day 26                 Association. There was little, therefore, for the

Pages 48-75            police to learn or consider for future games.
                       The year 1988 saw the semi-final at Hillsborough

                       between the same teams as 1989, Liverpool and

                       Nottingham Forest. Evidence has been gathered of

Part II                crushing problems at this match at the Leppings

Document No 51         Lane end.     A letter by the witness,

Pages 325-327          Mr                  was sent to the Minister for

Part II                Sport, Mr MOYNIHAN, and to Mr CROKER of the

Statement              Football Association, describing the problem.

Pages 771-775          There is no evidence of these letters being

                       received.     In addition evidence supporting the

                       injuries is produced in the form of an injuries

                       list giving the name and addresses of some of

                       those injured.     Statements of some of those

Part IV                injured in 1988 are produced in the relevant

                       section of the file covering this aspect.




                       There is little doubt that overcrowding was a

                       problem in 1988.      South Yorkshire Police officers

                       recognised the problem on the day and closed off

                       the tunnel to pens 3 and A.      A number of police

                       officers refer to this important action of closing

Transcript - 24.5.89   the tunnel in 1988.     However, the man in overall

Day 7                  charge of the 1988 match Chief Superintendent MOLE

Pages 46-47            told the Public Inquiry he had no knowledge of such

                       action.     Mr MOLE in fact infers that to his

                       knowledge police officers did not act in closing

                       the tunnel.




                                                                               201
                         There is the evidence of a number of supporters

                         who recall the police closing the tunnel in 1988.

Part IV                  This evidence is identified in the supporters

                         section.




                         The absence of knowledge by Chief Superintendent

                         MOLE of the tunnel closure in 1988 may be viewed

                         as a very important link in the culpability of

                         South Yorkshire Police as an organisation and,

                         perhaps, more so with regard to Chief

                         Superintendent DUCKENFIELD as an individual.




                         Chief Superintendent MOLE's knowledge is important

                         if the links between 1981, 1988 and 1989 are

                         relevant.   The 1981 debrief was communicated to

 Transcript    24.5.89   him in the following years. Mr MOLE was aware of

 Day 7                   the crushing problems in 1981 as his evidence to

 Pages 13-15             the Public Inquiry confirms.




                         It is important Chief Superintendent MOLE was

                         unaware of the problems of crushing and injuries at

                         the 1988 game, albeit there is the evidence

                         related earlier of the letter and the

                         recollections by some of the injured.




                         Consequently, therefore, because the 1988 match

                         was seen by Chief Superintendent MOLE as a

                         successful police operation following on from the
                  previous year, the link with the 1981 problem was

                  broken.   Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, as a

                  result, is unlikely to have been made aware of the

                  problems of 1981 and 1988 by Chief Superintendent

                  MOLE, although interview will confirm whether this

                  is an accurate assumption.




                  This lack of communication may appear serious, but

                  police officers often do act independently to deal

                  with problems.   If the overcrowding was controlled

                  by those in 1988 and they had no knowledge of the

                  1981 problem the importance of communicating the

                  problem of Chief Superintendent MOLE would not have

                  been apparent to them.




                  The late arrival of supporters is a factor, but

                  not one unknown to South Yorkshire Police.

                  History of the 1987 match confirms this as does

                  the 1981 experience the possibility of ensuring

                  all supporters entered the ground in reasonable

                  time is dependent upon the turnstile capabilities,

                  the police control of supporters in the immediate

                  vicinity of those turnstiles and the co-operation

                  of the supporters themselves.

Part V

Document No 193   To correspond with this the Police Operational

Pages 1045-1127   Orders for 1988 and 1989 and the Chief

Document No 194   Superintendent's strategy play an important part.

Pages 1128-1210
Transcript - 25.5.89

Day 8                  Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD in evidence to

Pages 10 and 21        the Inquiry stated his position on the late

                       arrival of fans.




                       Video evidence clearly shows the mass build up of

                       supporters in Leppings Lane and the inability of

                       those police officers present to contain the

                       situation. The reduced turnstile access to the

                       terraces and the confusion from misleading signing

                       and tickets, also involving seated supporters,

                       only added to the problem.




                       As an organisation South Yorkshire Police were

                       aware of the possibility of late comers and could

                       assess over preceeding years the ability of the

                       turnstiles to allow access at a required rate.

Part II                This is perhaps best proved by the minutes of a

Document 81            meeting of Sheffield City Council Advisory Group,

Pages 448              at which the police were present, held on 23 March

                       1988 in which the trend in late comers was

                       identified.




                       Another question to be addressed is the

                       responsibility of South Yorkshire Police, as a body

                       corporate, may have in respect of the appointments

                       made and the training given to individuals who were

                       in command on the day.
The Investigating Officer thinks particularly of

the promotion and transfer of Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD which took effect on 27 March 1989,

just nineteen days before the Football Association

Cup semi-final.   Criticism could be levelled at the

Force for the appointment being so close to the

final and perhaps for not making sure that Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD was up to the job, which

subsequent events would suggest in part he was not.

Lack of geographical knowledge probably was one of

his difficulties and it may be argued that the

organisation put him in an invidious position

especially as matters began to go wrong.     Should

Chief Superintendent MOLE, his predecessor, have

been asked to command the match with Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD "sitting-in" and the

crucial question, of course, would the outcome have

been any different?   A second question is how

qualified was Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD for

his new role, how had his previous performance been

appraised, what was his earlier experience, what

training had he undergone and how had he been

appraised in training, particularly those

appertaining to public order scenarios?




Of course these questions are easy to address with

the wisdom of hindsight.   It is quite probable, in

the opinion of the Investigating Officer that other

police officers have been placed in command

positions and have "gone blind" on their first big
                       occasion coming through because (a) nothing has

                       gone wrong, and (b) the support of the organisation

                       and the people close to the new commander have

                       ensured that the invididual has been adequately

                       bolstered.   The sadness, and a problem for

                       police organisation, is that individuals are not

                       properly tested until a real life event occurs.

                       Training, no matter how realistic, can never

                       adequately test individuals quite like the real

                       thing.




                       These possible aspects of South Yorkshire Police's

                       corporate responsibility have not been addressed

                       because, in the opinion of the Investigating

                       Officer, the evidence, particularly of Assistant

                       Chief Constable Mr JACKSON, indicates that there

                       was an honest belief by him, and by natural

Transcript - 26.5.89   extension, the promoting authorities, that Chief

Day 9                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD was up to the job.     And

Pages 74-75            he may well have been.   Perhaps it was other

                       factors, such as crowd behaviour, communications,

                       ground layout, safety certification (leading him to

                       a justifiable presumption that the ground was safe)

                       - all incidentally outside his control - which

                       conspired to deny him the opportunity to gain

                       experience and greater knowledge.   Had he been

                       allowed to gain that experience and knowledge in

                       1989, who knows how he would have reacted had the

                       events which immediately preceeded the disaster



                                                                               206
occurred in 1990?    In sum "on the job" experience

is alright until it goes wrong.    In the opinion of

the Investigating Officer whilst South Yorkshire

Police could be criticised with hindsight, such

criticism does not amount to criminal behaviour,

corporate or otherwise.




INTERIM CONCLUSION




South Yorkshire Police have, by evidence produced,

been   aware of the problem of overcrowding and

crushing at Hillsborough Stadium since 1981.      The

evidence presented with regard to the culpability

of South Yorkshire Police for considerance of

Corporate Manslaughter on 15 April 1989 is

regarded, at this stage, insufficient.




INDIVIDUAL CULPABILITY




Within South Yorkshire Police a number of police

officers have been identified who had

responsibility on the disaster day for the safety

of the supporters.   For simplicity they are dealt

with in rank order commencing with the Assistant

Chief Constable.
Part II           (1)   WALTER JACKSON,

Statement               ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE (OPERATIONS)

Pages 860-869

                        Assistant Chief Constable Mr JACKSON was

                        present at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April

                        1989-     He was effectively on duty and

                        expected to respond or deal with any major

                        incident that took place in conjunction with

                        the match commander, Chief Superintendent

                        David DUCKENFIELD.




                        In addition to considering Assistant Chief

                        Constable Mr JACKSON's culpability overall,

                        it is relevant to mention that two specific

                        complaints have been made against him.

Part IV                 Briefly the complaints made by Mr Trevor

Statement               HICKS are summarised as:-

Pages 2331 2356

                        (a)     That he failed to take control of the

                                disaster.

                                and

                        (b)     That he, Mr HICKS, made an allegation

                                against Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                                that he was deceitful and intentionally

                                misled the public and senior police

                                officers, including Assistant Chief

                                Constable Mr JACKSON, in relation to the

                                opening of gate ’C * in Leppings Lane.
However, Mr HICKS now alleges that he

questions whether Assistant Chief

Constable Mr JACKSON was unaware of the

real circumstances relating to the opening

of gate 'C'.   Mr HICKS, therefore,

considers there may have been collusion

between Assistant Chief Constable Mr

JACKSON and Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD concerning this point.




These complaints made by Mr Trevor HICKS

relate to Assistant Chief Constable Mr

JACKSON's handling of the disaster after it

was recognised.




If the principle is adopted that the disaster

and deaths were caused primarily because of

acts or omissions on the day, it is necessary

to consider the role played by Mr JACKSON

before the recognition of the disaster.




This can only be assessed by interview of the

officer because there is little in terms of

evidence available to point to Mr JACKSON

being in control or making decisions relevant

to the crucial issues of:-
(a)   Crowd build up in Leppings Lane.




(b)   The   opening of gate ’C *.




(c)   The   overcrowding in pens 3 and   4 and the

      monitoring of those pens, and




(d)   The   response of the police tothose

      issues.




The only evidence of involvement prior to the

disaster is contained in Mr JACKSON's own

non-CJA account when he refers to meeting

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and

Superintendent MURRAY at about 1400 hours in

the Police Control Box and discussing the

general police operation and the early

arrival of Nottingham Forest supporters.

Mr JACKSON also makes reference to Liverpool

fans arriving later.




Assistant Chief Constable Mr JACKSON was

seated in the Directors' Box in the south

stand shortly after 1430 hours and, according

to his evidence to Lord Justice TAYLOR, he

remained there until the recognition by him

of a problem when fans behind Leppings Lane

began to climb the perimeter fence after play
                   commenced.   It seems during this period

                   Mr JACKSON saw nothing which he felt required

                   his attention or intervention.

Part V

Statement          The evidence of Mr SHARPLES, Chief Constable,

Pages 3458 ■3475   Merseyside, who was at the match on 15 April

                   1989 may be significant because he certainly

                   recalls looking for Assistant Chief Constable

                   Mr JACKSON shortly after Mr SHARPLES

                   recognised something was wrong. Assistant

                   Chief Constable Mr JACKSON had already left

                   the Directors' Box by that time.




                   INTERIM CONCLUSION




                   By his presence at the ground on 15 April

                   1989, his involvement in the agreed

                   Operational Order and the responsibility

                   Assistant Chief Constable Mr JACKSON would

                   accept, there is a requirement to interview

                   him under caution.   Although it is unlikely

                   that he as an individual is close enough to

                   the acts or omissions that resulted in the

                   overcrowding and the deaths, he may still be

                   failing to do his duty:-




                   (a)   before the disaster happened, and
                        (b)   based upon the complaint by Mr HICKS of

                              failing to do so after the disaster.




                        The first suggested failure before the

                        disaster is perhaps an alternative to the

                        offence of Manslaughter.     It is suggested the

                        evidence is the same for each offence.        The

                        extent of that evidence has already been

                        examined.




                        The second possible failure will revolve

                        around Mr JACKSON's actions from the time he

                        recognised a problem     and to the time he

                        became involved.    To   some extent his

                        statement provides detail of the actions he

                        took as the disaster     unfolded, but again it

                        will be necessary to     interview Mr JACKSON to

                        understand more fully how he handled the

                        situation.

Part VI

Document No's 211-220   Reference to the extracts from the South

Pages 1491-1589         Yorkshire Police Control Room tape transcripts

                        of their radio communications will assist in

                        establishing how the police managed the

                        disaster.    To actually identify exactly which

                        officer directed certain actions is not easy.

                        At this point it needs to be remembered that

                        an escalating event such as this is often

                        based on teamwork and accepted

                        responsibility.    For example, the
                  identification of a major disaster will

                  result in pre-determined and written

Part V            instructions being carried out by certain

Document No 206   officers.   The Major Disaster Manual is a

Pages 1352-1444   crucial document and needs to be assessed

Part V            alongside the request for 'Operation Support'

Document No 205   which was in fact specifically requested by

Pages 1315-1351   Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and

                  confirmed by Assistant Chief Constable

                  Mr JACKSON.




                  Very often interpretation, common sense and

                  an acceptance of responsibility by all

                  involved is necessary to resolve a disaster

                  in an efficient co-ordinated way.     When it

                  happens it is difficult to introduce

                  composure, logic, reasoning and produce a

                  controlled and totally effective response.

                  Somewhere along the line a mistake, omission

                  or mis-interpretation will occur.     It may be,

                  therefore, that any criminal culpability by

                  Assistant Chief Constable Mr JACKSON will

                  rest, to an extent, on the performance of

                  others or his expectations of them.




                  Finally, one must address Assistant Chief

                  Constable Mr JACKSON's responsibilities and in

                  particular whether he should have taken

                  command for the match with Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD in support.
Assistant Chief Constable Mr JACKSON knew that

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD was newly

promoted and was probably unfamiliar with the

ground.     Should he have, therefore, assumed

the command or asked Chief Superintendent MOLE

to do so?     If he did neither, should he have

positioned himself closer to Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and be immediately

available to plug the gaps in Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD's experience and

knowledge should he have observed things going

wrong?    Had he been closer and the conclusion

drawn by Lord Justice TAYLOR that Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD "froze" had been

observed by Assistant Chief Constable

Mr JACKSON, could the disaster have been

averted by Assistant Chief Constable

Mr JACKSON's subsequent actions, based on

his greater knowledge and experience?     With

approximately 38 per cent of South Yorkshire

Police deployed on activities related

directly to Hillsborough, could it have

been better for Assistant Chief Constable

Mr JACKSON to take command?




The wisdom of hindsight dictates that the

answers to all these questions could probably

be 'yes', but does the failure not to do so

amount to a criminal offence?    Subject to
                        anything that Assistant Chief Constable

                        Mr JACKSON may subsequently say in interview,

                        the Investigating Officer is of the opinion

                        that whilst one can criticise Assistant Chief

                        Constable Mr JACKSON, such criticism does not

                        amount to a criminal offence.




                        Assistant Chief Constable Mr JACKSON will be

                        interviewed over the allegation by Mr HICKS

                        that he may have colluded with Chief

                        Superintendent DUCKENFIELD to lie about how

                        the supporters gained access to the ground.

                        This was to some extent dealt with in his

                        evidence to the Inquiry.     There is no direct

                        evidence to associate Assistant Chief

                        Constable Mr JACKSON with this occurrence

                        and, therefore, only by further interview can

                        these matters be resolved.




Part V            (2)   DAVID DUCKENFIELD, CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT

Statement

Pages 2457-2469         David DUCKENFIELD was promoted to Chief

                        Superintendent and transferred to his new

                        division on 27 March 1989, just 19 days

Part II                 before the semi-final was to be played.     Chief

Statement               Superintendent Brian MOLE effectively had

Pages 846-859           been responsible for planning the event in




                                                                            215
1989 and he had the experience of the two

previous semi-finals in 1987 and 1988.




Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD thereafter

took over responsibility for the operational

control of the event and liaised with Chief

Superintendent MOLE during that 19 day period.




By nature of his rank and role Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD being present at

the match was the man operationally in

charge, the decision maker for all

eventualities unless operational command was

assumed by a more senior police officer,

which it seems it was not.




Briefly the main area of responsibility

directly related to the deaths and the

possible manslaughter culpability of Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD are those

decisions, acts or omissions in the following

categories:-




(a)   Failing to prevent the build up of

      supporters in Leppings Lane and at the

      turnstiles and effectively losing

      control of the ground.
                  (b)   Failing to recognise the overcrowding in

                        pens 3 and k and to act accordingly.




                  (c)   Approving the opening of gate 'C' and

                        possibly gates 'A' and 'B' to

                        relieve the pressure outside and

                        possibly save life, without taking steps

                        to address the possible consequences of

                        that decision for those who would enter

                        and those supporters already in pens 3

                        and k.



                  In addition specific complaints have been

                  made against Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                  and are as follows

Part IV

Statement         By Mr Trevor HICKS;

Pages 2331 2356

                  (a)   He was deceitful and   intentionally

                        misled senior police   officers and

                        members of the public regarding his

                        command and control of police officers

                        on the day.    ("The lie").




                  (b)   He failed to prevent   a dangerous build

                        up of supporters outside of the gates.




                  (c)   He failed to control the movement of

                        supporters subsequent to the opening of
                  (d)   He failed to respond to the developing

                        tragedy and was slow to effect a rescue

                        operation.




                  (e)   That Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                        colluded with Assistant Chief Constable

                        JACKSON to mislead the public over the

                        opening of gate 'C'.

Part IV

Statement         Further Mr Leslie JONES has made allegations

Pages 2368-2377   as follows:-




                  (f)   He failed to acquaint himself with the

                        planning and problems related to the

                        control of the Liverpool -v- Nottingham

                        Forest Semi-final on Saturday 15 April

                        1989.



                  (g)   He failed to monitor the crowd numbers

                        packing into pens 3 and k.




                  (h)   He failed to act when it became obvious

                        that pens 3 and k were over full when he

                        had an excellent viewpoint from the

                        police box above the pens.
                        (i)   He failed to make provision for fans

                              coming through gate 'C' after he had

                              given the order for the gate to be

                              opened.




                        (j)   He failed to act when it was obvious

                              that people were in distress.




                        (k)   He attempted to mislead the Assistant

                              Chief Constable at the ground and

                              others, namely, representatives of the

                              Club, the Football Association and the

                              fans themselves regarding the origin of

                              the order for gate 1C f to be opened.

                              That is by inferring supporters had

                              forced open the gate when he had, in

                              fact, given the order to open the gate.

    Part IV

    Statement           Mrs Joan McBRIEN has reinforced the above

^   Pages 2432A-2432R   allegations with one similar complaint as

                        follows




                        (1)   He should not have opened the gates

                              under any circumstances giving unlimited

                              and uncontrolled access into the

                              football ground by supporters.




                                                                         219
Apart from the "lie" and perhaps complaint

(d) by Mr HICKS, all of the allegations

centre on issues that effectively attempt to

prove the gross negligence or recklessness

required if Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

is to be charged with the offence of

manslaughter.   As with Assistant Chief

Constable Mr JACKSON, it is suggested the

same issues will relate to a possible failure

to do his duty, ie culpable malfeasance as an

alternative, but not as an additional offence.




The "lie" subject of complaint (a) is a

separate issue and the complaint (d) is one

that may fall to be part of the overall

assessment without being a feature of any

recklessness before the disaster occurred.

This very much runs alongside the complaint

against Assistant Chief Constable Mr JACKSON

of failing to take control of the disaster

also made by Mr HICKS.




The evidence in support of the allegations

made and the evidence to support gross

negligence if it exists can be provided and

assessed in a number of key evidential

documents and statements.   Perhaps the
                  simplest way to deal with this is to provide,

                  by list, a brief reminder of the key

                  evidential issues.




                  The Video Evidence




                  From the Police Control Box position Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD was provided with

                  police video.




                  Hence, the visual evidence available to him

                  at the time is restricted to a variety of

                  monitors controlled by police officers in the

                  Police Control Box.




                  The View




Part III          Photographs have been taken from the Police

Document No 176   Control Box in an attempt to show the

(Video Tape)      possible view Chief Superintendent

Page 864          DUCKENFIELD had of pens 3 and 4.     The

                  photographs show empty terraces and give a

                  clear sight of the perimeter fences, radial

                  fences and the tunnel entrance.    On the day

                  the presence of supporters would have

                  obstructed much of those structures which

                  made an important contribution to the deaths

                  and injuries.
In addition it must be remembered that the

position of the Police Control Box and the

intended seating position for the

Chief Superintendent is to give a reasonable

view of the whole of the ground.     There is no

evidence of any activity or disorder in pens

3 or k that would have caused attention to be

directed specifically to those pens prior to

the incident.    There is video evidence of

some supporters in those pens standing on the

crush barrier and there is visual evidence of

some climbing from one pen to another.




Monitoring of the Pens



Related to the view is the monitoring of the

pens for overcrowding which is an unresolved

issue. One understanding is that the Club and

their stewards have this responsibility.

However, there is also an acceptance that the

police, in this case under Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, must have a

responsibility to ensure the safety of

supporters.     (NB: A knowledge of the Green

Guide is a requirement for a police football

ground commander and capacity and safety are
                  issues included in the Green Guide.)      In

                  addition there is the facility to monitor the

                  number of supporters entering the ground by

                  reference to the Club's turnstile counting

                  system.   Indeed the evidence suggests the

                  police made a number of calls to keep

Part I            up-to-date with the   turnstile counts

Statement         according to Mr LOCK.

Pages 598-616

Part V            The South Yorkshire   Police Standing Order

Document No 192   reflects the police   interpretation of

Pages 998-1044    monitoring and crowd packing. In essence this

                  aspect is dealt with by senior police

                  officers suggesting that supporters "find

                  their own level".     In other words it is for

                  the supporters to take responsibility      for

                  their own comfort and safety with the

                  assistance of the Club stewards.




                  Having said this it is evident that there was

                  a difference of opinion and understanding by

                  the Club, the police and by Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, on the monitoring

                  of the Leppings Lane terraces.     Quite simply,

                  whatever the understanding, the fact is no

                  one either police or Club employee,

                  recognised the fact that pens 3 and k were

                  overcrowding.   Nor for that matter did any
                   other observer recognise the fact including

                   professionals who regularly attend matches,

                   such as the media personnel.

Part III

Document No 162    The photograph which shows the time at 1452

Photograph No 28   hours perhaps emphasised the uneven

                   distribution of supporters on the Leppings

Part III           Lane terrace at about the moment the gates

Document No 162    were opened.   Also the photograph at 1454

Photograph No 29   hours, two minutes after the opening of the

                   gate, still suggests there was no real crush

                   at the time.   (Photographs taken by a

Part IV            supporter

Statement

Pages 2090-2091    The extensive gaps on the terrace pens at 6

                   and 7 are very noticeable and even 1 and 2

Part III           show room for more supporters.    Compare these

Document No 162    with the 1459 hours photograph taken by

Photograph No 1                      and the scene is very

Part IV            different in the front of pens 3 and 4.

Statement

Pages 2092-2093    However, it must be pointed out that the

                   views depicted in these photographs were not

                   those necessarily accessible to Chief

                   Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.    For example, the

                   photograph at 1459 hours by         is taken




                                                                     224
                  from the opposite end to the Police Control

                  Box.    Given the perspective from the Police

                  Control Box the density in pens 3 and 4 may

                  not have been as apparent to Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD as perhaps the

                  photograph depicts.




                  Crowd Build Up




                  It is not in question that the crowd build up

                  in Leppings Lane was considerable, certainly

                  from 1430 hours onwards. The video evidence

                  and photographic evidence is ample to show

                  this.    Estimates of numbers suggest between

                  four and five thousand people waiting to

                  enter at about 1445 hours outside the

                  Leppings Lane turnstiles.




                  Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD was aware of

                  this problem, not only from the video

Part V            available to him, but from police officers

Statement         outside, principally Superintendent Roger

Pages 2527-2547   MARSHALL.




                  There is evidence that the police initially

                  controlled the situation after the first

                  crushing outside the turnstiles and in the
area between the outer iron perimeter gates

and the turnstiles.    Effectively the outer

iron perimeter gates were closed and that

enabled those in the crushing area to

eventually gain access to the ground.




This control, however, by police horses and a

few policemen was brief because within a

short time, either by sheer force of numbers

pushing,   accident or by deliberate act, the

outer iron perimeter gate nearest the River

Don was forced open and a mass of supporters

entered.   Effectively at this point control of

supporters was lost.




Gate 'C'




This gate was opened at the request of

Superintendent MARSHALL and on the authority

of Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.     It was

opened, it is understood, to save the lives

of people being crushed outside the

turnstiles waiting to enter.    It is important

to note that the opening of gate 'C',

followed by the outer iron perimeter gate

nearest the River Don being forced and the

crowd flowing into a now congestion free area




                                                  226
                 between those perimeter gates and turnstiles,

Part II          resulted in a constant flow of supporters

Document No 89   into the concourse area.   The evidence of      the

Pages 584-605    Health and Safety Executive counts those

                 supporters who entered in this period through

                 gate 'C ' .




                 If the opening of the gate 'C' was to save

                 life by relieving the pressure and allow in

                 just those between the outer iron perimeter

                 gates and the turnstiles, the well

                 intentioned plan regrettably failed.     This

                 was because of the uncontrolled additional

                 flow from those in Leppings Lane who joined

                 onto the tail end of the remaining supporters

                 after the outer iron perimeter gate was

                 forced open.   This is conjecture and will

                 need clarification in interview with Chief

                 Superintendent DUCKENFIELD. The fact is, as

                 already stated, the police did not or could

                 not, control the supporters in Leppings Lane

                 and the result was the forcing of the

                 perimeter gates coupled with the opening of

                 gate 'C' producing a constant flow of

                 supporters from Leppings Lane into the

                 concourse area.
                  At about the same time the gates 'A' and TB 1

                  were also opened to relieve the congestion.

                  Statements of stewards and police describe

                  this.




Part III          Gate 'C 1 was effectively opened at 1452 hours

Document No 115   and closed five minutes later at 1457 hours

(Video Tape)      before being opened again at 1459 hours.

Page 757          Other openings earlier are not relevant to

                  this issue.   No action was taken, it seems,

                  to consider the effect of opening gate 'C' on

                  the people already in the ground.     From

                  Superintendent MARSHALL'S initial request to

                  open the gates, until the gate 'C ' was opened,

                  less than five minutes elapsed.     It may be

                  contended that in that time some action could

                  have been taken to receive the supporters and

                  distribute them.   That, however, infers that

                  Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD had made up

                  his mind, but delayed in giving the order.

                  If the time was used to consider a decision

                  then the situation is different and there may

                  have been no time to respond once he decided

                  and gave the order.   However, if the time was

                  used for considering a decision, should he

                  have thought through the consequences?       On




                                                                    228
the other hand during that time - whatever

period it was - was he pre-occupied with a

multiplicity of other events occurring

elsewhere in the ground? Interview of Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD will elucidate.




It should be remembered that the actual time

of less than five minutes is the maximum

time.   Although the request is made at 1447

hours it has to be relayed to Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD verbally via the

radio operator.    Also there must be some time

used to actually relay back the decision to

open the gates.    Hence, realistically the

time is likely to be less, but it is

difficult to be exact in the circumstances.




Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD refers to

losing the option of delaying the kick-off

because the players had entered the pitch

from the tunnel.    This aspect is more fully

dealt with in the section relating to

Superintendent Roger GREENWOOD and his tunnel

position about 1450 hours.    It is clear that

the positioning of Superintendent GREENWOOD

and the timing of events, realistically gave

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD time to

delay the kick-off despite his own views to

the contrary.
It is evident from stewards and police

officers that there was disagreement about

the decision to open the gates, probably

because those on the inside did not fully

appreciate the problems on the outside.     It

was left to Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

to make a decision believing lives were in

danger outside the ground.




There is clear visual evidence that pens

1 and 2 and 6 and 7 had spare capacity to

accept supporters, as did the concourse area.

The major question, therefore, is this:-




Should Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD not

only have looked for space to accommodate

those he intended allowing in, but should he

have also considered the effect of their

entry on the already 'full' pens 3 and 4?




If this is contrasted with the "finding their

own level" policy for comfort and safety, the

degree of recklessness involved in that

decision is important.   At the very crux did

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD have a

reckless disregard for safety?   In one sense,

no, for his decision to open gate 'C ' and the
other gates was to save life.   In another

sense his preventive strategy was not fully

thought through, given that a knowledge of

that end of the ground, its geography and

signing, should have led him to expect a

natural progression from gate 'C' to the

tunnel and into pens 3 and 4.   However, did

he have that knowledge?   What has also to be

clarified in interview with Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD is when he gave

the order to "OPEN THE GATES", was he

referring just to gate 'C' or to others as

well. If he was expecting gates 'A', 'B' and

'C' to be opened simultaneously, he may have

had an expectation that the supporters would

have "found their own level" by being

effectively distributed to the three separate

and distinct areas of the concourse and in

turn separate match viewing areas.




There is evidence of the supporters entering

through gate 'A' being 'welcomed' by police

officers despatched to the area.     There is no

doubt that these officers were those

requested from standby duty in the gymnasium

by Superintendent MURRAY shortly before the

request by Superintendent MARSHALL to open
the gates. Those officers, five sergeants and

50 constables, would have been unable to

actually get into Leppings Lane because of

the crush at gate 'A'.     Nor could they go to

the rest of the concourse area because of the

closed fencing running along from gate 'A' to

the north stand.




Encapsulated in or around these primary

evidential matters are ancillary areas that

will be addressed in interview with Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.     They are

briefly:-




(1)   Non-ticket holders




(2)   Late comers; queuing of fans at turnstiles




(3)   Previous football intelligence




(4)   Delayed kick-off




(5)   Contingency planning




(6)   Traffic delays




(7)   Alcohol and drunkenness
                   (8)   Knowledge of previous problems at

                         Leppings Lane end, especially 1981 and

                         1988



                   (9)   Police radio/telephone communications

                         and attendant problems.




                  (10)   Knowledge of layout of ground and of

                         turnstile capabilities




                  (11)   Command responsibilities of himself and

                         Superintendent MURRAY




                  (12)   Command responsibilities of

                         Superintendents MARSHALL and GREENWOOD




                  (13)   Responsibilities of police officers on

                         the track and their instructions

                         especially to Police Constable SMITH and

                         Police Constable ILLINGWORTH




Part V            (14)   His briefing notes before the match and

Document No 198          the emphasis on safety.

Pages 1263-1266

                  (15)   Previous command experience,

                         particularly of football in general and

                         at Hillsborough in particular.
                  INTERIM CONCLUSION




                  Primary points have been addressed and a

                  brief description of other considerations

                  have been set out.   The degree of

                  recklessness attributed to Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD can be considered

                  only after he has been given the opportunity

                  to answer the points raised and provide any

                  explanation of his own which has not so far

                  been apparent.




                  The complaint about the "lie" will be a

                  separate matter and it would be improper to

                  consider it in conjunction with the main

                  events.   Without prejudicing this separate

                  issue, it is a fact that the supporters

                  either deliberately or by sheer weight,

                  forced open the outer iron perimeter gate at

                  the time gate 'C' was opened.     The question

                  that must be asked is that in the

                  understandable confusion of the incident did

                  the two gates become mixed up in the minds of

                  those involved?

Part III

Document No 115   Also relevant may be an earlier opening of

(Video Tape)      gate 'C' to eject the fans when a police

Pages 754-759     horseman rescued the situation.      It was on
Part V

Statements              seeing this that Police Constable BICHARD

Pages 2578-2588         actually said at the time "They've broken

                        down the gate" and he referred the staff in

                        the control room to the monitor showing gate

                        'C'.   This may be an explanation, albeit

                        erroneous.

Part V

Statement         (3)   BERNARD MURRAY, SUPERINTENDENT

Pages 2470-2488

                        Superintendent MURRAY was present on duty at

                        Hillsborough on Saturday 15 April 1989.      He

                        was posted to the Police Control Box within

                        the stadium with Chief Superintendent

                        DUCKENFIELD and the officers operating the

                        cameras, radio and telephone systems and

                        video monitors.



                        He attended the briefing on Friday 14 April

Part V                  1989 and has produced a set of briefing

Document No 199         notes.   In addition Superintendent MURRAY

Pages 1267-1276         commenced his own written log of events on

Part V                  Saturday 15 April 1989, although this log was

Document No 207         later abandoned.

Pages 1445-1447

                        In many ways, although under the command of

                        Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, this

                        officer by his rank, responsibility and past




                                                                          235
                  experience of policing Hillsborough must be

                  considered on a similar basis to Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.   Indeed to some

                  extent the advice, statements and actions of

                  Superintendent MURRAY reflect the

                  decision-making of Chief Superintendent

                  DUCKENFIELD.   Also if Chief Superintendent

                  DUCKENFIELD "froze" as indicated in Lord

                  Justice TAYLOR's Interim Report, should

                  Superintendent MURRAY have reacted to

                  retrieve the situation?




                  In addition to considering this main area of

                  possible recklessness with regard to

                  manslaughter Superintendent MURRAY has had

                  specific allegations made against him in the

                  form of complaints against the police.      These

                  complaints relate to his actions which

                  determine the manslaughter aspect and can,

                  therefore, be assessed with the primary

                  offences for consideration.

Part IV

Statement         Mr Trevor HICKS has made the following

Pages 2331-2356   allegations against Superintendent MURRAY:-




                  (a)   Failed to prevent a dangerous build up

                        of supporters outside of the gates,
(b)   Failed to control the movement of

      supporters subsequent to the opening of

      gate 'C' and,




(c)   Failed to respond to the developing

      tragedy and slow to effect a rescue

      operation.




Superintendent MURRAY'S non-CJA recollection

contains a detailed account of his actions on

Saturday 15 April 1989.   He is certainly on

duty in the Police Control Box well before

the arrival of Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD about 1350 hours.




It is correct to say that the areas

highlighted in the context of Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD are relevant to

Superintendent MURRAY and as such are not

reiterated here.




Specifically referring to the primary

features Superintendent MURRAY actually asks

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD if he

intends to open the gates following

Superintendent MARSHALL'S requests.     In

addition he is definite about his own

recognition of crushing in Leppings Lane.
INTERIM CONCLUSION




Superintendent MURRAY is part of the decision

making team employed at the semi-final.      If

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD is in

jeopardy by his actions then Superintendent

MURRAY will be in jeopardy because it could

be argued he should have seen or recognised

the dangers in the requests being made,

especially as he had previous experience of

the 1988 match and of the ground.




Again, as stated earlier, if the conclusion

drawn by Lord Justice TAYLOR that Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD "froze" is fair and

correct, why did not Superintendent MURRAY

step into the breach and react?




In addition, in overall terms, he must have

some responsibility for the control outside

the ground as well as inside.     The use and

availability of the video and communications

by radio place him in a position of overall

authority with Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD.   Again many of the issues or

points to cover, ancillary to the main

issues, will be referred to in interview with

Superintendent MURRAY.
                        In the same manner as an alternative to any

                        Manslaughter offence consideration must be

                        given to Culpable Malfeasance.

Part V

Statement         (4)   ROGER MARSHALL, SUPERINTENDENT

Pages 2527-2547

                        Superintendent MARSHALL was present on duty

                        at the event on 15 April 1989 and was in

                        charge of policing the Liverpool supporters

                        outside the ground in the Leppings Lane area.



                        He has previous experience of policing the

                        ground. In 1988, he was in control of

                        policing inside the ground with

                        Superintendent GREENWOOD in charge in

                        Leppings Lane.




                        Taking into account one of the major issues,

                        the build up     of supporters and the alleged

                        failure of the police to control the crowd

                        outside Leppings Lane, the command

                        responsibility rests with Superintendent

                        MARSHALL. In addition, as a result of the

                        problem that developed he requested the

                        opening of gate ’C ’ to relieve the crushing

                        outside the turnstiles.
                   Further to considering the actions of

                   Superintendent MARSHALL as they may relate to

                   a Manslaughter offence, he too, by virtue of

                   the evidence, may be considered for the

                   offence of Culpable Malfeasance as an

                   alternative.




                   There are specific allegations made against

                   Superintendent MARSHALL in the form of

                   complaints against the police.   The

                   complaints made relate to his actions and

                   decisions and thereby can be assessed along

                   with the primary criminal offences being

                   considered.

Part IV

Statement          Mr Trevor HICKS complains as follows, in that

Pages 2331 •2356   Superintendent MARSHALL:-




                   (a)   Failed to prevent a dangerous build up

                         of supporters outside of the gates,




                   (b)   Failed to control the movement of

                         supporters subsequent to the opening of

                         gate 'C', and,




                   (c)   Failed to respond to the developing

                         tragedy and was slow to effect a rescue

                         operation.
PartIV

Statement           Mr Leslie JONES adds to the allegations as

Pages 2368-2377     follows:-




                    (d) Superintendent Marshall failed to

                          control and filter fans away from the

                          immediate vicinity of the turnstiles

                          even after 1417 hours, when it was

                          obvious he had lost control of the

                          turnstile area.   In any event he should

                          have acted by 1430 hours at the latest.



                    (e)   He gave no actual order to restrict the

                          approach of those fans, or after 1430

                          hours, to actually stop the fans

                          entering Leppings Lane.

Part IV

Statement           Mrs Joan McBRIEN reinforces the complaints:-

Pages 2432A-2432R

                    (f)   Superintendent MARSHALL failed to

                          prevent a build up of Liverpool

                          supporters at the turnstiles in Leppings

                          Lane by inadequate policing arrangements.




                    (g)   He should not have requested Chief

                          Superintendent DUCKENFIELD to open the

                          gates under any circumstances and

                          thereby giving unlimited and

                          uncontrolled access into the football

                          ground by supporters.
                  Thus the prime responsibilities for

                  Superintendent MARSHALL are questioned in his

                  handling of the events outside the ground.




Part III          His own non-CJA recollection provides his

Document No 136   account of events and there is video evidence

(Video Tape)      which shows him in the crowd immediately

Pages 791-794     outside the turnstiles obviously in great

                  discomfort and showing concern.




                  Superintendent MARSHALL must accept the

                  primary police responsibility for the action

                  taken or lack of action taken in the control

                  of the supporters outside Leppings Lane

                  turnstiles, notwithstanding their

                  contribution to subsequent events.     Within

                  his observation rests the task of taking the

                  necessary decisions either independently, or

                  by requesting assistance of others through

                  Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD in the

                  Police Control Box.




                  Some of the action taken or requested by

                  Superintendent MARSHALL is recorded.    His

                  request at 1417 hours to stop the motorised

                  traffic in Leppings Lane suggests he first

                  recognised a problem at this time, or shortly

                  before, and had begun to respond to it.



                                                                  242
Other action taken, for example, tannoy

messages and the loud-speaker appeal by

Police Constable BUXTON from the police

vehicle are positive acts taken in terms of

making requests to the gathering and growing

crowd to respond; Police Constable BUXTON

also requested the kick-off be delayed to

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.




The closing of the outer perimeter gates and

the use of the police officers on horseback

at this point identifies another positive

action taken. The question is whether extra

resources should have been deployed and could

they have been deployed in good time to

firmly control this crowd, especially as the

evidence indicates the problem had been

recognised.   It is at this crucial point that

the decision to delay kick-off needed to be

addressed.




Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD has

explained his reasoning for not so doing and

to an extent that decision may have made

control of the crowd outside by

Superintendent MARSHALL even more difficult

as kick-off time approached and the demand of

the crowd to get in on time grew.
It is evident that Superintendent MARSHALL

saw that control had been lost because at

1447 hours, in a rapidly     deteriorating

situation with lives in danger, he requested

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD to open the

gates, ie 'A',   1B 1 and 'C'.   Superintendent

MARSHALL requested this action and it must be

explored if there was any alternative open to

him.



There is no suggestion and no evidence at

this time that Superintendent MARSHALL, on

requesting the opening of the gates, gave

thought to requesting a reception of police

and/or stewards inside.     This area, of

course, being under the command of

Superintendent GREENWOOD and ultimately Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.




INTERIM CONCLUSION




Superintendent MARSHALL will need to be

interviewed on his responsibilities.




He had no knowledge of the situation within

the ground in terms of whether overcrowding

was a likely result of his actions.




                                                  244
                        Many of the other points relative to Chief

                        Superintendent DUCKENFIELD are applicable to

                        Superintendent MARSHALL and ,therefore, are

                        not repeated.

Part V

Statement         (5)   ROGER GREENWOOD, SUPERINTENDENT

Pages 2515-2516

                        Superintendent GREENWOOD was the officer on

                        duty with responsibility for police

                        operations and control inside the stadium.




                        As previously indicated Superintendent

                        MARSHALL and he, changed duties from the 1988

                        semi-final. Their respective roles in 1989

                        compliment each other and possibly overlap.




                        The overcrowding of pens 3 and 4 are within

                        the responsibility of Superintendent

                        GREENWOOD. However, the decision to open the

                        gates, the crowd build up outside Leppings

                        Lane and those related events were not within

                        his remit.




                        In addition to considering the main area of

                        recklessness with regard to Manslaughter,

                        Superintendent GREENWOOD has had specific

                        allegations made against him in the form of
                    complaints against the police.    These

                    complaints relate to his actions and

                    decisions in respect of the principal

                    criminal offences being considered.

Part IV

Statement           Mr Trevor HICKS    makes the following

Pages 2331 ■2356    allegations against Superintendent GREENWOOD




                    (a)   Failed to prevent a dangerous build up

                          of supporters outside of the gates,




                    (b)   Failed to control the movement of

                          supporters subsequent to the opening of

                          gate 1C T and,




                    (c)   Failed to respond to the developing

                          tragedy and was slow to effect a rescue

                          operation.

Part IV

Statement           Mr Leslie JONES    makes the following similar

Pages 2368- ■2377   allegations against him of:-




                    (d)   Hefailed to carry out his assigned    duty

                          by placing himself in a position by the

                          players tunnel.   Using his radio and his

                          eyes he should have been aware of the

                          dangerous situation and controlled his

                          officers accordingly.
                  (e)   He failed to give instructions to his

                        officers to monitor the pens, for

                        overcrowding in relation to crowd safety

                        at his briefings.




                  (f)   He was totally ineffective in mounting a

                        rescue. That is he made no attempt to

                        organise the police officers in a way

                        which would have helped bring about a

                        successful rescue operation.




                  (g)   He failed to send officers   to the rear

                        of pens 3 and 4 to relieve   pressure when

                        he was in control of the area.   This was

                        when he knew gate 'C' was being opened

                        to allow supporters in.




                  Superintendent GREENWOOD'S own non-CJA

                  recollection provides a detailed account of

                  his movements on the day, as well as dealing

Part V            with the briefing that he attended on Friday

Document No 200   14 April 1989. His briefing notes are

Pages 1277-1279   included.




                  To an extent Superintendent GREENWOOD'S role

                  must be viewed alongside the specific

                  allegations made against Police Constables

                  SMITH and ILLINGWORTH who were on duty at the
                  Leppings Lane end on the perimeter track

                  between the pitch and the terraces.   It must

                  be remembered that Superintendent GREENWOOD

                  had overall responsibility for the whole of

                  the inside of the stadium, including the

                  Spion Kop area which housed some Liverpool

                  supporters amidst the Nottingham supporters.




                  Superintendent GREENWOOD in his statement

                  recalls the fact that at around 1450 hours he

                  was at the players' tunnel for the arrival

                  onto the pitch of the two teams.

Part III

Document No 128   According to the video evidence Liverpool

(Video Tape)      were first onto the pitch at 1454.09 seconds.

Pages 774-775     Superintendent GREENWOOD, by the players'

                  tunnel, was presumably in position at that

                  time and given the fact gate 'C ' was opened at

                  1452 hours it does suggest that there was an

                  option of a delayed kick-off for Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD:-




                   !i)   Because Superintendent GREENWOOD was in

                         position at the tunnel and in radio

                         contact to stop the players, match

                         officials, and




                                                                    248
                  (ii)   because there was almost two minutes

                         between the opening of gate 'C' and the

                         later appearance of the players.

Part III

Document No 128   The match officials actually came onto the

(Video Tape)      pitch at 1457 hours and could have been

Pages 774-775     contacted to delay the actual kick-off at any

                  time prior to that by Superintendent

                  GREENWOOD.




                  In respect of Superintendent GREENWOOD'S own

                  action unless he actually viewed closely pens

                  3 and 4 after about 1430 hours it would be

                  difficult if not impossible at a distance,

                  for example the opposite terraces, to

                  recognise the problem.




                  Interestingly he makes the point that when he

                  did see supporters climbing the perimeter

                  fence he thought it was too early for a pitch

                  invasion.




                  Superintendent GREENWOOD then went to the

                  scene at pens 3 and 4.   His statement

                  explains his actions on recognising the

                  problems.




                                                                   249
INTERIM CONCLUSION




Superintendent GREENWOOD will require

interviewing in view of his stadium

responsibility and safety of supporters.     His

position at relevant times in the ground may

be important and his communication, in

particular with Police Constable SMITH and

Police Constable ILLINGWORTH will need to be

explored.




If he overheard the request to open the gates

it may be he can be interviewed on whether he

gave consideration to any action by the

police officers under his command at the

Leppings Lane end.



Superintendent GREENWOOD'S actions on

recognising the problem will also have to be

explored.   It will have to be established

whether he was grossly negligent in his

response and in the control of others in

reacting to the unfolding disaster.




As well as the alleged Manslaughter offence

it will be necessary to consider as an

alternative the offence of Culpable

Malfeasance.
Statement         (6)    PETER EDWARD SMITH, POLICE CONSTABLE 1285

Pages 3315-3323

                         Police Constable SMITH of Serial One was

                         posted to the perimeter track.    He and Police

                         Constable ILLINGWORTH (see later) were

                         positioned at the Leppings Lane end of the

                         ground with the responsibility to monitor the

                         crowd on the terraces.




                         Specific allegations have been made in the

                         form of complaints against the police against

                         Police Constable SMITH.

Part IV

Statement               Mr Stephen HENDRY has made the following

Pages 2389-2398          allegations:-




                         (a)   He was getting crushed and could not

                               breathe properly, so together with

                               others, he screamed at a policeman

                               standing at the gate numbered 3, who

                               was facing the crowd "open the gate let

                               us out".   Mr HENDRY says the policeman

                               waved his arms and shouted "push back

                               push back" but would not open the gate.




                         (b)   That when some supporters climbed onto

                               the perimeter fence the same policeman
                        grabbed one unknown person by the collar

                        and belt and pushed him back over the

                        fence into pen 3.

Part IV

Statement         Mr David LACKEY has made similar allegations

Pages 2357 2367   and they are:-




                  (c)   The police officer standing on the pitch

                        side of gate 3, facing the crowd should

                        have opened the gate when asked because

                        it would have saved the life of some

                        supporters.




                  (d)   When the police officer eventually did

                        open the gate he pushed one lad back

                        into the crowd.




                  The complaints made suggest that Police

                  Constable SMITH should have opened perimeter

                  gate 3 earlier than he did and if he had done

                  so lives would have been saved.   Hence,

                  consideration is given to whether the

                  evidence available suggests this officer was

                  so reckless in his acts or omissions as to be

                  culpable for the offence of manslaughter.
Transcript - 8.6.89/9-6.89   The written account given by Police Constable

Day 17 - Pages 130-145       SMITH and his evidence to the Public Inquiry

Day 18 - Pages 2-4           suggests he certainly recognised the

                             overcrowding problem.   He states he heard

                             people in the crowd saying they were being

                             crushed and he states he acted by opening the

                             perimeter gate 3.   Hence, it is the time of

                             his action that appears important in

                             assessing the culpability of Police Constable

                             SMITH.




                             Although overcrowding was not specifically a

                             briefing point made by senior police

                             officers, Police Constable SMITH, it seems,

                             was aware of overcrowding because in previous

                             games he moved people out of the pens.     The

                             officer has policed the ground at this

                             particular posting for some years including

                             the two previous semi-finals in 1987 and 1988.




                             The build up of the crowd into the pens is an

                             important aspect in these allegations.

                             Significantly Police Constable SMITH actually

                             went for his meal about 1400 hours, returning

                             at approximately 1450 hours to his post.

                             Effectively he was away at the crucial times

                             after 1430 hours and specifically after 1447

                             hours when the request was made to open gate
                   Overcrowding in the pen is a major fact in

                   assessing the culpability of Police Constable

                   SMITH.   However, he has stated that from

                   experience supporters find their own level

                   often by climbing from pen to pen.




                   Consideration of the photographs timed at

                   1452, 1454 and 1459 hours may be very

                   relevant to the actions of this officer based

                   upon his recognition of the problem and the

                   time he first acted.




                   Specifically Police Constable SMITH refers to

                   perimeter gate 3 opening by crowd pressure

                   after 1450 hours, possibly on two occasions.

                   If he is correct he recognised the problem of

                   crushing before kick-off time and personally

                   opened the gate to assist supporters out.




                   Police Constable SMITH further states that he

                   used his radio to alert staff in the Police

                   Control Box at the ground about the perimeter

Part V             gate opening.   This, has not been be

Statement          accurately confirmed.   Police Sergeant

Pages 2566 ■2577   GODDARD recalls an unknown police officer on

                   the perimeter track passing an unreadable

                   message.
                  Many supporters claim that Police Constable

                  SMITH was slow to react to their pleas to

                  open gate 3. That evidence is contained, not

                  only in the statements of HENDRY and LACKEY,

                  but in those submitted within the supporters

                  section of the submission, Part IV.




                  The match order is specific in relation to

                  the control of supporters entering the track

                  area and actually states that the gate must

                  remain bolted.




                  In fact the order can be interpreted that the

                  perimeter gates can only be opened upon the

                  authority of a senior police officer, except

                  for supporters to receive medical attention.

                  It would seem unlikely that this in any way

                  delayed the action taken by Police Constable

                  SMITH.




                  The evidence of the match photographers, the

                  ball boys and other track side witnesses also

                  needs to be considered, but they add little

                  to the evidence already available.

Part III

Document No 128   There is video evidence which shows that at

(Video Tape)      1451 hours the supporters in pens 3 and 4

Pages 774-775     were enjoying the event, singing, raising

                  arms and acting seemingly quite normally.




                                                                  255
A number of witnesses   do relate to a police

officer pushing people back into pen 3,

apparently unaware of the problem.     Hence,

the specific further allegations made by

HENDRY and LACKEY are corroborated.     The

question and difficulty here is whether this

action was performed by the officer before he

recognised the distress.   Certainly it would

seem a very callous, indeed culpable action,

if performed after he recognised the

distress, unless of course he was attempting

to extricate people in an orderly fashion

from what was a very small exit.     Only on

interview can this be properly established.




INTERIM CONCLUSION




Police Constable SMITH must be interviewed

with regard to the specific allegations made

against him.   It may be that the degree of

recklessness attributable to him can perhaps

only rest on his own view at the time.     It is

very difficult to imagine from the

circumstances that even a short delay, with

good reason, could be so reckless as to be

criminal.




                                                   256
                       Account must be taken of the history from the

                       1988 game when some supporters did climb the

                       fence at the end of the game and of

                       supporters' behaviour overall.




                       Consideration will have to be given based on

                       the evidence for the alternative offence of

                       culpable malfeasance.

Part V

Statement         7)   DAVID ALFRED ILLINGWORTH, POLICE CONSTABLE 417

Pages 3324-3328

                       As in the case of Police Constable SMITH,

                       Police Constable ILLINGWORTH was posted to

                       Serial One on the perimeter track and

                       positioned at the Leppings Lane end to

                       monitor the crowd'on the terraces in front of

                       pen A.




                       Specific complaints have been made against

                       Police Constable ILLINGWORTH.

Part IV

Statement              Mr Anthony Dennis LEIGH makes the following

Pages 2399-2411        allegations:-




                            Together with other supporters Mr LEIGH

                            says he shouted at a policeman walking

                            along the perimeter track to open the

                            perimeter gate to let them out.    The




                                                                        257
                        police officer turned to the supporters

                        and appeared to mouth the words "shut up

                        you dickheads".     Mr LEIGH feels this

                        officer should have helped him and the

                        other supporters.

Part IV

Statement         Mr Edward SPEARRITT makes the following

Pages 2378-2388   allegations against Police Constable

                  ILLINGWORTH:-




                  (b)   He failed to open gate 4 in the

                        perimeter fence despite his (Mr

                        SPEARRITT) loud appeals directed at him,

                        his position being in close proximity to

                        him and, as a result his failure to act

                        had a direct bearing on the death of his

                        son and injuries to himself.




                  In the instance of Mr LEIGH, Police Constable

                  ILLINGWORTH is identified by his description

                  and position outside pen 4.




                  Mr SPEARRITT's 14 year old son died at

                  Hillsborough and Mr SPEARRITT names Police

                  Constable ILLINGWORTH as the officer he

                  believes responsible for the death of his son

                  as well as injuries to himself.
                  In the allegation by Mr SPEARRITT

                  consideration must be given to the

                  culpability of Police Constable SMITH for the

                  offence of Manslaughter.   To an extent the

                  allegation made by Mr LEIGH infers the similar

                  culpability.




                  In many ways the evidence considered in

                  respect of Police Constable SMITH is also

                  applicable to Police Constable ILLINGWORTH

                  and it is not proposed to reiterate those

                  main points.




                  The evidence of this officer from his written

                  recollection and the evidence he gave to the

                  Public Inquiry provide a useful insight into

                  his actions on the day.




                  As in the case of Police Constable SMITH,

                  Police Constable ILLINGWORTH states he

                  recognised the problem shortly after 1450

                  hours when he returned from refreshment and

                  says he opened gate A.




Part V            There is some dispute here based upon the

Statement         evidence of Police Constable Philip HOPSON

Pages 3392-3400   who states he opened gate A on his arrival.
                   If this is correct it could suggest Police

                   Constable ILLINGWORTH if he did recognise a

Part III           problem may have failed to act upon it.

Document No 109    However, there is video evidence of two police

(Video Tape)       constables, who cannot be identified, with

Pages 740-741      gate A open at 1459 hours.   This may well be

                   Police Constables H00S0N and ILLINGWORTH

                   together.   Only on interview can this be

                   further explored.   It may be the gate was

                   closed again before or after this event, but

                   that visual evidence suggests Police

                   Constable ILLINGWORTH may have acted as he

                   stated certainly around the time of kick-off,

                   if not before.

Part III

Document No 150    In addition there is a photograph of gate A

Photograph No 14   open at about 1459 hours.




                   According to Police Constable ILLINGWORTH he

                   used his radio to inform the Police Control

                   Box that there was a serious situation at the

                   front of the pen.   There may be evidence to

                   support the existence of a call by Police

                   Sergeant GODDARD, albeit the content was

                   unintelligible.




                                                                    260
However, crowd noise, other communications

and radio problems may explain the failure of

the message to be passed.   Certainly Police

Constable 1035 RYAN (the radio operator)

cannot assist in this regard either to Police

Constable ILLINGWORTH or to Police Constable

SMITH.   He will, of course, have been

extremely busy at these times.




INTERIM CONCLUSION




There is a requirement to interview Police

Constable ILLINGWORTH to clarify his

involvement.




As previously stated, the issues are similar

to those which effect Police Constable SMITH.

The same conclusion applies.




Although recognising that Police Constable

SMITH and Police Constable ILLINGWORTH have

been subject of specific complaints, the

evidence presented has also been assessed in

relation to other officers with perimeter

track duties at the Leppings Lane end.     The

conclusion is that there is no evidence to

consider interviews of these officers,
Part V

Statement         including the immediate supervisors,

Pages 3305-3311   Inspector DARLING and Police Sergeant 454

Part V            CHAPMAN, for the offences of Manslaughter or

Statement         Culpable Malfeasance.

Pages 3312-3314

                  The same situation has been considered for

                  the junior officers present in the Police

                  Control Box with Chief Superintendent

Part V            DUCKENFIELD and Superintendent MURRAY, namely

Statement         Police Sergeant 616 GODDARD, Police Constable

Pages 2566-2577   1370 BICHARD and Police Constable 1035 RYAN.

Part V            The evidence evaluated, their duties and

Statement         responsibilities considered, it is not

Pages 2578-2588   thought they should be interviewed in

Part V            relation to any criminal offences.

Statement

Pages 2589-2596




                                                                  262
(B)   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB AND

(C)   EASTWOODS AND PARTNERS CONSULTANTS




      Although separate organisations in their own right,

      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Eastwood and

      Partners, Consultants, are very much linked in

      relation to responsibilities affecting the

      disaster.




      The following major causes identified by Lord

      Justice TAYLOR could be considered as affecting

      both:-




        (i)    The layout at the Leppings Lane end.




       (ii)    Lack of fixed capacities   for the pens.




       (vi)    The barriers in pen 3.




       (ix)    The perimeter gates were   too small.




      To some extent these four key issues or 'causes'

      are linked in themselves and each plays a part in

      the disaster.




                                                            263
The layout of Lepplngs Lane has been previously

explained.     The changes over the years and the

alteration in the use of turnstiles has

effectively meant that none of the six terrace

pens has controllable crowd capacity.     The

introduction from 1981 of the pens led later to

the removal of barrier 1kk and also for more

perimeter gates to serve the new pens.




Perhaps now it can be seen that each of these

'causes', often developed independently without

perhaps sufficient thought to the overall

effect, which when added to the events and

decisions on 15 April 1989, materially effected

the disaster.




It is necessary to consider each of these main

'causes' attributable to the Club and to Eastwoods

in order to establish whether recklessness has

occurred to such an extent that an organisation

or an identified individual should be prosecuted

for an offence of Manslaughter.




First, we will deal with the organisations

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Eastwoods

Consultants.    It is proposed to examine the four

issues or 'causes' separately.
*   (i )   The Layout at the Leppings Lane End




           This can be broken down into a number of

           areas, outside the turnstiles, between the

           iron perimeter gates and the turnstiles, the

           turnstiles themselves, the concourse inside

           the ground, the central tunnel and the

           standing terraces.   All of these areas have

           been described in Part II of this submission.




           To a large extent the majority of these areas

           can be ignored as far as the organisations

           are concerned.   The history of the ground

           shows that the tunnel and the turnstiles

           themselves have existed for many years

           without any problems indicating a reckless

           disregard for safety of those visiting the

           ground.




           There is no evidence to suggest either the

           Club or Eastwoods should have previously

           identified the areas outside the ground,

           inside the iron perimeter gates, the

           turnstiles or the concourse as dangerous.

           Certainly each area plays a part when

           considering other problems like crowd build

           up and control, a police responsibility, but

           not as they relate to the organisations now

           being considered.



                                                           265
                 The only notable point is that Eastwood and

Part II          Partners submitted plans to the Club in 1985

Document No 64   to have a new turnstile area built to feed

Pages 368-369    individual pens and thereby control

                 capacities, but as was explained in Part II

                 of this submission, this was rejected on the

                 basis of cost by the Club as they had other

                 work to carry out following the Popplewell

                 Report on the Bradford Fire.




                 The first structural item for consideration,

                 therefore, is the central tunnel feeding pens

                 3 and 4.   It will have been noted that this

                 tunnel is not in accordance with the Green

                 Guide in that the gradient is 1 in 6 compared

                 to the recommendation that it should not

                 exceed 1 in 10.




                 There can be no doubt that the severe

                 gradient had an accelerating effect on the

                 mass of supporters progressing to their

                 desired viewing positions in pens 3 and A. The

                 evidence shows that the pressure on those in

                 the pens increased as more supporters

                 entered.   In addition many were unable to

                 change direction or return out of the tunnel.

                 Escape, therefore, would have been infinitely
                       more difficult, given the severity of the

                       incline to be overcome to return to the

                       concourse area.




                       This tunnel was constructed in 1966 when the

                       West Stand was built in preparation of the

                       Hillsborough Stadium for the 1966 World Cup.

                       (NB: It was built, therefore, before the

                       introduction of the 1976 Green Guide.)      There

                       is no history of the gradient in the tunnel

                       causing problems and, therefore, any

                       consideration to change it to conform with

                       the 1976 Green Guide probably seemed

Transcript - 23.6.89   unnecessary.   Dr EASTWOOD in evidence to the

Day 27                 Public Inquiry said he was aware of the

Pages 33-34            excessive gradient.




                       It is considered, therefore, that although

                       the tunnel is an important feature in this

                       disaster, with its gradient of 1 in 6, the

                       same overcrowding would have occurred

                       regardless and, no doubt, the results may

                       have been much the same.   What cannot be

                       established is the effect the gradient may

                       have had with other factors, such as the

                       removal of barrier 144, in creating a surge

                       or surges in the crowd and whether that led

                       to the eventual breaking of barrier 124A.
                 The standing terrace at the Leppings Lane

                 end was originally one uninterrupted terrace

                 with the seated West Stand behind. The

                 history is well documented in Part II of this

                 submission, but it is necessary to consider

                 the events over the years and conclude,

                 evidentially, if they materially affect the

                 criminal liability.




Part II          In 1956 the first documented problem on the

Document No 45   terrace was identified by

Page 308

Statement

Pages 752-754    Although obviously important this incident

                 was some 25 years before the major problems

                 of 1981 and to that extent it is felt that

                 the Club today and especially its current

                 Chairman, Directors and Secretary, as well as

                 Eastwood and Partners, cannot be fairly

                 critisised for that event and or lack of

                 action deemed necessary at that time or since.




                 In 1981, when there were again problems, the

                 current Club Chairman, Mr McGEE, was also

                 Chairman at that time.   Not only is Mr McGEE

                 in position, but also by 1981 Eastwood and

                 Partners were established as Consultants to

                 the Club.
                 In Part II the events of 1981 are well

                 documented and, therefore, are not reiterated

                 here.




                 There is evidence that the Club was aware of

                 the overcrowding and crushing problems in

Part II          1981.   The letter sent by the Club to the

Document No 47   Council on 15 April 1981 describes the

Pages 314-315    injuries to supporters.     The result was that

                 Eastwood and Partners were consulted and the

                 first radial fences were designed and

                 constructed and added to the perimeter fences

                 which had been first introduced in 1977.




                 This event in 1981, also at a semi-final

                 football match, must be considered as a

                 crucial factor in assessing the degree of

                 recklessness or otherwise of both Sheffield

                 Wednesday Football Club and Eastwood and

                 Partners Consultants.     This is because from

                 then on the two organisations were both aware

                 that overcrowding and crushing had caused

                 injury to supporters.     Hence, the safety and

                 welfare of supporters should have become a

                 prime factor in the future developments,

                 alterations and additions particularly to the

                 Leppings Lane terrace, if not the ground

                 overall.




                                                                   269
It must be reasonable, therefore, to have

expected both organisations to give

consideration to this point specifically

because of the knowledge they possessed.




Although crowd capacity will be dealt with

later, it is important to refer at this point

to the fact that the terrace capacity was

identified as 10,100 spectators made up of

7,200 for the main terraces (now pens 1, 2,

3, A) and 2,900 for the north west terrace

area (now pens 6 and 7).     This is very

important because the later introduction of

radial fences, including the sterile void

"pen 5", should have resulted in the terrace

capacity being reduced.     This in fact was not

done either by the Club, Eastwoods or indeed

the Local Authority.




This takes on more significance when the 1981

incident is reviewed.     It was known that the

capacity was exceeded on that occasion

according to the turnstile readings by over

400 supporters.




It is worth also noting that the capacity

figure of 10,100 on the Safety Certificate

was considered by the police in 1981 to be
Part II          too high.   A letter was sent to that effect

Document No 49   to the Club by the police commander then

Pages 318-319    involved.



                 This was not, it seems, pursued by the Club.

                 However, in the opinion of the Investigating

                 Officer this is a matter which should have

                 affected the decisions subsequently made by

                 the Club and Eastwoods after the 1981

                 semi-final experience.




                 At the 1987 semi-final, according to limited

                 evidence available, there was crushing.

Part II          Ferenc MORATH states his experience.

Statement

Pages 767-768    There is, however, no evidence that the Club

                 Eastwoods, or for that matter senior police

                 officers, were aware of this problem in 1987




                 The 1988 semi-final is different and the

                 facts are recorded in Part II.




                 Despite the content of two letters written

                 separately by Mr           to the Football

                 Association and to the then Minister for

                 Sport there is no evidence that the Club or

                 Eastwoods were advised, formally or

                 informally, of the crushing problems in 1988
                     The evidence both of supporters and police

                     officers identifies an overcrowding problem

                     in 1988, but again it cannot be confirmed

                     that the Club were made aware of the problem.

Transcript 24.5.89   Indeed it is doubtful that they were, because

Day 7                the police commander at the time, Chief

Pages 46-47          Superintendent M O L E , certainly stated to the

                     Public Inquiry he was unaware that police

                     officers closed the tunnel in response to the

                     problem.




                     In fact the only way to identify what

                     knowledge individuals had, will be for us to

                     interview those with responsibility at the

                     Club.




                     The introduction of the radial fences

                     creating the different pens, has been fully

                     explained in Part II.




                     The issue here is directed at the roles

                     adopted by the Club and Eastwoods in the

                     introduction of the radial fences; firstly

                     following the 1981 incident and later in 1985

                     the addition of two more radial fences

                     effectively creating pens 3, A and the void 5.




                                                                        272
                 Mindful of the knowledge that existed of

                 overcrowding problems the installation of the

                  first two radial fences will be first

                  considered.    It appears the erection of these

                  radial fences, effectively producing three

                 separate pens, was intended to improve crowd

                  control by reducing sideways movement across

                  the terrace.




                  The Club proceeded with the installation

                  after the proposals were agreed by the then

                 Officer Working Party and approved by the

                  Local Authority.




                 It is difficult in examining the documents to

                 establish the emphasis then placed upon

                 safety.   It is fair to assume that the

                  'control' aspect involved a better crowd

                 distribution and thus, no doubt, it was

                 considered likely to be a safer crowd.      This,

                 however, is speculation and not fact.




Part II          The plans produced by Eastwood and Partners

Document No 58   actually designates the capacity of the

Page 359         central pen (now 3, 4 and void 5) to be

                 2,200. However, neither the Club nor

                 Eastwoods sought to reconsider the overall




                                                                     273
effect of erecting the radial fences on the

total terrace capacity, which still stood at

10,100.   Taking into account the introduction

of the two radial fences, the 1981 incident

and the over-capacity at the 1981 semi-final,

it was, on the face of it, a serious omission

not to re-address the capacities defined and

make efforts to have them amended on the

Safety Certificate then in force.



The matter is compounded by the fact that

even though the crowd control was probably

made easier there was still no method of

limiting or controlling the numbers who

entered each of the then three pens.




This aspect perhaps is only significant to

the Club and Eastwoods in terms of the failure

to amend the Safety Certificate because the

introduction of these two radial fences was

at the instigation of the police, supported

by the Officer Working Party, approved by the

Local Authority with responsibility for the

Safety Certificate and progressed by the

Club and Eastwoods.




It would be reasonable to expect each of the

parties mentioned to have been aware of the
reasons for the installation, but it is

evident that crowd capacity, safety and

welfare, had been addressed but only

partially and certainly not in     overall

capacity terms.




Perhaps if application had been made to

re-consider the capacity the issue of a

new Safety Certificate might have provoked

that and resulted in a considerably

reduced capacity in 1981.




In 1985 two more radial fences were erected.

By then the emphasis was more upon the

control and segregation of the supporters and

it appears that safety and welfare may have

been secondary considerations. The

introduction of these additional radial

fences, for the same reasons given for the

erection of the original radial fences,

should have led to a further reduction in the

capacities of the pens on the terrace.




The Club's responsibility in not reviewing

the capacities is important.     At the same

time Eastwood and Partners, whose role cannot

be ignored, must be considered in the same

way because they became involved in the
      construction of radial fences and should have

      taken safety into consideration in the

      preparation of their plans and the subsequent

      installation of the radial fences.




      It is evident that the alterations made were

      only done so after consultation and agreement

      between the numerous parties involved, ie the

      Police, the Club, the Officer Working Party,

      Eastwoods and the Council.   Thus the failure

      to consider the effect of the changes appears

      to have been missed by all concerned and

      perhaps coincides with the growth in

      attention to football hooliganism at the

      expense of the safety and welfare of

      supporters.




      The point is, with hindsight perhaps, safety

      and welfare should have remained the

      priorities, but did not.




ii)   Lack of Fixed Capacities for the Pens




      Although no capacities were fixed for any of

      the pens, the only ones we will consider are

      pens 3 and 4.




                                                      276
It is true that Eastwood and Partners defined

a total capacity of 2,200 on the single

combined pen in 1981.     Even though this

figure was set the Club had no way of

counting or controlling the number of

supporters actually entering the pen because

of the freedom of supporters to go where they

pleased after they had entered through the

turnstiles.     The proposed change to the

turnstiles by Eastwoods in 1985 was intended

to address this problem.




The only possible control the Club could have

had would have been for someone to physically

count in the supporters.     Alternatively the

Club could have restricted use to only that

one pen and then relied on the turnstile

counter system.




The capacities must feature as an important

safety issue.     The fact that there was no way

of counting and controlling the actual number

of supporters entering each pen should have

emphasised even more the possibility of

problems to those running the Club with

its known history of overcrowding and

crushing problems.
                 In addition the allocation of capacities by

                 Eastwoods should have been concerned with

                 safety aspects given the experience of 1981

Part II          as well as the requirements of the 1976 Green

Document No 87   Guide as it relates to capacities and the

Pages 463-480    positioning of the crush barriers.




                 This theme continues to 1985 with the

                 installation of the extra   radial barriers.

                 This resulted in new identified capacities

                 for pens 3 and 4 as were defined on

Part II          Eastwood's plans.

Document No 74

Page 388         Eastwoods obviously realised it was necessary

                 to reconsider capacities by defining the

                 1,200 for pen 3 and 1,000 for pen 4, a simple

                 split of the existing 2,200 capacity.    The

                 fact that the barriers themselves take up

                 space as well as the creation of the void

                 (pen 5) seems to have been ignored, it is

                 contended that the safety issue should have

                 then been given higher prominence than

                 perhaps it was.   Although it is included on

                 the plans, nobody, either at Eastwoods or at

                 the Club, addressed the iSsue to consider the

                 implications and have the Safety Certificate

                 amended.   It is difficult to establish if the



                                                                  278
                       Officer Working Party and the Local Authority

                       were made aware of the capacity definitions

                       before or after installation; the evidence

                       suggests that they were not.




                       There seems, therefore, to have been a lack

                       of care on the part of Eastwoods and the Club

                       which subsequently materially affected the

                       safety and welfare of the supporters as

                       reported in the     events of 1987, 1988 and

                       later to this disaster in 1989.




                       The only evidence available of any

                       consideration of capacities was in the 1987

Part II                memoranda which were presented to the Public

Document No 72         Inquiry and which related to Mr STRANGE, an

Page 386 and           employee of Dr EASTWOOD.     These memoranda

Document No 73         refer to the question of crowd capacities

Page 387               with specific reference to the Leppings Lane

                       end changes over the previous years.     The

                       conclusion was that Dr EASTWOOD himself

                       actually said the capacities were to be left

                       as they were.     It is fair to say that during

Transcript - 26.6.89   the Public Inquiry the content and accuracy

Day 28                 of the memoranda was to an extent questioned

Pages 33-34            by Dr EASTWOOD.




                                                                         279
       Evidence produced by the Health and Safety

       Executive determined two important points.

       First, that the capacities set for pens 3 and

       4 were wrong and in excess of the recommended

       levels.    Secondly, that the numbers of

       supporters actually in pens 3 and 4 on 15

       April 1989 at 1503 hours were significantly over

       these set capacity figures even if they had

       been correct.




Iiv)   The Barriers in Pen 3




       Two barriers have a bearing on the disaster

       and the deaths in pen 3.     They are barrier

       124A,     which collapsed on the day of the

       disaster and barrier 144, which was removed

       in 1986 to facilitate the smooth flow of

       supporters into the pen.




       No barrier actually broke in pen 4, although

       some were distorted by the crowd pressure

       exerted.




       It is difficult to decide accurately what

       effect barriers 124A and 144 had on the

       overall disaster.     The only evidential fact

       of significance is that of the 95 deceased 88



                                                        280
of them died in pen 3.     Health and Safety-

Executive evidence indicates that pens 3 and

4 were equally     overcrowded.   The conclusion

must be that the collapse of the barrier,

taking into account its location in pen 3

relative to the position of those who died,

must have had a significant bearing on the

deaths.




To compound this the removal of barrier 144

from its original position at the tunnel

entrance no doubt affected the crowd pressure

into pen 3 from the tunnel and resulted in a

diagonal almost uninterrupted flow straight

to barrier 124A.     This is important because

the remainder of barrier 144 which was left

in pen 4 may, it seems, have reduced the

crowd flow into that pen and effectively

reduced the pressure exerted on the lower

barriers in that pen.




A fair conclusion is that given supporters

died both in pens 3 and 4 because of

overcrowding, it was the 124A barrier breaking

which was instrumental in the large number of

deaths in pen 3 in comparison with pen 4.
(a )   Barrier 144




       There is documentary evidence in Part II

       which explains the reasoning behind the

       removal of barrier 144 in 1986.




       This removal, prompted by the police

       over concern for evacuation, was agreed

       by the Officer Working Party and

       Eastwoods.    Authority was given by the

       Local Authority employee, Mr BOWNES.

       The part of the barrier 144 in pen 3 was

       removed, but the part in pen 4 was

       retained.



       The authority to remove given by Mr BOWNES

       will be dealt with later.




       The evidence establishes that Eastwoods,

       Dr EASTWOOD himself, the Club and all

       interested parties agreed the removal of

       this barrier on the grounds of safety.

       It is apparent that the safety of

       supporters inside the pens at evacuation

       times was considered, but seemingly not

       at other times.    There is no evidence

       available to suggest that the removal of

       the barrier prompted anyone, especially



                                                    2 82
                        Eastwoods, the Club or the Local

                        Authority, to consider the effects on

                        the capacity of pen 3 as a result.




                 (b )   Barrier 124A




                        Barrier 124A collapsed and there is no

                        doubt that many died in pen 3 as a

                        direct result.



                        Also of importance is the precise time

                        at which the barrier 124A broke.       This

                        is not clear.    The evidence of the

Part II                 Health and Safety Executive indicates

Document No 89          that the barrier tube probably broke

Pages 507-524           first before the later collapse of the

                        legs.   How close the two events were is

                        not clear.




                        The only evidence available is from

                        supporters which suggests barrier 124A

                        finally broke under severe pressure

                        sometime around 1500 hours or kick-off.

                        It may even of been as late as 1504

                        hours when Beardsley hit the bar.




                        The time is important in considering the

                        culpability of the Club and Eastwoods

                        because of the likely pressure

                        exerted to cause the barrier to fail..
In sura the evidence of the Health and

Safety Executive suggests that barrier

124A was exposed to a pressure far in

excess of that required or seen in any

test conditions.




This pressure was no doubt caused by

overcrowding in pen 3, but it may be

crucial that the barrier did break after

1452 hours when gate *C * (and the other

gates) were opened. The influx of

supporters and the build up of pressure

down the tunnel between 1452 hours and

the time the barrier broke obviously

greatly increased in probably what was

an eight minute period.




Furthermore, the fact that barrier 144

was missing in pen 3 no doubt increased

the pressure diagonally down to barrier

124A and probably was at its greatest

during this period.




If we consider the culpability of the

Club and Eastwoods at this point then

briefly the picture is this:-
  (i)   Barrier 124A was sufficiently sound

        to more than withstand the

        necessary crowd pressure in

        normal circumstances.




 (ii)   Barrier 144 being removed caused

        barrier 124A to have been

        subjected to more pressure than

        it should have,




        BUT




(iii)   The Club and Eastwoods could not

        have foreseen an incident such as

        happened at 1452 hours on 15 April

        1989 when an uncontrolled flow of

        up to 2,000 supporters would be

        allowed into pens 3 and 4.




In other words the unexpected actions of

South Yorkshire Police in opening the

gates to an extent must mitigate the

barrier considerations in pen 3.




Although corrosion of barrier 124A was

noted, the matter is not considered

relevant to the barrier breaking

because of the excessive pressure

exerted at the time.



                                              285
           During Eastwood's evidence to the Public

           Inquiry it was discovered that there

           were omissions in the barrier testing

           method adopted.   This is serious in

           itself, but the evidence of the Health

           and Safety Executive suggests that

           barrier 124A would have taken the

           required load as recommended in the

           Green Guide, thus eliminating this

           factor to a great extent.




(i x ) The Perimeter Gates were too small




     The 1986 Green Guide lays down minimum widths

     for perimeter gates in perimeter fences.




     At Hillsborough the gates were less than the

     required width, but they were constructed

     prior to the 1986 recommendations.




    Although the size of the perimeter gates may

    have   delayed the evacuation after the

    disaster, they did not contribute to the

     'cause' of the disaster.




    Perhaps some of those who died would have

    lived if access had have been better from the

    pitch to the terraces to effect a rescue.
      However, if the perimeter gates had accorded

      with the 1986 Guide, the difference probably

      would have been minimal.




      There is, therefore, a neglect by the Club,

      by Eastwoods and by the Local Authority in

      ignoring the 1986 Green Guide as it relates

      to the previously constructed gates, but it

      is not considered crucial.    What it does

      show again is the unsatisfactory way in which

      the Club and Eastwoods chose to ignore a

      safety issue.




INTERIM CONCLUSION




(a)   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club



      The Club must take prime responsibility for

      the way in which the Leppings Lane end and

      terraces have been developed, particularly

      since 1981.     That development and the

      apparent decline in safety is most apparent.

      In considering capacities, crowd monitoring,

      radial fences, barrier removal and so on, the

      Club have tended to rely upon others for

      advice and progress. The Police and Eastwood

      and Partners have been the main two

      organisations to which the Club have looked

      for advice.
No doubt the Club will argue that not only

did these organisations provide advice, but

the Club paid them for their expertise.       In

addition the Club probably looked upon the

Local Authority and its involvement with the

Officer Working Party as its "insurance

policy" on safety matters.   However, the

insurance policy did not work.




For example, the perimeter fence gates built

before the minimum requirements laid dowti by

the 1986 Guide were never altered.     This

perhaps shows carelessness by the Club,

Eastwoods, the Officer Working Party and

especially the Local Authority, any member of

the Working Party could have been expected to

point out the new minimum width recommended

after 1986.




Despite this the Club must retain ultimate

responsibility for the safety of the public

it attracts.   The employment of other

advisers can only serve to mitigate.
                       Notwithstanding the previous debate, it is

                       concluded that despite the knowledge, the

                       history, the structural changes and the

                       ancillary matters, the events of 15 April

                       1989 were outside the direct control of

                       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.     At this

                       stage there is insufficient evidence to

                       consider a Corporate Manslaughter offence.




                       Eastwood and Partners




                       The question of 'safety' is vital to the

                       work prepared or proposed by Eastwoods. The

                       question is were they aware of their

                       responsibility to consider safety.




Transcript - 23.6.89   A difficulty is evident in the transcript

Day 27                 evidence at the Public Inquiry of Dr EASTWOOD

Page 66                as to where the safety responsibility

                       actually starts and finishes.   For example,

                       if Eastwoods record on a plan for the new

                       pens 3 and k crowd capacities of 1,200 and

                       1,000 respectively, are they correct to

                       assume that the Club will accept and arrange

                       for the Safety Certificate to be amended

                       accordingly?




                                                                        289
What is clear is that somewhere between

Eastwoods, the Club and the Officer Working

Party, there was a severe breakdown in

communication.




Common sense would suggest that Eastwood and

Partners should have been more thorough by

following up safety aspects especially where

the capacities were concerned between 1981

and 1986.   The 1987 memoranda suggests

carelessness when addressing the capacity

issue.




The removal of barrier 1bb and the

subsequent likely effect on barrier 124A

has clear implications for Eastwoods.

To some extent the Club went along with

the changes, but it has to be said

Eastwoods should have given greater

consideration to the effect of the barrier

removal layout on the Leppings Lane

terraces. They seemingly did not and,

although it is evident that people died

because of overcrowding and crushing, a

greater number of people probably died

because of the barrier collapse.




Eastwoods must take prime responsibility for

the situation that developed in pen 3 and
with other possible careless acts Eastwood

and Partners must be viewed as potential

defendants.




However, as with the Club, the events left

Eastwoods' control once the decision was made

to open the gates at 1452 hours.   Had deaths

occurred in 1987, 1988 or 1989 in pen 3

during "normal" crowd capacities then

Eastwoods would have been in considerable

jeopardy.   The interim conclusion, however,

is that as an organisation the evidence is

insufficient to consider a charge of Corporate

Manslaughter against Eastwood and Partners.

These are interim conclusions based upon the

evidence so far available, but it will be

necessary to interview key individuals within

the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and

Eastwood and Partners to exactly identify the

roles, responsibilities and proceedures in

order to establish the culpability or

otherwise of the organisations or their

respective members.




The individuals recognised as having

responsibility within Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club were identified in Part I of

this submission and earlier in this Report.
                Given our interim conclusion on the Club's

                culpability as a Corporate Body there

                is no point, at this stage, of interviewing

                all of the seven identified persons within

                the Club.




                To a large extent the evidence related in our

                interim conclusion for the Corporate Body

                will apply equally to the individuals.




                However, it is thought that some further

                explanations are required on the lines

                previously stated from three of the seven

                Club officials.     They are:-




Part I      (a ) Herbert Edward McGEE

Statement

Pages 1-6       Mr McGEE is the Chairman of Sheffield

                Wednesday Football Club and has been so since

                1975.   He was a Director for two years before

                that.   He has, therefore, been in a prominent

                position during significant events and

                changes that relate to the Club since that

                time.   Briefly they include;




                  (i)   The introduction of the 1976 Green

                        Guide.    Later the publication of the

                        1986 edition and the effect at

                        Hillsborough.
  (ii)     The employment of Eastwood and Partners




 (iii)     The implementation of the Safety at

           Sports Ground Act at Hillsborough.




  (iv)     The installation of perimeter fences.




     (v)   Knowledge of the Officer Working Party

           and its procedures.




  (vi)     The problems of 1981.




 (vii)     The introduction of radial fences in

           1981 to create three pens.




(viii)     The introduction of additional radial

           fences in 1985 to create pens 3, 4 and

           void 5.




  (ix)     The removal of barrier 144.



     (x)   The Safety Certificate requirements.




There are other aspects that are attributable

to    Mr McGEE, but the ten listed are perhaps

those which are most related to the subsequent

disaster.




                                                     293
No statement   (b )   Keith ADDY




                      Mr ADDY is the Sheffield Wednesday Football

                      Club Director with specific responsibility

                      for buildings and structural matters.     As

                      already stated he has not yet been

                      interviewed.   He was not present at

                      the ground on 15 April 1989.   Mr ADDY is,

                      according to Mr McGEE, a building contractor

                      by trade.




                      It may be that the Club has relied upon

                      Mr ADDY for this specific responsibility, but

                      only by interview can the matter be further

                      addressed in terms of Mr ADDY's personal

                      culpability, if any, as opposed to his

                      corporate responsibility as a Club Director.




                      Mr ADDY has been a Director for at least

                      eight years.   Many of the events and changes

                      relative to Mr McGEE will be equally

                      applicable to him.




Part I         (c)    Graham MACKRELL

Statement

Pages 36-59           Mr MACKRELL has been employed by Sheffield

                      Wednesday Football Club since December 1986

                      as Club Secretary.   Mr MACKRELL is




                                                                      294
experienced in the role having been previously-

employed by Bournemouth and Luton Town

Football Clubs in a similar capacity.




Upon joining Sheffield Wednesday Football

Club in 1986 the Club Secretary's

responsibilities were already established

for dealing with safety matters involving the

Club, the Local Authority and the Sheffield

City Council.




In essence it was Mr MACKRELL's responsibility

to oversee all safety matters and report to the

Board of Directors accordingly.     Further,

Mr MACKRELL had the responsibility to liaise

with the Officer Working Party and ensure that

the Safety Committee were satisfied annually

with the ground and its safety.




Compared with other individuals Mr MACKRELL

was a late arrival at Hillsborough.     The

Leppings Lane terraces were by that time

(December 1986) as they were on 15 April

1989, so there was virtually nothing new in

terms of ground alterations after his

appointment for him to consider.      Whether he

should have considered past changes is a

matter of conjecture.
According to his recollection he was unaware

of the problems at the semi-finals in 1987

and 1988.   It is doubtful if the events of

1981 and the reorganisation of Leppings Lane

were matters of which he would have taken

much notice.




His position is such, however, that he holds

the overall responsibility for safety. The

error in the capacity for the Spion Kop may

be indicative that all was not correct during

his time at the Club between 1986 and the day

of the disaster.   However, in fairness to him

he had raised certain issues of concern over

the Safety Certificate, but had not received

a response from the Local Authority. With

hindsight it could be argued he should have

pursued the matters more forcefully.




There will be a need to consider interviewing

Mr MACKRELL.   The following areas will     need

clarification by him:-




  (i)   The Leppings Lane capacity overall.




 (ii)   The capacity figures shown on the

        Eastwood plans for pens 3 and 4.
(iii)    The responsibility for monitoring the

         individual pens.




  (iv)   His understanding of the stewards'

         roles on crowd monitoring and

         specifically overcrowding.




   (v)   The role of Eastwood and Partners.




  (vi)   The role of the Officer Working Party.




 (vii)   His own responsibilities for the Club

         with particular emphasis on safety

         matters.




(viii)   The decision to reduce the number of

         turnstiles on 15 April 1989 for use by

         Liverpool supporters.




  (ix)   The confusion caused by the tickets, the

         exterior and interior signs.




   (x)   The stewards' responsibilities to

         guide people to viewing positions

         inside the ground, mindful that the

         1452 hours decision to open gate 'C '

         was outside his or the Club's control.



                                                    297
Insofar as Eastwood and Partners are

concerned, two individuals are seen to have a

responsibility for the Hillsborough ground.

They are Dr Wilfred EASTWOOD himself and

Mr J A STRANGE. It is not suggested that

Mr STRANGE be interviewed at this stage.




Ultimate responsibility would initially seem

to rest upon the shoulders of Dr EASTWOOD who

had knowledge of each of the major factors

affecting the ground, including those at the

Leppings Lane end, having beem retained by the

Club since 1978.




To be fair Dr EASTWOOD has been employed in

the relatively new aspects of ground safety,

working to guidelines and not legal

requirements, using methods of his own based

upon his interpretation of the guidelines

rather than being able to learn from

established and accepted practice.




In any event he had a responsibility for the

safety of supporters at Hillsborough by

reason of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

employing   him and his firm as Consultants.
There are issues that need clarification from

Dr EASTWOOD and these include




        His understanding of his employment by

        the Club particularly over safety

        matters.




 (ii)   His understanding of how safety matters

        were addressed by the Club as observed

        by him.




        Whose responsibility it is to ensure

        certain safety aspects were properly

        considered or dealt with, and which

        were in issue on 15 April 1989, ie



        (a)   The overcrowding of pens 3 and 4.




        (b)   The capacities on the plans showing

              1,200 and 1,000 for pens 3 and 4

              respectively.




        (c)   The removal of barrier 144.




        (d)   The introduction of the radial

              fences in 1981 and 1985 and the

              capacity effect.



                                                    299
        (e)   The width of perimeter gates.




 (iv)   The effect on barrier 124A of excessive diagonal

        pressure as a result of the removal of

        barrier 144 and the positioning of

        other barriers.




  (v)   The memoranda of 1987 concerning the

        capacities and supporters "finding

        their own level", referred to by

        Mr STRANGE.




 (vi)   His relationship with the Officer

        Working Party.




(vii)   His relationship with the Council,

        either directly or through Sheffield

        Wednesday Football Club.




The above are primary areas for research, but

there are other matters linked to these that

will be explored, especially as to how the capacity

figures for pens 3 and 4 were determined

and which according to the Health and

Safety Executive evidence were excessive.

This does suggest carelessness, possibly

associated with a failure to reconsider



                                                 300
overall capacity figures for the Leppings

Lane terraces on the introduction of radial

fences in 1981 and more significantly in 1985.




This may be regarded as a serious omission

which in itself contributed to the disaster

on 15 April 1989-   Whether the lack of care

was sufficiently reckless to consider Dr

EASTWOOD for Culpable Manslaughter seems

unlikely. However, the development of the

Leppings Lane terraces and the lack of

attention to safety, may be strong

mitigating factors in considering the

culpability of South Yorkshire Police

and Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.
(D)   SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL




      Originally under the 1975 Safety at Sports Grounds

      Act the powers and duties provided were

      administered by South Yorkshire County Council.

      These powers were transferred to Sheffield City

      Council following the Local Government changes

      which came into effect on 1 April 1986.




      In itself this creates some difficulty when viewing

      the corporate liability because the major changes

      and alterations related to Hillsborough were

      implemented during the period when control was in

      the hands of the South Yorkshire County Council.

      It may, however, be considered that Sheffield City

      Council must accept responsibility for all aspects

      of safety, both before 1 April 1986 and post that

      date, once they assumed responsibility as the

      licensing authority for the Safety Certificate

      originally issued in 1979.




      The actual powers and duties imposed upon Sheffield

      City Council were delegated to the General Purposes

      Panel and in two specific instances authority was

      delegated to Mr David BOWNES, Administration and

      Legal Department.   These two sections, 9 and 10 of

      the 1975 Act, are not relevant to this disaster

      and, therefore are not matters for consideration.




                                                            302
                  From the documentation recovered it is difficult to

                  examine and understand the actual functions and

                  responsibilities of the Council, specifically in

                  relation to Hillsborough.     For example, within the

                  South Yorkshire County Council system some

                  responsibility was given to the Building Surveyors

Part II           Department.   The schedule and letters that refer

Document No 82    and the transfer in 1986 suggest that virtually     the

Pages 449-450     same system would be adopted by Sheffield City

Pages 450A-450R   Council.   Although the schedule identifies

                  important areas of responsibility there is nothing

                  which identifies the role or action taken by the

                  Building Surveyors Department.     Only on

                  interview of further witnesses can this be

                  clarified.




                  It is also appropriate to point out that the

                  original Officer Working Party for the

                  Hillsborough Stadium was superseded by a Safety of

                  Sports Grounds Advisory Group following the 1986

                  Local Government changes.     In essence this new

                  group retained the same members and has operated

                  in a similar way.




                  In examining the key issues identified by Lord

                  Justice TAYLOR as contributing to the disaster, the

                  following can be considered as having a direct link

                  with Sheffield City Council



                                                                            303
 (i)   The layout at the Leppings Lane end.




(ii)   Lack of fixed capacities for the pens.




(vi)   The barriers in pen 3.




(ix)   The perimeter gates were too small.




The same four 'causes' are applicable to both

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Eastwood and

Partners Consultants.   It is not proposed,

therefore, to reiterate each 'cause', but the

factors referred to in the Club and Eastwoods

section should be considered alongside those now

about to be examined.




The prime point to consider is that the Council,

by law, have a responsibility to take an active

part in the certification of Hillsborough as a

sports stadium by ensuring that a 'safe' venue

exists for those members of the public wishing to

attend.




Taking into account, therefore, the four 'causes'

identified, it is necessary to consider if the

actions of the Council or any identified

individual, have been so reckless as to suggest a

prosecution for the offence of Manslaughter.
In the alternative, based on the same evidence, the

offence of Culpable Malfeasance may be considered.




It is true that the Safety Certificate for

Hillsborough, issued originally in 1979 was never

amended by either Council in respect of the

changes and alterations made after the events of

1981.   Knowledge of the ground changes, the

required authority and the completion of work was

known because of the Council representation on the

Officer Working Party and later the Advisory Group.




The important changes were the installation of the

radial fences in 1981 and 1985, and the removal of

barrier 144 in 1986.   The overall effect of these

changes on crowd capacity and safety, should have

been vital issues to the Council responsible for

issuing and amending Safety Certificates.




It is clear that in each instance the Safety

Certificate was not amended.   This in itself poses

the prime questions; why did no one involved give

consideration to the total crowd capacity and the

continuity effect of these changes.




                                                      305
If the Council's processes had worked effectively

then consideration of crowd capacity would have

been identified, discussed and some action taken.




The indications are that the Police, Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club, Eastwood and Partners and

the Council, although coming together as agreed,

failed to communicate effectively and to ensure

the objective of 'safety' was fully explored on

each occasion when changes were made.




The major difficulty is to identify exactly how

the communication processes worked between the

organisations.   It is also difficult to identify

the Council's action once the recommendations had

been made to the Council.




For example, Eastwoods were not formally members

of the Officer Working Party although on occasions

someone from the firm was present.   Consequently

it is often   difficult to establish if and whether

Eastwoods communicated directly with the Council

over safety matters or whether it was Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club's sole responsibility.
                       Certainly a representative of the Council would be

                       present during the testing of the crush barriers

                       as required in the Guide to Safety at Sports

                       Grounds.     However, the inter-operability of the

                       respective organisations, especially with the

                       Council, was ineffective as best illustrated by

                       the failure to amend the Safety Certificate.




                       The questions of participation in and operation of

                       the Officer Working Party are explained by

Transcript - 27.6.89   Mr BOWNES in evidence he gave to the Public Inquiry.

Day 29                 He confirms the group had no recognised Chairman

Pages 55-56            or leader.




                       To illustrate the manner in which the Council

                       dealt with certain issues it is useful to review

                       the processes surrounding the removal of barrier

                       144.   It is evident that this was undertaken at

                       the request of the police, as agreed by Sheffield

                       Wednesday Football Club and Eastwoods, and

                       confirmed on site by Mr BOWNES of the Council.        In

Transcript - 27.6.89   evidence at the Public Inquiry it is clear no

Day 29                 official documentation exists about the barrier

Pages 56-57            removal nor its official approval.



                       Such removal did require Council consent, but it is

                       not clear who had the authority to give such

                       consent.     On one hand, the powers of the Council



                                                                                  307
                  were delegated to the General Purposes Panel, yet

                  on the other hand, Mr BOWNES gave the approval

                  without it would appear referring the matter to

                  that Panel.




                  The question arises as to whether Mr BOWNES had

                  that authority or whether he should have referred

                  the removal of the barrier to the General Purposes

                  Panel.   Perhaps Mr BOWNES acted in good faith, but

                  it does suggest a lack of concern by the Council

                  on important safety aspects.




                  The Council are not safety experts, but they do

                  have the responsibility under the Act to ensure

                  that safety aspects are properly dealt with by

                  those expert in the field.     That reliance on

                  others extended to the Council's own Building

                  Surveyors Department whatever their terms of

                  reference.    In sum the Council, in having the

                  licensing function, are responsible for ensuring

                  that safety is properly addressed before issuing

                  or amending the Safety Certificate as was the case

                  for Hillsborough.




Part II           Referring back to the schedule and   the

Document No 82    documentation   for the period after 1986, there

Pages 449-450     are relevant matters which need to   be

Pages 450A-450R   considered.
The schedule identifies, by code, the relevant

body with the prime authority for certain key

issues regarding the implementation of the Safety

at Sports Grounds Act 1975.   For example, all

structural matters have two prime authorities, the

Building Control Authority (Building Surveyors

Department) and the Fire Brigade.




Significantly, however, the Council Building

Control Authority is the primary authority for the

following identified factors:-




(a)   Spacing of crush barriers.




(b)   Strength of crush barriers.




and the Council (County on the schedule) is the

primary authority for:-




(c)   Estimation of safe ground capacity.




This schedule, therefore, assists in identifying

where the prime responsibility lies and shows

which other authorities need to be consulted.

Effectively the above factors relate to two of the

four 'causes' relevant to the Council.
Part II          Another schedule identifies the role of the

Document No 82   Building Surveyors Department in relation to areas

Page 450J        of responsibility under the 1975 Act.

                 Unfortunately, it is not possible to explain or

                 understand exactly what actions this Department

                 were involved in or how the liaison worked,

                 particularly within the Administration and Legal

                 Department of the Council.




                 This can be best addressed before interview if

                 certain action, as will be suggested later, is

                 taken.




                 INTERIM CONCLUSION




                 Sheffield City Council (and their predecessors,

                 South Yorkshire County Council) have not dealt

                 with the Safety Certificate correctly as is

                 required by the 1975 Safety at Sports Grounds Act.




                 The Council, however, are a licensing authority

                 who have to rely upon others to make

                 recommendations or raise objections, and on the

                 basis of which the Council can issue the

                 certificate.




                 The evidence shows that the Council have taken

                 action in respect of Hillsborough by agreeing to



                                                                      310
certain procedures, attending the ground for

inspection and, sometimes in the form of Mr

BOWNES, making decisions.




The recommendations and alterations made at

Hillsborough were made by the Officer Working

Party agreed by the Council as "experts".     The

fact that this Party approved the changes,

effectively restricted the Council's role to one

of ratification.   It is unlikely that anyone in the

Council, including the General Purposes Panel,

if consulted, would have refused the alterations

made to the Leppings Lane end terraces over the

years.




There are concerns over the delegation of

authority; for example, the approval to remove

barrier 144.   The structure of the Council and

the formation of the expert authorities and the

consultative procedures referred to in the

schedule, in all probability would have

resulted in an identical approval.




The conclusion is that the Council, through

its records and its employees, has acted

in a careless manner.   However, the carelessness

does not amount to a reckless disregard for safety.
The opening of the gates at 1452 hours onwards

was a decision that the Council could not have

foreseen, nor for which they can be held

responsible.    Their behaviour as a Council can

be criticised and, with others, it could be

argued compounded the problems and may have led

to the enormity ofthe disaster.   However, that

is a matter for civil proceedings and not the

criminal law.




There is, therefore, insufficient evidence at this

stage to consider the offence of Corporate

Manslaughter for the Council overall or the

specific departments of the Building Surveyors and

the Administration and Legal Departments.




The evidence does suggest an alternative offence

of Culpable Malfeasance may have been committed,

but given the remoteness of amendments to the

Safety Certificate to the disaster itself, it

would be inappropriate   to pursue such a

prosecution.




As far as individual culpability is concerned,

only Mr David BOWNES of the Administration and

Legal Department has featured in the investigation

to date.   Mr BOWNES was the person who exercised

the prime role in   that Department with

responsibility for the Hillsborough Stadium.
His involvement, especially his authority to make

decisions, has already been discussed.




Mr BOWNES is not a safety expert, but relied upon

other representatives to assess safety issues.




The conclusion, therefore, is that there is no

evidence at this stage to consider any criminal

offences have been committed by Mr BOWNES.     In

addition no other individual has been identified

within the Council with who can be considered

responsible for a criminal offence including, the

Head of the Administration and Legal Department,

Mr Roger PENSAM, whose name features on some of

the documentation.




Consideration may be given, if this conclusion is

agreed, to interview Mr BOWNES initially as a

witness in an attempt to identify all the relevant

issues with particular emphasis on the

participation of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

and Eastwood and Partners.   Similarly, if

necessary, Mr PENSAM could be interviewed to

clarify the operations and responsibilities of the

General Purposes Panel, the Building Surveyors

Department.   He could also clarify the extent of

Mr BOWNES' authority.
Finally, reference is made in some of the

documentation to the Fire Service.     Consideration

has been given to the role of the Chief Fire

Officer and his responsibilities based upon the

workings of the various consultative groups and the

schedule outlining responsibilities.




It is not envisaged that any culpable

responsibility lies within this organisation,

notwithstanding their role.




                                                       31
RECOMMENDATIONS




To summarise the findings of this report at this stage

it is thought that there is insufficient evidence to

proceed with a prosecution for the criminal offence of

Corporate Manslaughter in respect of any of the

identified organisations, ie South Yorkshire Police,

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Eastwood and

Partners, Consultants and Sheffield City Council.




Part I of this submission identified the individuals in

each of these organisations with some responsibility

for Hillsborough.   In addition formal complaints

against certain South Yorkshire Police officers are

in the course of investigation.




It is recommended that the following individuals should

be interviewed under caution in respect of the events

that relate to the deaths   of the 95 supporters.




Consideration has been given to the order for interview

and the following list is the preferred order of the

Investigating Officer and is, therefore, recommended




1.   Police Constable Peter Edward SMITH



2.   Police Constable David ILLINGWORTH




3.   Mr Graham MACKRELL
4.    Mr Keith ADDY




5.    Mr Herbert McGEE




6.    Dr Wilfred EASTWOOD




7.    Superintendent        Roger GREENWOOD




8.    Superintendent        Roger MARSHALL




9.    Superintendent        Bernard MURRAY




10.   Chief Superintendent David DUCKENFIELD




11.   Assistant Chief Constable Walter JACKSON




Referring back to Part I, the Introduction, several

other Directors of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

were included as potential individuals to be

interviewed.   It is considered that at this stage those

other directors are not interviewed, but      the decision

postponed until after the     prime Club personalities

have been interviewed.




In relation to Eastwood and Partners, Consultants, it

is considered unnecessary at this stage to interview

Mr STRANGE under caution.    A decision on this can be

postponed until after Dr EASTWOOD has been interviewed.
In respect of Sheffield City Council and particularly

Mr David BOWNES it is recommended that Mr BOWNES is

interviewed as a witness.   Should matters be disclosed

suggesting culpability the interview of this witness

will cease and advice will be sought.




Mr PENSAM has since left his post with the Council.        It

is recommended that the decision to see him be deferred

until after Mr BOWNES has been interviewed.



Finally, it is necessary to mention the police

interviews.   Although the main object of this

investigation is to focus upon the criminal liability

of those named in relation to the deaths,     it will be

necessary to address ALL matters subject of formal

complaint against the police. This will undoubtedly

include matters which in some instances do not affect

the main offences of MANSLAUGHTER and Culpable

Malfeasance, but in the opinion of the Investigating

officer, it would be wrong to prolong or separate such

issues in interview.
                                              JMJ/MJFO )(2)




    This report with the other six parts of the submission

    forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions for

    consideration of the interim conclusions and advice on

    the recommendations made.




3                                        West Midlands Police
                                         Police Headquarters
                                         Birmingham
                                                           ■■   .
   West Midlands Police




   APPENDICES




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
                                                         APPENDIX 'A'

SEQUENCE OF EVENTS




This appendix of the Report provides a factual account of

the key events as they relate to the disaster.   However,

the list of events is not exhaustive.   The first part

details key dates before the announcement that the 1989

semi-final would be played at Hillsborough.   The second

part of the sequence shows what happened following the

announcement and leading up to the day of the match.

Finally, the sequence records what happened on the day.

Hopefully this sequence will be a useful reference point

when reading other parts of this report and the library

sections which accompany it.   It is worth noting in the

third part that the video/audio timings (in bold print) are

precise.   The timing drawn from statements is based on

people's memories and is imperfect.




                                                                319
                                                     APPENDIX 'A'




    SEQUENCE OF EVENTS




    PART ONE




    Date                      Occurrence




    1867       Sheffield Wednesday Football   Club   formed.




    1892       Sheffield Wednesday Football   Club elected to

               the Football League.




    1899       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club move to their

               present ground at Hillsborough.




     1913      South stand erected.




     1914      Spion Kop erected.




17.3.1956      Problems at the FA Cup semi-final match

               between Birmingham City and Sunderland.




     1961      North stand erected.




     1965      West stand erected.



     1977      Perimeter fencing installed.




                                                                    320
                                         APPENDIX 'A*




     Date                  Occurrence




     1978   Eastwood and Partners first employed as

            consultants by Sheffield Wednesday Football

            Club.



11.4.1981   Problems at the FA Cup semi-final between

            Tottenham Hotspurs and Wolverhampton Wanderers.




     1981   Radial fencing erected between what are now

            pens 1 and 2 and between void 5 and pen 6.




     1985   Radial fence erected effectively creating what

            are now pens 3 and 4.




     1986   Barrier 144 removed from pen 3.




12.4.1987   Problems at the FA Cup semi-final between

            Leeds United and Coventry.




9.4.1988    Problems at the FA Cup semi-final between

            Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.




   7-1988   Crush barriers on the west terrace tested by

            Eastwood and Partners.




                                                              32
                                                   APPENDIX '




SEQUENCE OF EVENTS




PART TWO




Date                        Occurrence




20.3.89    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club approach

           South Yorkshire Police re the staging of the

           1989 Football Association Cup Semi-final at

20.3.89    Hillsborough on 15 April 1989-




22.3.89    A planning meeting held re the Football

           Association Cup Semi-final attended by Chief

           Superintendents MOLE and DUCKENFIELD.




27.3.89    Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD promoted and

           takes charge of the ’F ’ Division.
                                         APPENDIX 'A'


Date                       Occurrence




29.3.89   Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD holds a meeting

          to discuss the Operation Order and arrangements

          for the match.    The meeting is attended by

          Superintendent MURRAY    Chief Inspector DEAL and

          Inspector SEWELL.




10.4.89   Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD holds meeting

          with Sector Superintendents.




12.4.89   Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD holds press

          conference at Hammerton Road Police Station.




13.4.89   Superintendent MURRAY and Inspector SEWELL

          visit the ground.    They meet the Club Secretary,

          Mr Mackrell.




14.4.89   A pre-match briefing by Chief Superintendent

          DUCKENFIELD was held in the north stand at the

          Hillsborough ground.




                                                               323
                                                      APPENDIX   'A'

SEQUENCE OF EVENTS




PART THREE




Saturday 15 April 1989




Time                           Occurrence




0800                 Sergeant GODDARD and Police Constable

                     RYAN commence duty in the Police Control

                     Box at the ground.     Equipment checks,

                     including P/A system.     All appear in

                     order.




1000                 Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                     holds a pre-match briefing at the

                     ground for officers of the rank of

                     Inspector and above.




1120                 Radio checks from Police Ground Control

                     with Serial Sergeants and Inspectors.




1200                 Supporters arriving in a slow trickle into

                     ground.




1242                 Two mounted police officers leave

                     perimeter driveway and take up position

                     in Leppings Lane entrance.

                                                                 324
                                 APPENDIX 'A'
Time                      Occurrence




1340          Steady flow of supporters into ground

              from Leppings Lane.




1356          Volume of supporters form Leppings Lane

              steadily increasing.




1400          Superintendent MARSHALL hears on radio

              that the special train has arrived

              and fans are being escorted to the

              ground.




1400 approx   Radio signals on UHF channel 25 start to

              break up.




1409          Gate 'C' closed by stewards who now

              stand inside ground.     A programme seller

              (perhaps?) stands outside.




1415          Radio problems get worse.




1417          Superintendent MARSHALL sees traffic

              situation in Leppings Lane deteriorating

              and asks for Leppings Lane to be closed

              to traffic.    Superintendent MURRAY

              records the time (?)




                                                       325
                                     APPENDIX 'A'

Time                  Occurrence




1420 +    Radio engineer starts to carry out

          repairs to radio system.




1425 +    Superintendent MARSHALL after

          patrolling Leppings Lane makes a

          further request for it to be closed.

          Superintendent MURRAY says the time

          was 1422.




1426      Steady build up of people using

          turnstiles and in the approaches.




1433.09   Area outside Gate 'C' cleared by

          police officer on foot.




1435      Large area of courtyard and gate

          area packed with supporters.    Two

          mounted officers near Gate 'B '-




1435.22   Very dense crowd in courtyard and at

          entrance from Leppings Lane.    Gates

          open from roadway.
                                       APPENDIX 'A'



Time                Occurrence




1437      Large crowd in Leppings Lane.

          Courtyard full.    Ten mounted

          officers in courtyard area.




1438      Superintendent MARSHALL in

          courtyard amongst crowd.




1438.24   Gate 'C' opened from inside.




1438.25   Courtyard area full.    Roadway full.

          Crowd spilling into area of Gate

          'C' .




1439      Boy passed overhead from area of

          turnstile 'G *.    Carried to Gate 'C'.




1439.29   Boy carried through Gate 'C' by

          police officers.




                                                    32 7
                                    APPENDIX 'A'




Time                Occurrence




1440      Request for police manpower

          including mounted officers.




1440.45   Gate 'C' closed.




1440      Police Constable Bichard remembers

          message from serial at Leppings Lane

          to Ground Control, "Gates are being

          forced, they are bending and

          buckling."




1440      Superintendent MARSHALL requests

          Land Rover with public address (PA)

          equipment.




1440 +    Messages to Ground Control for

          tannoy messages to tell people

          to stop pushing.




                                                   328
                                          APPENDIX 'A'



Time                    Occurrence




1441         Superintendent MARSHALL outside iron

             gates in Leppings Lane shouts to

             officers, "Stop them moving in."




1444.25      Ground Control requests Force

             Control Room to send traffic car

             with public address.    Force Control

             Room also informed of radio

             difficulties.




1445         Superintendent MURRAY tries to tell

             Chief Steward Mr LOCKE via club radio

             of Leppings Lane problems.    No

             reply.




1445.55      Land Rover arrives at Leppings Lane

             gates.    Police Constable BUXTON uses

             P.A. equipment.




1444/14 45   Superintendent MARSHALL radios

             Ground Control and asks for gates

             at the Leppings Lane end to be

             opened.   Superintendent MARSHALL

             says he received no acknowledgement.
                                                 APPENDIX 'A'


    Time                    Occurrence




    1445 +        Superintendent Marshall uses another

                  radio and repeats message to open

                  gates.   No acknowledgement.




    1445 +        Superintendent MARSHALL changes

                  radio channel and asks local police

                  station to pass on request to open

                  gates.   He then repeated his message to

                  Ground Control saying, "If the

                  gates are not opened quickly

                  someone will be killed." Police

                  Constable BICHARD in the Ground

                  Control hears this message.




    1447 approx   Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                  recalls, "It was about this time,

+                 1447 that the first message came

                  over the radio from Superintendent

                  MARSHALL with a request to open the

                  gates.   Whilst considering this

                  position I saw Gate 'C' open, but at

                  that point a mounted officer

                  retrieved the situation and the gate

                  was closed."




                                                                330
                                           APPENDIX 'A'


Time                      Occurrence




1448.04       Gate 'C' opened to eject supporter.

              A total of 120 supporters enter.




1448.23       Mounted officer blocks access to

              Gate 'C'.




1448.31       Gate 'C' closed.




1448 approx   Radio engineer reports radio

              working correctly.



1447/1449     Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

              recalls, "After Superintendent

              MARSHALL'S comment that people would

              be killed I was considering my

              position.    Mr MURRAY asked for my

              decision.    I said,   'OPEN THE GATES'.




1451.30       Comment made in Force Control Room,

              "Superintendent MARSHALL is

              screaming for them to open inner

              gates to let people in."
                                         APPENDIX '



Time                     Occurrence




1450          Sergeant GODDARD gives instructions

              to open the gates.




1 452.06      Gate *C ' opens and supporters walk

              in.




1452 approx   Sergeant HIGGINS asks for Gate 'A'

              to be opened.




 1454.08       Liverpool Team on to pitch.

 1455          Gate 'A' opened.




??             Police Constable BUXTON asks for

               kick off to be delayed.   Sergeant

               GODDARD replies, "It's too late one

               team already on field."




 1455.22       Nottingham Forest Team on to pitch.
                                             APPENDIX 'A'




Time                      Occurrence




1457.25       Referee and linesmen on to pitch.




1457.35       Gate ’C ' closed.




1457.48       Toss up.




1459-12       Gate *C * re-opened.     Supporters

              still entering.




1459-30       Kick off.




1500.41       Supporters led by police from

              direction of west terraces towards

              North Stand.




1500.43       Supporters climb over perimeter

              fence from Pen A to pitch side.




1501 approx   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

              asks Superintendent Greenwood to go

              to Leppings Lane and find out what

              was happening.




                                                            333
                                       APPENDIX 'A'

Time                Occurrence




1505      Superintendent GREENWOOD decides the

          game must be stopped and runs on to pitch.




1505.24   Match stopped.




1506.10   Assistant Chief Constable JACKSON

          enters Ground Control box and asks

          for "Operation Support" request to

          Force Control Room.




1507-40   Ground Control request Force Control

          for a fleet of ambulances.




1508.54   Sergeant and Police Constables on

          perimeter fence motioning to people

          in Pen 3 to move back.




1513.35   Ground Control request Fire Brigade.




1514.08   Outward movement from Pens 3 and 4

          and back through tunnel.




1515.33   St John's Ambulance on pitch.

1517.32   Request for Casualty Bureau to be

          set up.




                                                      334
                             APPENDIX 'A'


          Occurrence




People being helped over fences and

through gates.   Police officer with

loud hailer appeals for calm.




Liverpool Club Manager, Mr Dalglish,

uses Club PA to ask for calm and

co-operation.




Superintendent Murray broadcasts

over PA serious nature of incident

and asks spectators not to move

until casualties cleared.




Ground Control to Force Control "No

further ambulances required at ground".




Announcement that match is

abandoned.




                                            335
                                                                                   APPENDIX 'B'

             THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
            Quee r , A n n e ' s C h a m b e r s
            2^ B r o j J u . i v L o n d o n S W I U ^JS

                             S w itc h bo ard   01-21 0 3000
            Telex 91 75 64              G TN    210
            F jx No 01-222 6006 - 210-3488
            O X (Vo. 2 3 18 V ic toria

\! 3 Jo nes Esq                                                   Please
                                                                   lease quote
 \ssis tant Chief Constable (Operations)                           L89/2117/DB
West Midlands Police                                              Your reference
\e c h e l i s Green Police Station
Birmingham                                                        Date
                                                                   10 May 1989




SALMON LETTERS TO SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE, SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC
AND SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


As discussed over the telephone yesterday, 1 now enclose for information copies of the
thre e "Salmon le tte rs" which have so far been drafte d by Andrew Collins and which 1
have now served on the relevant parties' solicitors. As you will be aware, Lord Justice
Taylor announced at the Preliminary Meeting on 15 April th a t parties the subject of
criticism would be informed in advance of the allegations against them.

On the basis of the evidence seen so far, Counsel consider th a t these three le tte rs are
warranted.

As the evidential picture builds up, other such le tt e rs may follow.

The p r actic e of issuing such le tte r s is of course founded on natural justice and was
recommended by Lord Justice Salmon in his Report of 1966 on Tribunals of Inquiry.




                                                     D BRUMMELL




                                                                                             336
                                                                                             APPENDIX ’B ’
                    THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                   Queen Anne’s Chambers
                   28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
                   Telephones Direct Line 0 1 - 2 1 0 2109
                                     Switchboard 0 1 - 2 1 0 3 0 0 0
                   Telex 9 1 7 5 6 4         GTN 2 1 0
                   Fax No. 0 1 -2 2 2 6 0 0 6 - 2 1 0 - 3 4 8 8
                   DX N o. 2 3 1 8 Victoria

    Messrs Keeble Hawsons                                                   Please quote
    7 St J am es R o w                                                      L 89/2117
    Sheffield                                                               Your reference
    SI 1XA
                                                                            Date
    For th e a tte n tio n of Miss Gregory/M iss Ayre                       9 May 1989



                                                   BY FAX AN D LETTER


#

    HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


    You will re c a ll t h a t a t th e pre-inquiry m e e tin g on 28th April Lord Ju stic e Taylor
    ind icated t h a t any body against whom any alleg ation was to be m ad e would be
    inform ed of it and th e su b stan ce of th e evidence supporting it

    You will a p p r e c ia te t h a t th e ta sk of assembling th e evidence for th e Inquiry is a
    form id able one and s ta t e m e n ts a re still being ta k en . However, it seem ed right to let
    you have w hat m u st be a prelim inary indication of critic is m s which may be levelled a t
    th e C ity Council, as th e local a u th o rity responsible for th e s a f e ty c e r t if ic a te s under
    th e S afety of S ports Grounds A ct, 1975, as soon as possible b efo re th e co m m en cem en t
.   of th e Inquiry.

    The following a r e th e m ain c ritic ism s which so far appear from th e evidence available:-

    1.       The pens on the te r r a c e s a t th e Leppings Lane end of the ground c o n s titu te d a
            p o te n tia l danger if crow ded. The m eans of eg ress onto th e pitch w ere
            in adequ ate and you should have insisted t h a t th e re w ere m ore g ates, th a t they
            w ere properly signed, t h a t th e r e w ere m eans of acc ess la te ra lly b etw een the
            pens, again properly m arked, and t h a t all gangways w ere properly m arked.

    2.       The directio n al signs w ere in adequ ate, so th a t those en te rin g w ere necessarily
            channelled to th e tunnel leading to th e c e n tra l tw o pens.

    3.      The crush b arrie rs within th e pens w ere no t properly positioned and one a t le ast
            was of in su fficien t s tre n g th .

    k.       The tunnel giving a cc ess to th e te r r a c e was n ot of a c o n s ta n t grad ien t but
            sloped steep ly a t th e te r r a c e end: this was poten tially hazardous if a large
            crowd c a m e down th e tunnel.

                                                                       1.


                                                                                                                 337
                                                                                   APPENDIX »B»


5.     The wall a t the turnstiles was not ad eq ua te to prevent persons climbing into the
       ground.

6.     Access by am bulances or fire engines to the playing a r e a and the surround was
       not adequately provided for. F urtherm ore, the provision of first-aid equipment
       was insufficient.

Should any f urth er m a t t e r s deserving of critic ism come to our a tte ntio n , we will of
course let you know of them.




                                        DAVID BRUMMELL
                                   A ssistant Treasury Solicitor




                                                  2.

                                                                                                   338
                                                                                          APPENDIX V
            THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
            Queen A n n e ’s Chambers
            28 Broadway L o ndon SW1H 9JS
            T elephones      Direct Line      01-210
                             Switchboard      0 1-21 0 3 00 0
            Telex 9 1 7 5 6 4           GTN   2 10
            Fax N o. 0 1 -2 2 2 6 0 0 6

                                                                Please quote   L 8 9/2117/P fO W
Messrs. Reynolds, Porter, Chamberlain,
Chichester House,                                               Your reference
278/282 High Holborn,
London, WC1V 7HA.                                               Date    16th June, 1 9 8 9

 For the Attention of Mr. P. D. Nicholas




    Dear Sir,

                     Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry - Dr. W. Eastwood

        As you know I act for the above Inquiry.

        You are already aware of the general criticisms which have been indicated
    against Sheffield Wednesday F.C. in the letter of 9th May, 1989 addressed to
    Davies, Arnold, Cooper, a copy of which is enclosed and which, I understand, you
    have been shown by the Club.

        Since that letter was written, much more information has become available.
    In the light of that information, I consider it appropriate that you should be
    aware of matters which may form the subject of criticism against your client and
    his firm.

       I should make it clear that I am writing you this letter because of Lord
   Justice Taylor's indication at the outset of this Inquiry that, if any criticism
   might be levelled against any person advance notice of it should be given.

       The following are the main general criticisms against your client which
   appear from the evidence now available

       1. There are a number of failures to follow the Green Guide reccnmendations
   in the construction, disposition and height of crush barriers on the West
   Terrace generally and more particularly in Pens 3 and 4, which affected the
   capacity of the pens on the terrace and the flow of spectators.

       Particular consideration should have been given to the effect of the removal
   of Barrier 144 in Pen 3 in 1986.

       2. The construction of the new radial fences in 1981 and of that in 1985
   which created the sterile area behind Gate 5 reduced the capacity of the
   terraces. Your client failed to take proper account of this in his advice to
   the Club and in his dealings with the Local Authority.

       3. Your client ought to have advised the Club of the effect of the
   installation of radial fences generally on capacity and evacuation particularly
   having regard to the narrowness of the gates in the perijneter fencing.

       I should advise you that if, in the light of this letter, your client
   wishes to be represented on Thursday when he gives evidence, Lord Justice Taylor
   has indicated that he will be receptive to such a request.

                                                                                                   339
                                                               APPENDIX'B'




    I enclose herewith for consideration a copy of a report by Dr. Nicholson of
the Health & Safety Executive dealing with certain factual matters.

    Please naice any response to me here, at the Inquiry at the address shown on
the fax covering sheet.




                                  Yours faithfully,




                                  for the Treasury Solicitor




                                                                       340
                                                                                             APPENDIX 'B ’
                       THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                       Queen Anne’s Chambers
                       28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
                       Telephones Direct Line 0 1 -2 1 0 3109
                                         Switchboard 01 -210 3 0 0 0
                       Telex 9 1 7 5 6 4        GTN 2 1 0
                       Fax No 0 1 -2 2 2 6 0 0 6 - 2 1 0 -3 4 8 8
                       DX No. 2 3 1 8 Victoria

    Messrs Davies Arnold Cooper                                             Please quote
    Solicitors                                                              L89/2117/DB
    12 Bridewell Place                                                      Your reference
    LONDON EC4 6AD                                                          117/743968/SW
                                                                            Date
    For th e a tte n tio n of Mr Doyle                                      9 May 1989


                                                    BY FAX AND LETTER




*        S k~
                        i
    HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB


    You will rec a ll t h a t a t th e pre-inquiry m e e tin g on 28th April Lord J u stic e Taylor
    ind icated th a t any body ag ainst whom any alleg atio n was to be m ade would be inform ed
    of it and th e su b sta n c e of the evidence supporting it.

    You will a p p r e c ia te th a t th e task of assem bling th e evidence       for th e Inquiry is a
    fo rm idable one, and s ta t e m e n ts a r e still being taken. However, it seem ed right to let
    you have what m ust be a prelim inary indication of critic is m s which may be levelled a t
    th e Club and its em ployees as soon as possible before th e co m m en cem en t of th e
    Inquiry. We su sp e ct t h a t you a r e alread y aw are of the g en era l th ru s t of the criticism s
    which have been m ade and th a t w hat is s e t out in this le t t e r will be no surprise to you.

    The following a r e th e main gen eral criticism s which so far appear from th e evidence
    available to us:-

    1.          There app ear to have been a num ber of significant failures to follow th e Green
                Guide recom m en dation s. In p articu lar, we r e f e r to th e following paragraphs:-

                 26.   Training of stew ard s in carrying out th e ir roles in natu ral and em ergency
                       situations.

                29.    There m ay have been breaches of the following sub-paragraphs, nam ely
                       (v)(a) and (c), (vi), (x), (xii) and (xv).

                45.    Walls could be clim bed over.

                46.    There w ere insu fficien t contingency plans to deal with th e e f f e c t of
                       opening th e g a te to relieve crowd pressure outside.

                 57.   T here was no proper signposting in the ground.

                                                                       1.




                                                                                                              341
                                                                                                     APPENDIX 'B'



         99.     The gangways in the te r ra c e s were not indicated.

        176.     The planning for em erg ency, in the light of events,                             was inadequate.

        194. (ii) and (iv). No step s were taken to ensure th a t the cap a cities of Pens 3
                and 4 were not exceeded and loud hailers were not provided for stew ards
                and police to co n tro l the crowds.

        195. (a). No stew ard s w ere available to d ir e c t persons en te rin g th e ground to
               ensure th a t the te r r a c e s filled up evenly.

       200.      There is some evidence th a t th e police w ere unable to com m u n ic ate with
                 th e stew ards.

       206.     The a rra n g e m e n ts for a cc ess to and egress from th e pens on the te rra c e s
                w e r e i n a d e q u a t e a n d t h e r e w e r e i n s u f f i c i e n t e x i t s to c a t e r fo r an
                em ergency.

       215.     The g a te s in the p e rim e te r fence w ere not marked                    as such and th a t to
                Peii 4 was d iffic u lt to use,      since th e r e w ere no                 steps leading to it.

2.     Turnstiles A-G w ere in sufficient to ensure e a s e of admission to the te r ra c e s
       inside, th e re w ere in ad equ ate directio n s to the pens to the side, th e r e being a
       small and insignificant sign indicating standing to th e right and no sign a t all to
       the le ft. The re su lt was th a t all e n terin g w ere draw n to th e tunnel leading to
       Pens 3 and 4, which was n ot of a uniform g rad ien t and sloped steeply a t the end
       leading onto the te rra c e s .

3.     No step s w ere taken to ensure th a t the pens did not g e t overcrow ded. Stewards
       ought to have m onitored the ingress o f the crow d and, with police assistance if
       necessary, to have p revented s p e c ta to rs going down th e tunnel when Pens 3 and
       4 w ere full.

4.     The c o l l a p s e o f   a b a rrie r    in   P en      3 m ay      in d icate    a la c k     of   stren g th .

5.     Since th e g ates to th e p e rim e te r fence w ere small and unm arked and th e gates
       giving a c c ess betw een th e pens a t th e to p of the te r r a c e s equally small and
       unm arked, it should have been ap p re c ia te d th a t a full house might lead to
       dangerous overcrow ding.         F u rth e rm o re , since Liverpool had been given an
       allocation of s e a ts which might have been in adeq uate to c a t e r for its regular
       supporters, it was likely th a t persons would co m e w ith ou t tic k e ts and add to the
       pressures outside th e ground. Very g r e a t c a re should have been taken to prev ent
       overcrow ding and to ensure an abundance of s tew ard s to supervise th e te r ra c e .

6.     The f irs t-a id eq uipm en t may have been in ad eq uate. In p articu lar, th e re was no
       oxygen available or eq uipm ent to assist resu scitatio n . A rrangem ents to access
       em ergen cy vehicles w ere inad equate: an am bulance could onfy reac h the playing
       a re a a f t e r an adv ertising hoarding was rem oved.

Should any fu rth e r criticism s com e to our a tte n tio n , we shall of course le t you know of
th e m .




                                            DAVID BRUMMELL
                                        Assistant Treasury Solicitor
                  THE TREASURY SOLICITOR                                                     APPENDIX *B 1
                  Queen Anne's Chambers
                  28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
                  Telephones       Direct Line      0 1 -2 1 0   3109
                                    Sw itch board 0 1 -2 1 0 3 0 0 0
                  Telex 9 1 7 5 6 4         GTN 2 1 0
                  Fax No. 0 1 -2 2 2 6 0 0 6 - 2 1 0 -3 4 8 8
                  DX No. 2 3 1 8 Victoria

Messrs Hammond Suddards                                                 Please quote
Solicitors                                                                L 8 9 /2 1 17/DB
Empire House                                                            Your reference
10 Piccadilly                                                             PC M /P AB
BRADFORD BDl 3LR                                                        Date
                                                                         9 Mav 1989



                                                  BY FAX AND LETTER




     IK ,
HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


You will rec a ll th a t a t th e pre-inquiry m e etin g on April 28th Lord J u stice Taylor
indicated th a t any body again st whom any alleg ation was to be m ade would be inform ed
of it and th e s u b stan ce of the evidence supporting it.

You will a p p re c ia te th a t th e task of assembling th e evidence for the Inquiry is a
form idable one. And s ta t e m e n ts a re still being taken. However, it seem ed right to let
you have w hat m ust be a prelim inary indication of c ritic is m s which may be levelled a t
th e South Y orkshire Police as soon as possible before th e com m en ce m en t of th e
Inquiry.   We su sp e ct th a t you a re already aw are of th e general th ru s t of criticism s
which have been m ade and th a t w hat is se t o ut in this l e t t e r will be no surprise to you.

The following a re th e main gen era l critic ism s which so far appear from the evidence
available to us:-

1.          Failure to ta k e any a d e q u a te step s to co ntrol su ppo rters so t h a t the crush, which
            built up from ab ou t 2.20 to 2.30pm outside th e Leppings Lane e n tra n c e to th e
            ground and which led to th e decision to open ' C g ate because of a perceived
            danger to life, did not occu r. In p articu lar, th e re w ere not proper arran g e m en ts
            to check supp orters a t a far enough d ista n ce from th e ground and insufficient
            o ffic e rs w ere av ailable to control th e crowd outside the tu rn stiles.              Having
            regard to th e lim ited s p a c e available, th e disposition of mounted police may not
            have been of any use and may have c o n s titu te d a positive danger. It should
            have been a n tic ip a te d t h a t many supporters would a rriv e shortly before kick-off
            and t h a t some would n o t have tic k e ts. Steps should have been taken to stop
            n o n -tic k e t holders g e ttin g n ear the ground and adding to the congestion.



                                                                   1.


                                                                                                               343
                                                                                                 APPENDIX 'B'


2.    Failure by o ffice rs outside to liaise adequ ately with those inside the ground and
       vice versa. There w ere in addition problem s with radio com m unications and th e
       noise of the crowd rend ered such tannoy or loudspeaker announcem ents (if any)
      as w ere made in e ffe c tiv e . When it was decided th a t a g a te or gates must be
      opened to relieve p ressure outside (and the decision to open g a te s may well have
      been a n ecessary one in the circu m stan c es), th e r e w ere no step s tak en to ensure
      th a t th e re was any police or stew ard presence to p rev en t those en terin g going to
      the tunnel which led on to the already overcrow ded Pens 3 and U. It ought to
      have been realised th a t w ith ou t such p resence all those coming in the gates
      w ere likely to go down th e tunnel because of inadequacy of signing and because
      the tunnel was the only visible way to the te rra cin g .

3.    No ste p s w ere taken to m onitor properly the s ta t e of Pens 3 and k. O fficers
      ought to have been statio n ed in the tunnel an d /o r a t the rear of th e pens and
      should in conjunction with those a t th e front have ensured th a t the pens did not
      becom e too full. It was known th a t th e re was likely to be a full house and th a t
      it was essen tial to en sure an even distribution of s p e c ta to rs in all the pens on
      the te r r a c e s , p articularly as the decision had been m ade to give Liverpool th e
      sm aller end of the ground.

k.     When people began to be crushed and to lose th e ir lives, th e o ffice rs in front of
       Pens 3 and k took too long to r e a c t to w hat was happening. They seem ed to be
       thinking in te rm s of prevention of disorder and pitch invasion r a th e r than safety .
       There was no proper guidance given to the individual o ffic e rs because no proper
       plans had been m ade to deal with overcrow ding in th e pens. The g ates leading
       on to th e pitch w ere no t opened in tim e and, when they w ere, o ffice rs w ere
       initially trying to p rev en t people g e ttin g ou t. O ffic e rs seem ed not to know w hat
       they should do and, although many individual o ffic e rs showed g r e a t presence of
       mind and devotion to duty, valuable m inutes w ent by before th e n atu re of what
       was happening was a p p re c ia te d .

5.     There w ere in a d eq u ate contingency plans to deal with th e sort of em ergency
       which aro se. In p a rtic u la r, th e em ergency services may not have been called as
       expeditiously as they should have been and in su ffic ien t arran g e m en ts had been
       made to en ab le them to gain a c c e s s to the ground. Help for th e injured was not
       co -o rd in a te d and no use was made of the tannoy system to explain to s p e c ta to rs
       w h at had happened or to organise assistance.

6.     Since th e re was no chance th a t all those tryin g to e n te r the ground would be
       able to do so by 3pm, co nsideration should have been given to d eferrin g th e
       kick -off a t a much e a r lie r stage. It seem s th a t it was no t until about 2.55 th a t
       this s te p w as considered and by then it was thought to be too la te because the
       te a m s w ere com ing out.                It should have been c lear much earlier th a t th e
       k i c k - o f f m u s t b e p o s tp o n e d a n d t h a t a d e q u a t e s t e p s w e r e t a k e n to g iv e
       assu ran ce to those trying to g e t in th a t th e re was a postponem ent. This might
       h a v e r e l i e v e d t h e p r e s s u r e a n d o b v i a t e d t h e n e e d to op en t h e g a t e s .

Should any f u r th e r specific m a tte r s which might re su lt in criticism s co m e to our
a tte n tio n , we shall of co u rse le t you know of them .




                                             DAVID BRUMMELL
                                        A ssistant Treasury Solicitor
