                                                                        87

  AH                ^   nk^      m w II




  C   acU   « K



i Letfj~ 4 * «#•<*•■' UCcAj Jj(n           Ifw* Hwi (+r»T4*/ C. j>os/£» Cjo**r c*py)
  J + J * *& + *   1 *4 *+ * u * £ *      yL
                with compliments
                         °f
                   H.M. Coroner

Christopher P. Dorries
M edico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield                T elephone: Sheffield (0742) 738721
S3 7E T                                  Fax: (0742) 726247
                                                      c - CD9 ' i   0   (0




               Office of H.M. Coroner
               The Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S3 7ET
HM Coroner:                                                                  South Yorkshire (West)
Christopher P. Dorries                                                           (0114)273-8721



                                                                                   13 March 1996
Your ref:
O ur ref:

Mr Trevor Hicks
Chairman
Hillsborough Family Support Group




Dear Mr Hicks

Hillsborough Documentation

Thank you for your letter of the 5th March 1996. I am sorry for the slight delay in replying
but I have been away from the office rather a lot in the last few days.

I should first of all say that the Support Group itself probably does not fall within the
relevant legislation for the supply of inquest documents but the individual relatives
(obviously including yourself) most certainly do. I am therefore working on the basis that
the request for copy documents comes from you personally.

A Coroner is obviously supplied with a number of papers prior to any inquest so that he
can decide which witnesses to call. Normally the only people involved will be the local
police and the Coroner so issues of ownership of this documentation do not arise. The
situation as regards Hillsborough was somewhat more complicated, Doctor Popper
received a great mass of papers which had been taken for the W est Midlands Police
investigation, the Police Complaints Authority investigation, Lord Justice Taylor’s enquiry
and any subsequent inquest. It is perhaps worth noting that had criminal charges been
preferred against any party the inquest was likely to have been adjourned indefinitely, so
on the question of ownership I think it is quite clear that the Coroner has the least claim.

It seems to have been generally agreed that ownership of these papers lies with the South
Yorkshire Police. As you perhaps know, they have released many statements requested
by the relatives but decided that they would only do this if they received permission of the
person making the statement. I am only aware of a couple of instances where permission
was refused.




                                       Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                         CJA44851DOC
However, the Coroner is under an obligation by virtue of The Coroner’s Rules 1984 to
supply properly interested persons (such as yourself) with copies of post-mortem reports
or any other document taken in evidence at the inquest. This is generally taken to mean
statements which are read out at the inquest in place of the witness’s oral evidence. Thus
I have no power to release copies of statements where the witness actually attended and
gave oral evidence because the statement does not belong to me.

I would therefore suggest that the easiest way forward is for your request to be made to
the police. In order to assist I will pass a copy of your letter and this reply onto Chief
Superintendent Lowe at Heeley Police Station, Chesterfield Road, Sheffield. I do not
believe the police have previously made a charge for the supply of statements but of
course they may choose to do so in view of the amount of work involved in this request.

If you have any difficulty with the police meeting your request please telephone me and I
will discuss with you the best way to identify the statements that were read out at the
inquest in order that I might meet my obligations to you under The Coroner’s Rules 1984.
Indeed if there is any aspect of the matter that you would like to discuss with me please do
not hesitate to telephone.

Yours sincerely




C P Dorries
HM C oroner



cc. Chief Superintendent Lowe
 ~   (SouthYorkshire Police)




                                       SOUTH YORKS. POLICE




                                      Fax:(0114)272-6247
                                                                                  CJA44851DOC
                          Office of H.M. Coroner
                                      South Yorkshire (Weatl
         The Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S 3 7 f t




  r                               FAX MESSAGE

   For the attention of:                   PC K en G r e e n a w a y
  Organisation:                           S Y P o l ic e
  Fax no:                                 2523855
  Originating Officer:
                                                  Se c r e t a r y   to   H M Co r o n er
  Time & Date                             15/03/96                   09:59



      This fax message consists of 2 pages including this cover sheet.
             In case of any queries piease telephone 0114-273-8721


Comments:
Copy letter as requested per this morning's telephone call.

Please do not hesiate to phone me back if any queries




                        Our fax number is 0114-272-6247
 **     '   -W   .
      15/03 '98         10:0 3         FAX 01142738721
                                                                      MEDICO LGL CNTER




                                                                                           *    **   •




            S;;ppO^*
                                       Hillsborough Family Support Group




       5 March 1996




       Mr c P Dorries
       HM Coroner
       South Yorkshire (West)
       Medico Legal Centre
       Watery Street
       SHEFFIELD
       S3 7ET




       Dear Mr Dorries,

       Would it be possible to supply the Hillsborough Family Support
       Group with copies of all statements taken in connection with
       the inquest (including the mini-inquests) into the
       Hillsborough Disaster?

       Any advice you can give me about procedures to obtain such
       documents would be appreciated as would an estimate of the
       cost of supply.

       V q » i *b    s i n r .e jr e l v .




       Trevor h i c k s
       Chairman




CHAIRMAN                                                 SECRETARY                       TREASURER
T. Hicks                                                 P. Hammond                      Mrs, J- Traynor
