. .....   .......   ..
                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                      ( J O R   | U
                                                                REF;
        FROM:   P.C. 90k GAMER.
                                                                STATION/DEPT:   CLAYWHEELS LAWE.
        TO:     CH. SUPT. OPERATIONS and TRAFFIC.               DATE:              . 0
                                            .                                   2.6.o9«____

                   SUBJECT:                cu p SEMI j>INAL<




                  On Saturday 15th. April 1989 I commenced duty at 0900 to be at Hillsborough
                  Football Ground for 10.00 for briefing re duties.


                  I was the driver of a Ford Transit for serial 61, commanded by P.S. CHAPMAN
                  H.Q. Training patolling the Fir Vale area. There were no incidents
                  of any significance*


                  Aboat 15.00 whilst travelling towards the ground to take upjphase 2
                  duties there was a 10/9 call for all units to attend the ground. As we
                  arrived and parked in Penistone Road OPERATION SUPPORT was called and
                  we attended the rear of the West stand to await deployment as directed#

                  A short time later we were instructed to form a 'cordon along the front
                  of the KOP on the perimeter track to prevent pitch invasion.
                  As the incident developed an increasing number of Liverpool supporters
                  came down the pitch and inflammed the situation.     Others ripped down
                  hoardings whom we assisted.
                  As the situation on the pitch deteriated we instructed by Ch. Supt. NESBITT
                  to form a cordon across the half way line. I became seperated from my unit
                  and joined P.S. HALLETT when instructed to go into Leppings Lane.


                  There was a number of dead layed on one side and injured on the other*
                  We took up positions which masked the dead from view of the crowd and
                  pedestrians.


                  I was instructed to fetch the van I had been driving to convey injured to
                  hospital, but on returning tr Lepping Lane was used by Insp* DELANEY
                  to transport his C & V to a number of 10/9 calls and reports of fighting
                  in the Wadsley Lane and Middlewood Road areas.


                  I then returned to Penistone where after a period of inactivity I returned
                  to the police room for redeployment.   Togehter with Insp. EGGELSTONE and
                  other members of the Underwater Search Unit I attended the West Stand and
                  Leppings Lane terrace and took photographs of the scene.
                  The negatives were taken to Headquarters and at 22.00 I went off duty*

GEN/2


                  P.C.        £/
