                                                                                        MIR.15


 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and^tjnyn^i^d                                  Number
7

Title                  ec     b'/fa71-   '
(Include source and any document number if relevant)

Receiver's instructions - urgent action - y d /H o         ^                      jjr { ji Q f IsS
                                                                                                                   Receiver

                                                                                                                 ^ 7 4-J
Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                           Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Statement reader's instructions          0                                                                    Statem ent Reader




Indexed as indicated                                                                                              Indexer

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                           4% S’
Examined - further action to be taken
                                                                                                                         SIO


                                                                                                              IG51
Further action No(s)                                                                                              Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
          V C -L             \

J MERVYN JO N E S M S c                                                   FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                 Furnival Gate
  HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY I t A M                                            Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                          Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9
WEST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                  SMITHDOW N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                    Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Q ueensw ay                                                Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 7 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5
                                                                          Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE 8TATION
Fowler Street                                                             Our Ref:               JMJ/VSC
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                           Date:                  24 May 1989




                R M Whalley Esq
                Secretary to Lord Justice Taylor
                Sheffield Town Hall
                Surrey Street
                Sheff ield
                S1 2HH




                LETTER FROM                       DATED 2 2 MAY 1 9 8 9

                I refer to the above letter dated 22 May 1989 a copy of which I
                received today in Birmingham and have had faxed here.

                The questionnaire to which         [refers is the "supporter
                questionnaire" which we have used throughout this inquiry without
                serious complaint.  A copy of the questionnaire, which incidentally
                Treasury Solicitors saw at the beginning of the investigation, is
                enclosed.

                On examination of the q u e s tionnaire you will see the following as they
                relate to points raised by

                (a)     Of the 54 questions asked only three          (numbers 11, 15 and 35) refer
                        to alcohol, fighting or drunkenness.

                (b)     The questionnaire was used to obtain as much information as
                        possible as quickly as possible.  If the witness had a material
                        imput a witness statement using the individual's own words and
                        language would be used.

                (c)     Question 54 was the final catch all questions deliberately
                        designed not to inhibit any person from giving information.

                (d)     I am at a loss to understand how          :an know that "others
                        were not afforded this opportunity" when referring to a
                        requirement for particular statements to be included.




                                                  Sheffield
   PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
                                    -   2    -




(e)   The final point he refers to is not about intelligence, but about
      the quality of the witness and whether he is likely to be
      "impressive", "average" or "poor".   This was included as a guide
      for Counsel in deciding which witnesses would likely give the best
      accounts.   (NB: Even though many of my officers are very well
      qualified graduate teachers, I would not wish them to make any
      value judgement on any of the witnesses' intelligence l e v e l s ! )

(f)   Whether there is any intention to re-visit          s currently
      being investigated by Detective Chief Superintendent Foster and I
      will advise you accordingly.

I trust this if of some assistance.         Do you intend to reply, shall I,
or both?

Unless you have any views to the contrary I propose to arrange for one
of my senior officers to make telephone contact with          initially,
with a view to perhaps seeing him personally to explain the exact
position.  This may appear to be a little bit heavy, but we have had so
few criticisms to date that I feel it is appropriate to make sure that
        fully appreciates the integrity of the investigation.
                                                         Q .\ O ^     ,




                                                                     SHEFFIELD


                                                                     22 M ay 1989

M r Taylor
Chair of the Hillsborough Inquiry
The Town Hall
Surrey Street
SHEFFIELD


Dear Mr Taylor

H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y

As a witness to the events at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989,1 was interviewed by officers from
the West Midlands Police Force during the course of their initial investigations into the
circumstances surrounding the tragedy. I would however, wish to respectfully draw to your
attention to certain factors which may serve to skew' the complexion of the inquiry' - either by
design or otherwise - and possibly influence the ultimate outcome.

The supporters' questionnaire, which had been constructed by the West Midlands Police Force
(according to the officers who interviewed me) was obviously defensive in its approach, and also
in the language which w'as used. For instance, regular reference was made to drunkenness (or
excessive drinking) and also to crowd misbehaviour. Although obviously influencing factors, the
degree and weighting was quite disproportionate. The emphasis, continually placed on these
factors, could "lead" witnesses. Also, the police officers completed the questionnaire using their
English. In my own case I had to ask for particular statements to be included * others were not
afforded this opportunity. Finally, with regards to the questionnaire, the officers were asked to
make a value judgement at the end, which asked whether the witness was, in their opinion, above
average intelligence, average, or below average. I would question whether police constables (tw'o
constables interviewed me), with little or no training in this very delicate and sensitive area of
 interviewing, have either the experience or competence to make such a value-laden judgement.

At the end of this two hour discussion, the officers suggested that other, more senior officers,
would be returning to taice a further statement. To date this has not happened, yet I note that, as
the inquiry progresses, the opportunities for supporters to present evidence are diminishing.

 Yours sincerely




 (I have sent a copy of this letter to the West Midlands Police)
                                                        SHEFFIELD


                                                        Daytime tel no


27 April 1989


The Hillsborough Enquiry
West Midlands Police
Lloyd House
Uniform Operations
PO Box 52
Colmore Circus
Queensway
BIRMINGAHM


Dear Sir

This afternoon I spoke with an officer from West Midlands Police and gave an oral summary of the
statement which I now attach. Although I would submit this as a statement I would seek further
guidance as to ensure that I have covered all the salient features . I would welcome further
discussion with your officers.

-Yours faithfully_________________




                                                 V.

                                                      ""S   c   -S   .   h>S't<UZ
1   Football Clubs and Football Governing Bodies

    Areas which must be questioned and investigated

    (i)        Why, when statistical evidence is well known and well recorded, did the ruling and
               governing bodies in football make the ticket allocation in the way they did?

    (ii)       How much were these governing bodies influenced by police pressure?

    (iii)      Why wasn't the protest which the Liverpool Football Ciub, and also the Liverpool
               supporters club not listened to - and acted upon?

2   Police and Other Emergency Services

    My witness and experience of the events at Hillsborough - Saturday 15 April

    (i)        Being "dropped off" directly outside the ground on the main road running parallel
               with the North side Stand (where my seat was) at between 2.25 and 2.30 pm - it was
                not until 2.55 pm that I actually got into the ground.

    (ii)       I did sec some prospective spectators who had had a considerable amount of alcohol -
                and I would not wish to condone this - but, it must be given some perspective, and
                the number of people falling into this category w'as so small that I believe that it
                would be considered to be too small to be statistically significant.

    (iii)      In trying to gain access to the ground I noted that all o f the side streets - which are
                important for both entrance and exit • had police barriers which blocked the routes.
                The net effect of this was to cause a "funner’ effect whereby pressure was building
                up in only one way - at the turnstiles. Following the road barriers, these turnstiles
                were the first and only form of crowd organisation at the Leppings Lane end of the
                ground. I would also note that in the ensuing crush very few police were in evidence
                on the approaches to Hillsborough.

     (iv)      W hen I eventually did manage to get through the turnstiles, I saw - and spoke to - a
                group of at least twenty policemen who were, apparently, oblivious o f what w'as
                occurring outside. It was already becoming self-evident to spectators who have
                experience of events such, as this that a very serious crowd problem was developing,
                and that the police authorities had not, at that stage, been able to identify or quantify
                the magnitude of the developing situation.

     (v)        Having found my seat, two thoughts were uppermost in my mind. Firstly the gross
                overcrowding in the enclosure to my right - the Leppings Lane End, and secondly,
                the number o f forged tickets which were being exchanged and discussed.

     (vi)       Shortly after the game started I witnessed spectators being physically hauled up from
                the central standing area in that enclosure to the upper stand ( I am aware that all of
                this is recorded on film) and also people in that enclosed area both being ’spewed’ out
                from the gate which was then opened and also some somersaulting over the
                perimeter fencing.


      (vii)      It was apparent from the reaction of the police, and perhaps understandable due to
                 obvious lack o f communication, that these actions constituted a pitch invasion.
                 A cco rd in g ly , some officers then physically tried to push back the spectators into the
                 same enclosure.

      (viii)     As events unfolded more and more police did come on to the pitch but by this tune
                 people who were injured were not in any way being cared for by the emergency
                 services. Indeed many police constables still apparently considered it to be a pitch
                 invasion. This was evidenced by police forming a human barrier across the centre
               line of the ground in order to restrain Liverpool spectators from moving towards the
               "kop" end of the stadium. It was not until some considerable time later that some
               rescue and recover}' services did in fact take a small number of stretchers to the
               injured. Fortunately some makeshift stretchers made from the advertising hoardings
               around the ground were used to carry the injured and dying people out - these
               stretchers were in the main carried by spectators,

        (ix)    Another significant fact is that the crowd remaining on the terraces were not informed
                as to what was happening. This in itself causcd some confusion and would not have
                assisted emergency services operations outside o f the ground when people started
                drifting away.

P oints w hich I consider should be d ra w n to th e atten tio n o f th e Police
Investigation

1       In discussion with friends and family in and around Liverpool it would appear that the
        Liverpool police were not fully consulted by the South Yorkshire police. I find this
        somewhat surprising in that they have greater experience of crowd control of this kind. I am
        further led to believe that they (le the Liverpool Police)would not have had as many
        constables from as many different forces as was the case on that day.

2       Because of large number of constables on duty there must necessarily arise questions relating
        to where those constables were drawn from, what specific training they had for this occasion
        and indeed what experience they had, and what was their training - including coordination of
        the event prior to the start of, during and after the game.

3       Concerning the Senior Officers - it would appear that at least one of the most senior officers
        on duty had only recently been appointed to the post and indeed had spent most of his career
        in the Policy Academy and had very little experience o f crowd control. Another officer was
        investigated during the Toxteth riots for decisions which he took then, which had similar
        characteristics to the events of 15 April,

4        The police I believe did have some sw ay with the initial ticket allocation and also the part of
         the ground which would be occupied by the different sets of spectators. I believe that this
         area needs thorough examination in light of the statements made earlier and relating to
         statistical evidence available with regards to crowds and the large attendances at matches in
         Liverpool and Nottingham and also the specific complaint which was lodged by Liverpool
         Football Club regarding the allocation of tickets.

 5       Questions must certainly be asked as to why the side streets were blocked and why there
         were so few police outside the ground.

 6       Although the fact that forgeries were in evidence is known, the extent of the sale o f the
         forged tickets is another factor which must be investigated, as I believe that this was a
         contributory factor on the numbers attending the match.

    7     With regards to the information on the outside of the ground and the information on the
          inside of the ground, I would have thought that at this level before an order was given to
          open the gates other factors should have been taken into account in addition to the evidence
          from the computer.

    S     Some of the gates at the Leppings Lane end were apparently not opened at the time which
          they should have been opened for a game of this kind ie 11.30 am . They did not open until
          shortly before 2.00 pm.
    9     It has been widely reported that requests were made to senior management (ie o f the Police)
          to postpone the start of the game. This also needs investigation as to why the order was not
          given to delay the start.
10   In previous matches of this kind there has be.cn similar, although less catastrophic, events at
     the Hillsborough ground which the police and the club were aware of. It was also known on
     the "grapevine" that under certain circumstances police had taken to the habit of allowing
     spectators in without tickets. This'had happened very recently at another game in Yorkshire
     this year.

11   There appeared to be little coordination of the emergency services as the tragedy was
     u nfolding. I would question what training and coordination for the combined emergency
     services was given beforehand and what emergency procedures were rehearsed. It seems
     quite alarm ing that in the first instance the Fire Brigade Only sent two tenders when the call
     was made to them and also that the club itself did not have a defibrillator (a standard piece of
     equipment at a match o f this kind) and also that the single oxygen cylinder was found to be
     empty when asked for by one of the emergency doctors.
