               .        it.
                                                                                                         M I R . 15
               V         tills -             '




                   'CUMENT FORM                           5ate and tim e raised                                       Number
                                                                                                                               •bfFlO
                                                    /
                                             M IL   'A l(/\
T it le _                                                                                                               H & m 4h
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's in s tru c tio n s — urg en t actio n — Y es/N o          LG\ 4
                                                                                                                                   Receiver




                                                                                                                                    ndexer
D o c u m e n t registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                               Statement Header
S ta te m e n t reader's in s tru ctio n s



                                                                                                                                   In d exer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                               4-tf5
E xam ine d - f u r t h e r actio n to be taken




                                                                                                                                   Indexer
F u r th e r ac tio n No(s)


W hen satisfied all actions raised O ffic e Manager t o endorse o th e r D o c u m e n t Master N u m b e r F orm
Telephone:
Hexham
                                                           HEXHAM
         ««««                                      NORTHUMBERLAND
/O April 1989
                                                     /
Lord Justice Sir Peter Taylor                     /
Chairman                                         /
The Hillsborough Enquiry
Sheffield
My Lord

This letter is motivated by my feeling, as a responsible adult,
that your enquiry should cover some points which       it would
perhaps be insensitive to raise publicly so soon after the
disaster - and which have not yet been raised in media
discussions, presumably for this reason - but which seem to me
t© be of greater relevance than many of the issues currently
dominating public discussion. You will, I hope, forgive me if
you were intending to pursue these matters and this letter
wastes your time.

They arise, mainly, from the inescapable fact that what happened
was that some Liverpool fans killed and wounded other Liverpool
fans by wantonly reckless behaviours and that, at this point in
time, I have not heard of any action to identify or prosecute
those responsible. Attention has been focussed almost entirely
on the shortcomings of the police and football administrators
rather than the culprits. We appear to accept, as a society,
that such behaviour is natural, inescapable and not culpable:
and that those who try to prevent or abate its consequences are
the ones to be blamed. This I find alarming.

My first point is that the primary cause of the disaster seems
to have been the behaviour of the fans who arrived late outside
the gate. Their impatience not to miss the first part of the
game is understandable: but is not a justification for creating
a dangerous crush. Arriving early for a fixed-time function is
easy to arrange. Traffic delays are simply one of the things
that one normally allows for. Stops for refreshment are a normal
part of one's journey planning. Late arrivals have no less
responsibility to comport themselves in an orderly manner as
early ones. I would hope that prosecutions of those responsible
for this crush outside the gates will be pursued with vigour.
Secondly, one questions whether the sensibly-behaved soccer fans
do enough within their own community to control the ill-behaved
minority by their own social policng: or whether too many just
turn a blind eye and pretend that the problem isn't there - or
that it is none of their business. For when we do this, in our
local community, in our club, at our workplace, we expose
ourselves to the perils of the society we allow to develop
around us. lie forfeit our right to complain when such peril
affects us. I fear Liverpool fans may well be in this position.
The Liverpool fans who were killed were killed only by other
Liverpool fans. The tragedy is that in this          case,   the
well-behaved suffered and the ill-behaved may well go scot-free.
Has the club no responsibility, like any other club, to put its
own house in order by the use of peer sanctions rather than ask
society to curb its members' wrongdoing?

The third point is that the police procedure of opening gates t©
relieve pressure is common knowledge among fans. They are aware
that generating a crush results in a high probability of
obtaining free and unrestricted entry to a ground. There is thus
a strong incentive, especially to those without tickets, to
start such a crushing movement - it requires but few to start
it. How to resolve this situation may be a proper subject for
enquiry.

Fourthly, it may well be proper to enquire what it is about
football crowds that manifests itself in physical violence,
hooliganism, heavy pre-game drinking, and anti-social behaviour:
and, in particular, what role parents of those exhibiting such
behaviour have played in either causing it - or at least not
preventing it. Home influences do not always tailor          our
childrens but one is entitled to ask whether the parents of
those who have ill-behaved seriously enough to have caused a
hundred deaths have done enough or tried hard enough to instil
acceptable social values.

Lastly, one observes that rugby football crowds do not have to
be caged, are attended by families who feel safe - even when
standing, permit kids to run onto the pitch at the end of the
game and, in many cases serve alcohol without adverse social
consequences. The whole ambience      is   more   decorous   and
well-behaved with an atmosphere of fun: fans behave responsibly
and without the excesses of soccer crowds. Yet the class
background of rugby league fans is not a lot different from that
of soccer fans whilst the sport itself is considerably more
brutal and aggressive than soccer. Can lessens be learned from
soccer's sister sport?

You will not, I hope, think me presumptuous in offering these
views: I would feel guilty if enquiry into them went by default.
I wish you a successful enquiry which, from tragedy, will chart
a happier, as well as safer, future for soccer.
Ymire   o4   n
    J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                 FURNIVAL HOUSE
    ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                          Furnival Gate
     HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM                                         Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                       Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9

    WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                            SM ITHDOW N LANE POLICE STATION
    PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                             Liverpool L7 3PR
    Colmore Circus Queensway                                           Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 7 5
    Birmingham B4 6NQ
    Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5                    Your Ref:
    NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
    Fowler Street                                                      Our Ref:
                                                                                      JMJ/SJA
    Birmingham B7 5DA
    Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                    Date:
                                                                                      23 July 1989




      Hexham
      Northumberland




      Dear

      I have received your letter dated 20 April 1989 from South Yorkshire Police
      concerning the tragic events at Hillsborough on Saturday 15 April 1989.

      The contents of your letter have been of great interest to my investigation
      team

      If you have any further information please do not hesitate to contact my
      investigation teain at Nechells Green Police Station. Alternatively you may
      write to the Secretary of the Inquiry as below: -

                              Mr R M Whalley
                              Secretary to the Inquiry
                              50 Queens A n n e’s Gate
                              London 3W1H 9AT

      Yours sincerely




      J M Jones
^     Assistant Chief Constable




        PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                    NECtfEUS . o m m .P.O.LXCR 3XATI0N
