                                                                                                          MIR.15


 O T H E R D O C U M E N T FO RM                         Date and time raised                        a?
                                                                                                                   Number

 Title                                                                                        ivigiR
 (Include source and any document number if relevant)

 Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Yes/fckr'                     6      / lo /u         (y

                                             <X              /   A JL A l£ {C L ij                                              Receiver



 Document registered/indexed
                   ■■       ^
                              as indicated          P \ / 3!
                                                  <a4«w .^                                                                       Indexer
 No(s) of actions raised

Statem ent reader's instructions         <^_s.
                                                                                                                            Statement Reader



Indexed as indicated       f O   j ^ X                                                                                          Indexer
                                                                                     -< cG \ ,3 0
No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No(s)
                                                                                                                               Indexer

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                  Surrey.


                                                  22na April 1989

Dear Sir,


     In reply to a few short lines printed in The Guardian today, I have
set out below my first hand experience of the Hillsborough disaster so
it may be used in the public enquiry.
    Having travelled to Sheffield by train that morning,     I arrived at
the ground at approximately 1.30pm, entering via Leppings    Lane gate B.
Coming through the centre tunnel, I branched to the left and took up
position in a lightly populated area of the enclosure, just to the rear
of centre. At approximately 2.30pm the area became quite crowded but not
uncomfortable and a good atmosphere was built up amongst the fans at
this end. There was much swaying and pushing just before the kick off,
but at the time I thought this would subside once the match got under
way. The match started and the pushing continued,        Peter Beardsley
cracked a shot onto the lottingham Forest crossbar and we all surged
forward, but instead of relaxing and resuming our positions on the
terraces, we found we were unable to push back on the people behind us.
There was a crush barrier about four or five feet in front of me and I
thought to myself that if I was to go anywhere near that then I'd be in
trouble as there wasxalready a lad of about twenty five pinned to it,
possibly whilst trying to climb over as he was a couple of feet above
everyone else. Tears were streaming down his face as he cried out in
agony, he looked right at me and cried "ly legs, oh my god, my legs."
That was the last I saw of him as a surge propelled me diagonally
downward onto the corner post of the crush barrier, where I came to a
sudden halt with my back now to the pitch and my right leg trapped on
the barrier post. We wera all yelling for the Police to open the gates
but they seemed oblivious to the crush inside.         I was there for
approximately another five minutes, it could have been less, when there
was a slight ease in pressure and I was able to drag my now numbed leg
free. This was, though, just a pause before another large push, again
diagonally, towards the high fencing at the side of the enclosure. Here
we had a fairly organised escape, helping the people in front over the
fence onto a pathway between enclosures, which led to a now opened gate.
Upon landing in this pathway, I steadied myself and limped off, my leg
now tingling and aching, towards the gateway. I had got no further than
a couple of feet when somebody yelled "Help us get the |          |out of
there," I looked to my right and I was met by a deep .penetrating gaze of
fear in the eyes of a girl of about eighteen. Steadying myself against
the railings I put my hands together and thrust them thrdfrgh the fence
so that she could use them as a step up onto the to]5> of the fence. Once
at the top, she jumped down into my arms, and walked to the far side of
the passage. I then limped off and out onto the playing area, glancing
right to see people squashed at the front, screaming and gasping for
air, with the metal mesh barrier digging into their faces. I staggered
around the pitch not really taking it all in, before laying on the grass
far a rear.. Many people stepped to ask if I was alrirnt, and I waved
them a:;. Some fans nearby started to take down promotional advertising
boards to use as maicesiiiit stretchers, but were stopped from doing so at
first by police officers who eventually relented. I rested against a
wall and was soon joined by a lad of about fifteen who said that people
were dead at the back. That was at approximately      4*5pia. and -is the last
1 remember from the ground. The train journey home was completed in near
silence and apart from being badly shaken and a few pains in isy legs, I
didn't feel too bad.




    Yours Faithfully,
