                                                              ?OLjplllzi)\




DAVID KENNETH HODGETT                                            R331*




Police Sergeant 1084




Hackenthorpe Police Station




At 8.30 a.m. on Saturday, 15 April 1989, I paraded for duty at

Hackenthorpe Police Station, in connection with duties for the F.A. Cup

Semi-Final football match at Hillsborough Stadium between Liverpool amd

Nottingham Forest.

The majority of officers on my serial were also from 'El' Sub-Division

and once they had assembled, we travelled by hired bus, arriving at the

stadium shortly after 9-00 a.m.

When all the officers involved had arrived, we assembled in the North

Stand, for the pre-match briefing, which started on time,   shortly before

10.00 a.m.   We were addressed at that stage by Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield, Inspector Sewell, Detective Sergeant Charlesworth (and

possibly one other officer, Chief Inspector Beal).   My duties were in

charge of serial no. 5, of which I had had previous written advice.      The

officers on my serial were as follows:-

(All stationed at 'El' unless otherwise stated).

P.C.   596 Smith

P.C.   933 Botley

P.C.   499 Cartwright

P.C.   769 Mutch

P.C. 3131 Lewis

P.C.   851 Wicken

P.C. 1535 Fairclough
                                     2




P.C. 2512 Craigie

P.C. 1177 Davies (E2 Sub-Division)

P.C. 1564 Mace (E2) was shown also to be on serial 5, but he advised me

that his number had been placed in another serial as well, and that his

duties in the other serial included traffic duties.     In the

circumstances,    I agreed that he should remain with the other serial, and

that my serial would continue with nine men.

Serial 5 were scheduled for duties on the West side of the official car

park in Sector 1A, with Inspector Harvey (HQ) and Chief Inspector Beal

supervising.

After the general briefing, we were provided with a light packed meal,

which was consumed in the North Stand.     The serial and myself were then

joined by Inspector Harvey, who gave us a more direct briefing, which

was specific to the duties allocated to my serial.     We deployed to the

car park at about 11.20 a.m.     (Inspector Harvey was aware of the fact

that the serial was an officer short).

The duties for my serial effectively split them, for the pre-match phase

of the operation, into three groups.     These were supervision of the BBC

television vehicles and equipment, supervision of turnstiles 19 - 22

(Gate 'E') and supervision of turnstiles 23 - 28 (Gate 'F' - possibly

'D'?? ).

The television vehicles etc. were parked within the official car park,

just on the West side of the floodlight pylon situated in the car park

at the corner where the South and West stands meet.     These vehicles were

in an area which was to be kept sterile and free from fans of either

teams.     Three of the serial (P.Cs Wicken, Craigie and Fairclough) were

given this duty.     The remaining six officers spilt into two groups of

three, were given the previously de
                                     -   3   -




Sergeant 266 Jacques (Serial 4) had responsibility in the pre-match

phase for the west end of the car park and Sergeant 729 Norburn (Serial

6 ) had responsibility for maintaining the sterile area on the car park

between the South Stand   and the West Stand turnstiles.          (I believe a

serial or part serial was also deployed covering the

directory/players/guests/sponsors/banqueting areas).

Even when we deployed there were several people to the official car park

area.   The sterile area was established by serial 6 by placing barriers

across the width of the car park at the extreme west corner of the South

Stand, and by a further row of barriers at the Leppings Lane entrance to

the car park.   The only fans to be allowed through the barriers at the

West end of the South Stand were those Nottingham spectators who had

green coloured tickets (for uncovered seating) marked gate 'E'.           With

the sterile area enforced, it became apparent that there were numbers of

Liverpool fans using the car park as a thoroughfare to get to the

Leppings Lane entrances from the North side of the ground.           Such people

were from then on directed around the outside of the ground via

Penistone Road North, Parkside Road, Catchbar Lane to Leppings Lane.             It

was also evident at that stage that there were fans present, mainly, if

not exclusively, from Liverpool who did not have possession of match

tickets.   Some said they had tickets available to them and awaiting

collection from diverse venues such as the ticket office, from the

players entrance, from sponsors or stewards etc.          Some said they were

looking for touts to buy tickets from.           (it should be noted that in the

area I was working, there should have been only Nottingham fans.           I made

a point of speaking to fans who were obviously Liverpool supporters and

who were, therefore, at the wrong part of the stadium).

As time progressed, Liverpool fans       t   1
through the official car park from the Penistone Road end to Leppings

Lane.   They claimed to have been directed along this route by Police,

stewards or gatemen.     Almost all were re-directed as previously

described.    A very selective few were allowed through the sterile area,

the very old or young and the infirm, and then in each case they were

escorted from barrier to barrier through the sterile section.        So far as

my own serial were concerned, there was very little required in the form

of direct supervision.     They were at the extreme end of where Nottingham

fans were expected to gain entry and hence, the vast majority knew where

they were going to and had tickets ready.     Very few problems were

presented.    The officers on serial 6 had slightly more of a problem, in

that it fell to them to maintain the sterile area and re-direct fans

bound for Leppings Lane.     I gave them what assistance I could,

particularly in filtering the fans who were allowed past the barrier for

gate 'E'.    With Liverpool fans still trying to get through the car park,

I liaised with Sergeant Jacques and ensured that his serial were aware

that the official car park was not to be treated as a thoroughfare.

(So far as this aspect of the matter is concern, my opinion is that many

of the Liverpool fans I spoke with were well aware of the layout of the

Hillsborough Stadium, probably from previous visits to the ground, and

that match tickets showed a plan of the ground, clearly indicating the

probability of a route via the car park).

By about 2.30 p.m. my serial was at its busiest, with a constant stream

of fans seeking admission.     Queueing was minimal.   I doubt if anyone

queued for longer than a minute, with the queues only reaching about 8

to 10 persons at their longest.

Also about this time I recollect looking through the 'E' gate turnstiles

to the North Stand and considering the time I expected to see it very
                                       -   5   -




nearly full - it was comparatively empty.

There was, around 2.30 p.m. I believe, a radio message passed to Match

Control which outlined that there were a large number of fans around the

ground who did not apparently have tickets.         I also transmitted to Match

Control supporting this observation.

There was almost constant traffic on the radio at this time and the

radio traffic, together with a visit from Detective Superintendent

McKay, drew my attention to congestion at the Leppings Lane entrances.

From my g a tes , I had no view of the area in front of the Leppings Lane

gates, but Superintendent McKay pointed out the congestion, which I had

a partial sight of when I went just beyond the television vehicles.         Mr.

McKay suggested that I make part of my serial available to support

Sergeant Norburn's men on the barriers, if necessary.         I briefed Police

Constable Craigie accordingly to monitor the situation and if

appropriate, to take Police Constables Wicken and Fairclough and give

assistance.

Up to this stage radio transmissions had been satisfactory, but from

2.30 p.m. onwards, the quality of reception deteriorated.         Whether this

was due to increased crowd noise or a technical problem, I am unaware,

but control transmissions at times were distorted, poor and not easily

understood.   The quality of the radio was so poor at one stage I

indicated to a female officer who was on duty inside the ground in the

South Stand to relay a message to the Match Police Control to ensure

they were aware of the radio problem.          I am not aware whether or not the

message was passed on.

From the time I was first made aware of the problems at the Leppings

Lane entrances, I can be no more accurate with the time than estimating

it to be about 2.30 p.m.   There appeared to be almost constant radio
traffic about the matter, but as I have already said, transmissions

were, for some time of a very poor quality, but broken references to the

matter could be picked out.

Between 2.30 p.m. and 3-00 p.m.   (possibly earlier) several Mounted

Officers made their way from Penistone Road North, through the sterile

area, to the Leppings Lane end.    (I would estimate that 6 to 8 officers

used this route).

From this time, I remained at the barriers at the end of the South

Stand.    There was still a considerable number of Liverpool fans trying

to get through the sterile area, and whilst many had previously been re­

directed without too much of a problem, an increasing number now were

argumentative about having to seek an alternative route around the

ground.    It was also apparent that the majority of these later arrivals

had been consuming alcohol).

I can confirm that at this time, I heard a radio broadcast requesting

that the match kick off be put back.    I cannot identify who made the

request, or say whether the transmission     was acknowledged by control.    I

do recollect thinking that the request was late, and that by that stage

the players may well have been ready to go on the pitch.     I had no view

of the pitch, but had not heard the loud     cheer that normally heralds the

entry of the players onto the ground.    I   also recollect thinking,

without considering the public order situation that had developed, that

it would be unfair to delay the match to allow the latecomers to gain

entry, after all, the majority had arrived in good time and had taken

their places in the ground.    At that time I was also aware of the fact

that Police Constables Craigie, Fairclough and Wicken had left their

duties in the vicinity of the television vehicles.     I assumed they had

acted on their own initiative to join members of serial 6 at the
Leppings Lane barriers.   With kick off imminent, for the reason outlined

above, I knew the teams were on the pitch.     I began preparation for

Phase 11 of the match.    This included my serial having responsibility

for the whole of the official car park whilst Sergeant Jacques' serial

(No. 4) took meal at 3-00 p.m.     I had the barriers moved back from the

corner of the stand, to a point adjacent to the floodlight pylon, in

order to avoid congestion as fans left the ground after the match.       I

went then to the three officers on the lower gate (F) to ensure that

they covered the East end of the car park, from where I assumed Sergeant

Jacques'   serial would be ready to leave for their meal relief.    Radio

transmissions were still poor, and here I was under the overhang of the

Stand and/or the banqueting suite, when I heard what I believed to be an

Inspector on the radio.    He kept repeating himself about 'TROUBLE (??)'

at the gates.There followed a request      for the gates to be opened.

This was also    repeated and it seemed to be queried, several times.    I

could not discern who made the request i.e. I did not know whether it

came from Police Control or whether an officer outside wanted the

message relaying to someone within the ground.     I knew that if complied

with this request would lead to fans without tickets getting access to

the ground and that from that many people would be unable to see

properly, and that, therefore, we were going to have a public order

situation on the terracing.

I made my way    back towards the West end of the car park, radio

transmission still being a    problem.   As I reached 'E' gates, I wasmet

by an Inspector who had run from the Leppings Lane end of the car park.

He said there had been an instruction for all Police personnel to go to

the pitch, I don't recollect whether he said or that I had assumed that

there had been a pitch invasion.     Stewards opened the exit gate and I
gained entry to the South Stand.

I could see that there were already many fans on the pitch.       Play was

already stopped and I do not recollect seeing any players still on the

field.     I went down onto the pitch and climbed over the wall onto the

playing area from the South Stand.     I realised immediately that due to

the number of fans on the pitch that it was impracticable to arrest them

all, and the first ones I encountered I tried to usher back to the

terraces.     Their reactions were abnormal.    I think that from previous

experience of pitch invasions, I had expected them to run off and avoid

capture.     These youths did not run off.     They appeared bewildered and

confused.     They said people had been injured and directed me towards the

goal mouth.     I looked towards the goal mouth.     I could see that both

Police Officers and fans were climbing onto the fence, it took me some

while to realise that people were being lifted over the top of the fence

into the playing area.     Some of the officers were gesturing for people

to move away from the fence, in retrospect, I now realise that these

gestures were for people at the back to move back to relieve pressure.

Whilst this was happening, objects were being thrown from the terracing

towards the people at the fence.     I have a recollection of one officer

being hit by an object that disintegrated, I assumed it to be a pie.              I

found the whole situation very incongruous and difficult to assess.           I

formed the opinion that what I had envisaged earlier had in fact

occurred, i.e. there had been an outbreak of fighting on the terraces,

which had resulted in a number of people sustaining injuries.        The fence

was very crowded behind the goal.     I watched the crowd for a short        time

to try and assess the situation, and saw no reason at that stage to           go

any nearer the fence.     I moved to the penalty area and again tried to

move encroaching spectators back to the terracing but had no success „
whatsoever.   Other officers also were trying to move them, but more and

more were coming onto the pitch and it was obviously a wasted effort.        I

was approached by a Police Constable whose identity I do not know.     He

was distressed and in a state of. shock.    He said there were 'dead

people' and 'several fatalities' on the terracing.     I found what he said

difficult to believe.     I went towards the fencing, but due to the

numbers of fans and policemen standing on the wall, and by now the

number of casualties laid on the ground, I could not get close enough to

make out exactly what had happened to the people still behind the fence.

I looked down around me, in the vicinity of the goal mouth.     There were

casualities everywhere.     The situation with each one seemed to me the

same, they had several persons around them, with mouth to mouth and

heart massage being applied to almost all of them.     There were about six

such cases within a few feet of where I stood.     Each one appeared to be

dead, none showed any sign of response to the treatment being given.        I

looked around to see where I could be of any assistance (and I think to

see if anyone was alive who required assistance).     I saw a boy, aged

about 12, he was collapsed but conscious and in some considerable pain.

With others already there, notably Police Constable 1828 Metcalfe (El),

I rendered first aid.     The boy complained of pain in his hips and

shoulders and responded to stimulous to his feet.     After he was

reassured for some while as unsuccessful efforts were made to locate a

stretcher,    Police Constable Metcalfe picked him up and carried him off,

cradled in his arms.    (This is the boy and officer who were photographed

and had the picture published in many newspapers).     I also assisted with

other casualties and realising that none of the Constables had radios,

tried to monitor the radio transmissions.    By now the whole of the

penalty area - if not the West end of the pitch - was quite literally
teaming with spectators.    I had been aware of a couple of incidents

where Press photographers had been threatened or attacked by fans as

they took pictures, and that several officers had been told by fans that

what had occurred was our responsibility.     The mood of many spectators,

particularly the ones with very minor injuries or the uninjured, was

particularly unpleasant and their presence was becoming a hinderance,

either directly or indirectly, to the removal of the more seriously

injured casualties.     At this stage I was joined by a senior officer and

he told me to muster as many men as I could and try to clear the pitch

of the 'walking' wounded.     I made a conscious decision to move them

towards the North Stand (which was occupied by Liverpool fans) as

opposed to the South Stand.     The people on the pitch did not respond to

instruction, persuasion or even physical ushering.     Many were obviously

extremely distressed, looking for friends and relatives from whom they

had become separated.     Others were abusive, insulting and just unwilling

to co-operate.

I considered myself in a    situation where what I was doing was having

little effect.   Suddenly   there was a charge of spectators on the pitch

towards the East Stand -    the Kop end where the Nottingham Forest

standing spectators were    assembled.I am not sure what provoked     or

brought about the charge.     I had heard a small group of fit Liverpool

supporters on the ground chanting 'SHITTY GROUND' - this was directed

towards the South Stand (possibly the directors' box).     There seemed to

have been a response, possibly from the Kop, which came immediately

before the charge down the pitch.     There were a large number involved,

possibly up to 200, and with the many other officers on the field it was

quickly stopped and order restored.    With the other officers involved in

preventing the charge, I then formed a cordon across the width of the
                                    -   11   -




pitch at the halfway line.     Whilst I was in this position, efforts to

remove casualties continued.     Many were carried out on advertising

hoards and I could see fatalities as well, these baing carried out with

their heads covered.    At the halfway line I could hear radio traffic

more clearly; there was a discussion about the match having been

abandoned and whether or not, or when, that decision should be relayed

to the crowd.     I remained at the half way line cordon and during which

time and even after, it was eventually announced that the match was

abandoned.   I saw senior officers (particularly Chief Superintendent

Nesbit) being harangued by spectators.           Once the crowd cleared, I

endeavoured to re-group the members of my serial.           I located six of my

nine men, but our services were no longer required.           Eventually, we were

instructed to go to the North Stand where we had paraded for debrief.              I

remember looking at the stadium clock on the roof of the South Stand as

we crossed the pitch and thinking that the match should still have been

in progress at that time.

We walked in the North Stand for some time.           Eventually Chief Inspector

Beal gave de-brief instructions.        He quoted a figure of dead (I

recollect 70+).     The number shocked me, for I had assumed from what I

had seen that there were between 20 and 30 fatalities, possibly a few

more.   Part of the de-brief instruction was to provide a brief written

account of the way each member of the serial had been involved.              I could

not bring myself to write about what had occurred, and the de-brief was

completed by Police Constable 2512 Craigie.           We were then instructed to

go to Claywheels Lane Traffic Depot for transport back to Sub-Division.

We returned by bus to Hackenthorpe.          Serial 5 retired from duty at

7.30 p.m.
