FOR COURT USE ONLY

Regina -v-

Exhibit No..........................................
FOR POLICE USE ONLY
Police Force; WEST MIDLANDS
Division ...... Station .......... ...........
Crime D.P.No............... . .............
Description of Item
.        .. .O r. .                          .......




Identifying Mark
LAB. REF.
     C .J. Act 1967, s9;
   M.C. Act 1980, s 102;
   M.C. Rules 1981, r 70.
  I identify the exhibit described
 overleaf as that referred to in the
statement made and signed by me.

    \ S ig n a t u r e         Date



                            2?:6>:<P3.
                                                             Northumberland


19 April 1989


Dear Sir

Having attended the match at Hillsborough last Saturday and been very close
to the proceedings, standing in the Leppings Lane enclosure, it had been my
intention (need) to put down in writing, my personal view of the tragic and
traumatic events which led to the ninety-five deaths.     I'd thought it better
to allow more time than this however, in order to enable me to provide a
more balanced and objective assessment of the events which led to the
appalling loss of so many lives, with the incalculable after effects to the
bereaved, and to those involved. The item I have just witnessed in the BBC
News Bulletin however, in which the implications were made that drunken
disorderliness of the Liverpool supporters was a direct cause of the events
leading to the catastrophe, impel me to express my indignation and revulsion
at such claims, and to offer a fan's eye   view of the- proceedings, in the
naive hope that both sides of the argument be heard.

That many fans arrived late for the match is indisputable.  The reasons for
this are not important {or relevant) but I would offer two major reasons as
being:
1   fans were obviously travelling from far away, and the cross Pennine
    journey and the last leg of the journey through Sheffield was difficult
    and slow;
                       \0< « -
2   fans always arrive i«s*t to an all-ticket match as their ticket guarantees
    them entry.

What is equally indisputable is the fact   that the police  presence   outside
the ground,in particular at the LeppingsLane End of the ground, was totally
inadequate, and therefore incapable of providing the controlled ushering
towards the turnstiles, necessary to guarantee safe entry. At 2.45 pm, I
along with many thousands of others, was still a long way from any turnstyle,
and in the midst of the throng growing increasingly rowdy and aggressive at
the lack of any progress or even movement. As I could see, this throng of
literally thousands, arriving from all sides, was in the charge of approxi­
mately four mounted police, and a handful of foot-police! !! The crowd
sensing the lack of control or progress took it upon itself to make it's own
progress, and the warning sounds were growing ever louder.

To control this increasingly and admittedly difficult situation, the police
took the {fateful and unforgiveable) decision to ease the problem outside by
opening the perimeter gates. This did two things:

1   it allowed into the terrace area a large number of people who probably
    did not have tickets, thereby swelling the number beyond capacity;
2   more crucially, was the PACE at which these people {including myself) were
    allowed in. A turnstile by definition staggers and controlls the flow
    into the ground, and thereby allows people the time to manoevre into
    position, A swift and sudden and large influx such as that caused by the
    opening of the gates was uncontrollable.
Inside the ground ie, between the gates and the terracing, there were
literally no controlling officials whatsoever - neither stewards nor police.
Instinctively, the crowd flowed towards the action - visible through the
tunnel at the centre of the Leppings Lane End, and leading directly towards
the.central, pens of the terrace.  The tunnel itself took a massive effort
of nerve to negotiate, being low ceilinged - and completely unlit, thereby
increasing the desire of the crowd to progress towards the light of the pitch.

Little did anybody know that this progress was into an area already full to
capacity, and that the only thing that could give, as the perimeter and
pen-fencing would not, were the human bodies inside.

The purpose of the letter is not to describe the horrors experienced inside,
which will remain with me for the rest of my life, as these have been all
too graphically displayed in the press and on TV, My purpose is to describe
inadequately I feel, how I as an ordinary person, not drunk or disorderly,
was swept, because of lack of adequate supervision and preparation by those
whose job it was to do so, into a situation of indescribable terror, and
ultimate tragedy.  The major failings as I see, were in summary:

1    incorrect allocation of tickets in the first place and therefore incorrect
     placing of fans;
2    inadequate police presence OUTSIDE the ground, leading to inability to
     direct people towards the turnstile;
3    seemingly inadequate communication from authorities outside the ground
     to the authorities inside the ground.  It was obvious at 2,45 pm that
     there would still be many people outside - DELAY the kick-off and
     announce to the people trying to get in that kick-off has been delayed,
     thereby lessen their impatience;
4    no communication from those authorities INSIDE the ground to close the
     central areas and channel people to the (seemingly) underpopulated wing
     areas of the terrace;
5    incorrect decision to open the gates - literally a case of opening the
     flood-gates;
6    inside the turnstiles no control whatsoever to direct people away -from
     the central areas;
7    appalling tunnel entrance area - a classic death trap in it's own right;
8    the incredibly slow reaction of those authorities on the pitch to under­
     stand what was happening in the central area or STOP further people
     entering, and to understand the necessity to let those in, out onto the
     pitch,•
 9   to my knowledge, the only use of the PA system was made by Kenny Dalglish,
     at about 3,45 pm after all the damage had been done.

Much air-time and press space will be allowed to the authorities, the Police,
the FA and Hillsborough ground, MP's etc. My plea is that the common voice,
and individual voices of those people most affected by this tragedy, and with
perhaps more insight into their own welfare than any of the above, be given
hearing, that is the voice of the supporters themselves.

Yours faithfully
