                                                                                       MIR.15
                          Sheffield Archives Ref. ( b e °i / 1/> ! 4*
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                   Date and time raised   2«-lc+\89 7-)5p Number
   0

Ti'io        KjUX&vS-
(Include source and a n y docur, ient num ber it
                                              i f relevant)

                                    ion - Y e ^ f )
Receiver's instructions — urgent action
                                                                                                          Receiver




                                                                                                          Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Statement reader's instructions   ~ JZ Z                                                              Statement Reader




                                                                                                          Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to betaken              |    I^TTt^L qP                                     O/M        sio




Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                  1
Lord'Justice TAYLOR,Chairman of                    M
The Judicial INQUIRY, Royal Courts of Justice,      17—4—1989            Essex,
Strand, LONDON, WC2A 2LL.
*♦
My Lord/Mr:Chairman,
                     Re:-HILLSBOROUGH Tragedt/Disaster on 15th:April 1989-.Semi-Final
      I write firstly with deepest sympathy; having watched (|
          ) the above mentioned fiasco on TV, secondly as one interested in football
for over frds: Century as Player; Hen:Sec:j Linesman; Committeeman; Press Reporter
( EROS ) and spectator on many professional/London grounds, Wembley Finals,etc;;and
thirdly as a Chartered Surveyor who has participated in many sports such as:-Football,
Hockey,Shooting/Wildfowling,Yacthing, Swimming (all $he year-round), Water Polo,
Horse riding including Hunting, racing Point-to-Pointers and also on 'The Turf*;and
from agevjWi to 80 in "Banger Racing1 on my RAY Farm circuit; thus gaining a very ex­
cellent oi behaviours of spectators and the safety thereoftand the precautions taken*
      Hence my very pertinent question as to why the Perimeter Fencing did not have
ample 'Escape—routes' by way of sections hinged to open outside in the event of any
'Trouble' requiring speedy evacuation of a crowd from their 'entrapped' confinement
onto the space of the playing arena whilst the 'Trouble' was investigated and resolved?
Surely to have to stop a game its as nothing to the loss of life (94 dead and 170 in­
injured!— incurred by the POLICE failing to Open/Cut/Tear—down the fencing so soon as
the very obvious tragedy was apparent if no such action was taken!? Once the 'fans'
were allowed their 'Inway-rush* at the Lessings Lane end it was a certainty that all
would press forward to gain a position/view from the end 'housing' the Liverpool
supporters who had inadequate allocation compared with Nottingham Forest!? as,surely*
any experienced person would,or should,have khown.? e.g. The F.A.; the POLICE} the
Officials of the Sheffield Club and,of course,those of the 2 Clubs involved.?
      So precisely who erected an iron 'unclimbable* enclosing fence,from which NO
'Escape' gateways were provided to allow,in the event of an emergency,the crowds to
seek safety on the pitvh whilst the cause was rectified.? All I could do was to sit
and cry coupled with extreme anger against all those whose sheer stupidity had made
the arrangements which brought about that which was sure to come;sooner or later!?
      IF the POLICE opened the Lessings Road end entrance gate to allow thousands
of fans to enter did they tell, on their Radio contacts,their fellow Officers what
was about to happen and what should be done to control the incoming hordes!? Or was
it merely left as a case of M We have got rid of those outside — our brother Police
men will cope with what will happen when the crowd arrives'? It appeared that the
'Inside' Policemen had no idea of what was about to happen when the (fate was opened
nor what they should have done to ensure 'Crowd control and Safety1 for those already
on the Terraces against the obvious onrush of the fans who had already been 'Kept-out'
for 6 minutes after the game had commenced!? Thus these 'tensed—up* incomers (late)
would be sure to rush forward to secure a point of vantage; without any guidance,it
so appared,from anyone in AUTHORITY; surely all those engaged in FOOTBALL Management
are well aware of the behaviour of 'football fans' and,espec ial lywhen a Semi-Final
is involved.? Surely at least one intelligent person had access to 'Bolt-croppers'
or 'Wire-cutters' and could have quickly made 'Openings' through which the persons
subjected to pressdS from the rear could have escaped on to the playing arena?
Even if this meant a temporary stoppage of the game; as against the 'Cancellation'
which eventually ensued afitr the pathetic performances witnessed on the TV and the
pitiful lack of anybody acting with a sense of AUTHORITY and knowledge as to what
was bound to happen and what to do when it was seen to be happening!? Can you
discover and name one such person and state what he ORDERED be done.?
      We gaily proceed from one tragedy to another coupled with the usual evasions
and platitudes of w We must learn from these lessons - It must never happen again"
after Sailings with Ferry doors open; Train crashes with "taped,or untaped,wires
 left loose and liable to cause a 'short' in the circuit"; 'Planes with Bombs un­
traced until exploded!'; 'Child abuse* farcial failures; thousands of 'Alcohol —
related’ accidents/crashes/fights/assaults/'Breakins'/Robberies whilst,surely
DRUGGED by the supply of a drug/alcohol from which HM Government reaps £Millions and
incurs LOSSES of £BILLIONS;plus the Tragedfd.es resulting from such ’Drug/Alcohol'
indulgence!?
                   Yours sincerely,

P.S. May I take part at the INQUIRY.?                                          aged 80
1st: Class & Personal
                                                                      IBltfl




                        ^ilillsboroisgfe Football Disaster INQUIRY1

                                     SHEFFIELD,
 Lord Justice TAYLOR, Chairman of the
tHillsborough Semi-Final Disaster, INQUIRY,        19-4*1989              Essex,
 SHEFFIELD, West YORKSHIRE,
My Lord/Mr:Chairman,
                        Be:—Your Investigations into all aspects of Tragedy of lgthtinst;
       Reverting to ay letter of 17th:inst: in connection with the above mentioned
INQUIRY I would refer you to to-day*s issue ( N o , 4 1 , 6 2 2 ) of The daily Telegraph and the
various quotations/remarks recorded therein and ask:—
       When was the report first made,and to whom, that MANY of the 3*000 Liverpool fans
had been drinking heavily and that’fhere was mass drunkness among many of the 3,000 sup­
porters who turned up at the turnstiles just before kick-off (per Paul Middup,chairman
of the South Yorkshire Police Federation, who also said:- "Some of them were uncontrollably
A great number of them had obviously been drinking heavily"!? So why were these obvitras
"Drunks" not ARRESTED at once!? Or moved away from the Leppings Lane Entrance? And why
had the,surely,pre-match surveillance by the POLICE, and the ’watch* on/of Public Houses*
not resulted in these "drunks" being the subject of stopping their progress? e.g.by Water-
cannon? By cordon of Mounted POLICE,backed by Constables protected with riot-shields?
Or is the problem of ’heavy drinking' unknown to the POLICE and the FA organisers!?
Or could it be a last—mimute excuse/"way—out" for the maladministration witnessed?
       Why, oh why, did Supt:Boger Marshall,and fellow Officers, allow such ’drunks*,
and 3,000 supporters,to gain access into the Stadium by thepurely,irresponsible act
of ordering the gates to be opened? Even if,as                  agreed that he feared
an outside wall was within seconds of collapse!? Thus her remark”He had NO other choice";
Surely IF the wall aws about to collpase all he and the other POLICE mounted and on foot
had to do was to so state and ORDER evryone away from the wall.? Surely men swere seen
climbing over this wall? Did it collapse? Is it still standing? May I, Free of any
charge, inspect and Report as a FRICS, together with an inspection and report on the
enclosure fencing and the,surely,lack of 'Opening sections/gates' therein for emergency
Exits on to the Playing pitch IF such was even deemed to be necessary!? Or did the FA
and the POLICE,together with Council Officials/*Experts* all fail to realise that an
enclosure such as they ordered to be erecetd would,sooner or later, result in a very
serious accident/Death-trap in the event of any serious 'Trouble' on the Terraces!?
        Or is there,as ever,an attempt now being made to provide the usual "WHITEWASH"
 and 'Cover-up' of those in Authority who have failed in their jobs!?
        e.g. surely Douglas HURD knows that heavy drinking takes place and that alcohol
 is an addictive DRUG and use thereof must be restricted before any crowd of football
 Supporters are allowed to 'Flood—in' through an open Gate (adjoining a dangerous wall)
 into a narrow confined "Passageway/Tunnel" without any P0LICE,or 0ffici|ls,alerted to
 meet the 'Inrush* and control/disperse it towards the spaces available!? Or did NO
 body have this simple forethought? Surely the daily reports by TV, Radio, Press,etc:
 of *Troubles/knifings/Assaults/etc: outside Clubs/Pubs,etc; should have acted a clear
 WARNINGS that ’Drinkers* are very likely to be involved in 'Trouble' in 'Mass situations*
 and that to allow 3,000 persons (many who had been drinking heavily,and some drunken/un­
 controllable ),unimpeded access into a very confined/restricted space would result in,
 at least,serious trouble if not DEATH*? The whole sorry story gives rise to thoughts
 of the old,old game of ‘Rallying around/Closing ranks/Sticking together' to ensjire^that
 AUTHORITY be cleared of any responsibility in the hope that fellow Policeman Geoffrey
 Dear,CC of the West Midlands, will investigate South Yorkshire and fail to see all the
 Evidence which I feel I could ’unearth* as a Chartered Surveyor will over         \
                                                                              Century of
 investigations of Bomb/Military/Naval/AirForce WAR-time Damage and as Assessor to the
 Board of Trade for Insurance Claims!? I spent 4 days in Scotland Yard and was told:-
 " If you never do anyother thing for your Country you have done your bit in this cas§&~
 albeit the very serious matters involved were 'Hushed—up* as it was 'NOT in the Public
 Interest that my findings/investigations/reports bd the subject of FR0SECUTIONS;by HM
 Attorney General and/or The DPP; surely nearly 50 years later the same*Protections*
 will not be allowed * In the Public Interest*? Or is the Public Interest that of en­
 suring that the Public do not know the Truth and that the True Entries be not exposed!?
        As Lord DEnning told me 'Sometimes one has to put-up with INjustices,so learn
 to live with them'; with Lord Hail sham obviously imbued with a similar intent to deny
 matters which they deem are 'Not in the Public Interest* as matters to be the subject
 of full and frank provision of positive proof, if the 'Economical Truth' can be used;as
 in 'The Spycather' Case and,surely,the STALKER farce of Non-exposnre of the treefacts
 - ’In the Public Interest*!? Agreed,My Lord,.,,
                                               Yours sincerely,
.   ..   >rJ
                                                                                     t) !.            Number
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised
                              >
                                                                                   / t o ?
Title
(Include source and any docum ent num ber if relevant)

Receiver's instructions —urgent action —Y,ei/No
                                                           l •*                   To             jh
                                                                                                                  Receivar



                                                                                                                   Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                        Statement Reader
Statement reader s instructions



 Indexed as indicated

 No(s) of actions raised

 Examined • further action to be taken




  Further action No(s)

                       ions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
 When satisfied all actions
Asst:C .C »J .i-itirvy n Jones,MSc;,
\7est k i d l a n d s P o l i c e INQUIRE Team,             7 -6 —1999               ;»se:
Queeusway , iilRiVil KGHAM, B4 6NQ.

year Air: Jones,        Re :-HILLSL<OKUUGH Disaster Inquiry and Investigation Chief Officer
       I thank you for your letter of 26 May 1989,only received by 2nd:post to-dayi!WHY?j
having been posted lst:Class on -5 VI 89 and 're-posted' at,it so appears, V.ALSALL West
Midlands on 6 JNE!? I return \ our envelope for your checking as to how ’Authorities' act!?
       As to your letter are you in possesion of my first 2 'early' letters on the above
Tragedy? And alsoomy later letter? If not how can you possibly investigate my inform­
ation,please !? You only refer to 'your letter' so I can only presume you mean ONE!?
       As to subsequent statements ( are they on Oath?) regarding 'Drunken Liverpool
Supporters' surely this seems to be an afterthought? Lf not why were the 'DRUNKS' not
ARRESTED? And,worst still, why were they foolishly admitted en masse through a GATE
Opened by Police!? Into a then Narrow-Tunne1 under a Stand? Without arrangements being
made to control/disperse the ensuing 'Ru§h of FansS (including the DRUNKS!!??) to Left
and Right of the Tunnel Exit;instead of allowing a mass 'Forward* concourse en route
'Straight Ahead at Full-Steam' - regardless!? Surely those on duty with responsibility
are too blame? And in need of serious Punishment? - Not excuses to 'Cover-up' and
thereby effect a 'Hush-up' of this terrible Tragedy of,surely,Maladministration and,
possibly, Wilful Misconduct to 'Get rid of the Trouble/Drunks at all Costs!? Correct?
And Agreed? Or is your letter a mere copy with my partial address added thereon!?
Will you please confirm that a copy of this letter,and your reply thereto,is sent to
Lord Justice TAYLOR.? And that you are in possession of my letters to his Lordship!?
Are you accepting my 'FREE Offer', as a Chartered Surveyor, to examine and Report on
the Dangerous WALL which the Police feared would collapse!? Or was that ' A figment of
the imagination'? Produced as an excuse for ineptitude and/or failures by those in
Charge of 'Operations',on 15th;April last,at Hillsborough Stadium;as so shown on TV.?
       I await full and precise answers to all of my properly asked Questions,in my
letters hereon, from the ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE to ensure that Justice is bein^*
done and that eventually RIGHT will triumph over,surely,serious Wrongdoings!? Agtfteed?
Your assistant's words:— ” It may be " cause me concern as to his intentions herein!
10 days to post your letter does not fill me with a feeling of " We shall not be moved"
en route to the Truth and the production of the True Entries;which,surely,must be ob­
tainable from " The copper on the job on the day in question "!? C o r r e c t ? And A&yeed?
                          Yours sincerely & in Sympathy fran one who has suffered,
                                                                                      MIR.1b



                                               Date and time raised                              Number
O THER DOCUMENT FORM

                            v/k-
Title __
(Include source and any docum ent num ber if relevant)

                                    ion     (lU o   K & j £»    /U * * *   J. -         i d
Receiver's instructions — urgent action                                                                          Racaivar




Document registered/indexed as indicated

 No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                              Statamant Raadar
 Statement reader s instructions



 Indexed as indicated

 No(s) of actions raised

 Examined - further action to be taken



                                                                                                                   Indaxar
  Further action No(s)

                       ions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
 When satisfied all actions                                                                               6
Asst:C.C.j.Mervyn Jones,MSc;,
West Midlands Police INQUIRY Team,                    7-6-1989                Essex,
Queensway,BIRMINGHAM, B4 6NQ.

Dear Mr.Jones,    R e :-HILLSBOROUGH Disaster Inquiry and Investigation Chief Officer

       I thank you for your letter of 26 May 1989,only received by 2nd:post to-day!!WHY?J
having been posted IstrClass on -5 VI 89 and 're-posted' at,it so appears, WALSALL West
Midlands on 6 JNEl? I return your envelope for yoir checking as to how 'Authorities' act!":
        As to your letter are you in possesion of my first 2 'early' letters on the above
Tragedy? And alsoomy later letter? If not how can you possibly investigate my inform­
ation, please !? You only refer to 'your letter' so I can only presume you mean ONE!?
       As to subsequent statements ( are they on Oath?) regarding 'Drunken Liverpool
Supporters' surely this seems to be an afterthought? If not why were the 'DRUNKS' not
ARRESTED? And,worst still, why were they foolishly admitted en masse through a GATE
Opened by Police!? Into a then Narrow-Tunnel under a Stand? Without arrangements being
made to control/disperse the ensuing 'Ru§h of FansS (including the DRUNKS!!??) to Left
and Right of the Tunnel Exit;instead of allowing a mass 'Forward* concourse en route
'Straight Ahead at Full-Steam' - regardless!? Surely those on duty with responsibility
are too blame? And in need of serious Punishment? - Not excuses to 'Cover-up* and
thereby effect a 'Hush-up' of this terrible Tragedy of,surely,Maladministration and,
possibly, Wilful Misconduct to 'Get rid of the Trouble/Drunks at all Costs!? Correct?
And Agreed? Or is your letter a mere copy with my partial address added thereon!?
Will you please confirm that a copy of this letter,and your reply thereto,is sent to
Lord Justice TAYLOR.? And that you are in possession of my letters to his Lordship!?
Are you accepting nay 'FREE Offer', as a Chartered Surveyor, to examine and Report on
the Dangerous WALL which the Police feared would collapse!? Or was that ’ A figment of
the imagination'? Produced as an excuse for ineptitude and/or failures by those in
Charge of 'Operations',on 15th:April last,at Hillsborough Stadium;as so shown on TV.?
       I await full and precise answers to all of my properly asked Questions,in my
letters hereon, from the ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE to ensure that Justice is beingr?
done and that eventually RIGHT will triumph over,surely,serious Wrongdoings!? Ag#ied?
Your assistant's words:- 11 It may be " cause me concern as to his intentions herein!
10 days to post your letter does not fill me with a feeling of " We shall not be moved"
en route to the Truth and the production of the True Entries;which,surely,must be ob­
tainable from " The copper on the job on the day in question "!? Correct?
                   Yours sincerely & in Sympathy fran one who has suffered,

                                                                         7
                                     P.O. BOX 52
                                    BIRMINGHAM
                                        B4 6NQ ■ (
                                                                              O I H M 18436D J 5




1st;Class & PERSONALLY for;-
                               J.Mervyn Jones,MSc; Assistant Chief Constable, & the o /c of
                               The HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM & Their Investigations/Truth;
                               West Midlands Police-HQ, Lloyd House, Colmore Circus.

                               Queensway.   BIRMINGHAM. B4 6NQ
Dear Sir

RE HILLSBOROUGH - 15 APRIL 1989

I am grateful to you for writing and the information that you included in your
letter will be of great interest to my investigation team.

It may be that we shall be in touch with you again to take up the points that
you have made.

Thank you very much for writing.

Yours faithfully




J Mervyn Jones MSc
Assistant Chief Constable
Hillsborough Inquiry Team
                                                                                                          Ilf.
, J MERVYN JONES MSc                                               MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
  ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                        W atery Street
  H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M                       Sheffield S3 7ET
                                                                   Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                            Fax: 0 7 4 2 7 26 2 4 7
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                             KNOWSLEY HALL
Colmore Circus Q ueensw ay                         m   t 9.
                                                                   Prescot
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                  M erseyside L34 4AF
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 000, extn, 2 0 2 5                       Telephone: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 3871
Fax: 0 2 1 -2 3 3 3 2 5 6                                          Fax: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 2 9 7 6
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
                                                                   Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA
                                                                   Our Ref:       JMJ/VSC
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3332
Fax: 0 2 1 -359 6 7 3 5
                                                                   Date:          24 August 1989




             Essex




             D e a r __________

             I refer to your letter of 17 August 1989, the contents of which I have
             noted, I have passed on your letter to the Secretary to the Inquiry for
             the information of Lord Justice Taylor.

             Thank you for taking the trouble to write.

             Yours sincerely




            Assistant Chief Constable
            (Hillsborough Inquiry)




                                                                                           ^ /VL    (a)
             V/7                               ^                  6&<0)woJ2s       -t- Cofisf J/M7          'f'c


                      0    ^
              (V \                   DLL
   PLEASE REPLY
           e) l TO THE OFFICE AT . .tCJJ-SpA                  .Birmingham

                                                                                                             11
Geoffrey Dear,CC of West kidlands POLICE,
 ^Hillsborough'1 Inquiry”POLICE HQ.                 17-8-1989            Essex,

Dear Chief Constable,,.,
                        Le:-Exposure of the THUTH    of the True Entries in the ’POLICE1
          I hftve to-day read with interest,and of course HOPE,the references to your­
self and your bounden duty and responsibility on Pages 14 & 15 of The Daily Telegraph
together with previous Reports concerning the HILLSBOROUGH Disester; on which I con­
ducted correspondence with Lord Justice Taylor and the POLICE as,no doubt,you will
ao check in view of my offers thereto as a FRICS to assist in establishing the Truth?
Especially regarding the 'Dangerous Wall in danger of Collapse1 and the 'Drunken Fans'
whom the Police allowed to swarm into the Stadium, without any control or guidance
through the Stand Tunnel and thence from to Eight and l>eft to distribute the 1,000s
of spectators in orderly and safe areas instead of allowing a ‘Surge forward' then
followed by the POLICE Ordering/Forcing persons attempting to escape,over the peri­
meter fencing,back over the fence to,surely,almost certain DEATH? All under the paid
control of persons employed in the Public Sector from the Public Purse!? Correct.?
          Surely those who gave False Statements to the POLICE,on the usual Forms,
must be Guilty of Submissions of False Evidence,in a Corrupt Conspiracy to thereby
Pervert the course of Justice!? With Intent so to do in Difiance of their Oath of
Office on becoming Policemen*? With 'Withholding and/or Altering Evidence also a
serious Criminal Offence if Committed by a Police Officer with Intent to Deny the
Truth and the True Entries from being exposed in Public/the INQUIRY and/or in HM
Courts.? Resulting in a PRISON Sentence for 'Contempt',surely.? Together with
Maladministration and Wilful Misconduct being 'Punishable Offences',? Agreed.?
          My offer of a FREE Inspection/Survey/Repqst^on the "Dangerous Wall" is
still available from,Yours sincerely,


                                                                Assessor and Valuer.
