                                                                                                                                    Pc>W                 5/3
                                                                                                   Trinity Court
H am m ond S u d d a rd s                                                                          16 John Dalton Street
              S O L I C I T O R S                                                                  Manchester M60 8HS
                                                                                                   Telephone (0161) 830 5000
                                                                                                   DX No. 14347 Manchester 1
                                                                                                   Fax (0161) 830 5001
                                                                                                   Michael.Shepherd@HammondSuddards.co.uk
 STRICTLY PRIVATE & CONFIDENTIAL
 FO R ADDRESSEE ONLY
 Ian Daines Esq
 Assistant Chief Constable
 South Yorkshire Police
 Police Headquarters
 Snig Hill
 Sheffield
 S3 8LY



 Our Ref:                                                           Your Ref:                                                      Date:
 MLS.JH                                                             ACC ID NM H                                                    24 December 1998


 Dear M r Daines

 Adlington -v- M urray, Adlington -v- Duckenfield

 Further to our various telephone conversations would you now please find herewith, by way o f a
 record o f what has gone on since last weekend copies o f the file notes, correspondence and other
 notes listed in the attached Schedule being matters dealt with by me in Peter M etcalf s absence.

 The main thing for you to consider at present is the Schedule to the CPS letter and their request for
 your assistance. It is now 11.40 am on Christmas Eve and I am leaving the office. I have still not
 heard from CPS o f any decision on whether they will give any disclosure ahead o f resolution o f the
 Judicial Review.

 I am now passing the file back to Peter.

 V n n r g ginrprplv_______________________________________                           H


 'Z T X I^ 7 1 X IT 1 7 D - i J I I X n r E X 1 3 Z W '
 ldaines.dec24




 Offices also at:

 2 Park Lane                           7 Devonshire Square           Pennine House                    Suite 688 Lloyd’s                      Avenue Louise 250
 Leeds                                 Cutlers Gardens               39-45 W ell Street               One Lime Street                        1050 Brussels
 LS3 1ES                               London                        Bradford                         London                                 Belgium
 Telephone (0113) 284 7000             EC 2M 4Y H                    BD1 5NU                          EC3M 7H A                              Telephone (00) 32 2 627 7676
 Fax (0113) 284 7001                   Telephone (0171) 655 1000     Telephone (01274) 734700         Telephone (0171) 327 3388/3399         Fax (00) 32 2 627 7686
                                       Fax (0171) 655 1001           Fax (01274) 307239               Fax (0171) 621 1217

 A list o f Partners can be viewed at the above address. This firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct o f investment business.
SCHEDULE OF NOTES
 AND PAPERS DEALT
   WITH BY MLS


21- 24 DECEMBER 1998
             ACC SOUTH YORKSHIRE PO LIC E - HILLSBOROUGH

       SCHEDULE OF NOTES AND PAPERS DEALT W ITH BY MLS

                            21 - 24 DECEM BER 1998



File Notes

1.    M LS/Ian Daines - 23 December 1998, 2.30 pm.

2.    MLS/Walker Morris - 23 December 1998, 2.10 pm.

3.    MLS/George Croston - 23 December 1998, 10.00 am.

4.    MLS/Clerk to Miss Louise Varty - 22 December 1998.

5.    MLS/Ian Daines - 21 December 1998, 3.00 pm.

6.    MLS/Miss Adlington - 21 December 1998, 2.00 pm.

7.     Hearing before the Leeds Stipendiary Magistrate - 21 December 1998, 11.15
       am - 2.00 pm.

8.     Pre-Hearing meeting - 21 December 1998, 10.15 am.

9.    Pre-Court preparation - 21 December 1998.

10.   Meeting with Counsel - 21 December 1998.

11.    Meeting with Messrs. Harrison, Isaacs and Jones - 21 December 1998.

12.    Telephone conversation with George Croston, CPS - 21 December 1998,
       10.15 am.


Correspondence

1.     Croston, CPS to Hammond Suddards with 11 page Schedule - 22 December
       1998, 17.45 hrs.

2.     Croston, CPS to Hammond Suddards - 23 December 1998, 11.02 am.

3.     Walker Morris to Hammond Suddards - 23 December 1998, 13.12 hrs.

4.     Walker Morris to Hammond Suddards - 23 December 1998, 13.51 hrs.

5.     Hammond Suddards to Walker Morris - 23 December 1998 (about 2.00 pm).
6.        Hammond Suddards to Croston, CPS - 23 December 1998 (about 3.00 pm).

7.        Walker Morris to Hammond Suddards with copy letter o f 22 December HFSG
          to Clerk to South Yorkshire Police Authority - 23 December 1998, 17.05 hrs.


Miscellaneous

1.        Draft Skeleton Argument by Miss Louise Varty.

2.        Submissions as to Issue o f Summonses with timetable and extract from
          Hansard being the document handed to M r Shepherd by Miss Adlington at 2.00
          pm on 21 December 1998.



Schedulehillsborough. dec24
                                       FILE NOTE

                                                                                                     %
Client Name:       South Yorkshire Police - Assistant Chief Constable
Matter:            Hillsborough
Fee Earner:        MLS
Date:              23 December 1998
Time Engaged:



2.30 pm

I spoke to Ian Daines and told him again o f the correspondence and discussions with CPS and
I also told him o f the Walker Morris letters and the reply which I proposed to send.

He agreed that in view o f his impending holiday there was no point in sending him anything
now but that I would get everything in the post by surface mail to him so that he saw it on 4
January.

H e said his only other point to make would be that when he came back on 4 January there was
no way that this was going to be top o f his list o f priorities as he had all his normal policing
responsibilities and no doubt as usual there would have been pillage and mayhem taking place
in Sheffield over Christmas.

He confirmed that Hammond Suddards do not act for the South Yorkshire Police Authority
but he said that he had seen the letter to the Authority which had been sent by HFSG and is
referred to by Manning. He said that HFSG have threatened to judicially review the decision
o f South Yorkshire to fund the Defence o f the officers. He thought that the concept was
ludicrous.

He was in agreement with the letter which I propose to send to Walker Morris which might
help them in their endeavours to have the case de-listed on 7 January.

H e was extremely amused by the CPS wanting South Yorkshire to consent to production by
CPS o f the various documents. He said that his personal view would be that he would give
HFSG nothing at all or as little as he could get away with.
                                       FILE NOTE



Client Name:       South Yorkshire Police - Assistant Chief Constable
Matter:            Hillsborough
Fee Earner:        MLS
Date:              23 December 1998
Time Engaged:



2.10 pm

I received a second letter today from Walker Morris and have telephoned and left a message
for M r Manning who is out through his secretary to inform him that my understanding is that
Hammond Suddards acts for the South Yorkshire Police and in particular for the Assistant
Chief Constable and does not act for the South Yorkshire Police Authority and therefore we
have not seen the letter which he is referring to as a letter sent by HFSG to the South
Yorkshire Police Authority.

I am writing him a letter to the same effect.
                                       FILE NOTE


Client Name:       South Yorkshire Police - Assistant Chief Constable
Matter:            Hillsborough
Fee Earner:        MLS
Date;              23 December 1998
Time Engaged:


George Croston o f CPS York phoned MLS and said that he was sending a properly typed
letter to supplement the hand-written letter which he had faxed at just before 5.00 pm on 22
December and which had included schedules.

He said that he had still not received a decision from London either as to whether CPS would
give disclosure before the Judicial Review proceedings had been resolved nor had he received
a decision as to disclosure o f CPS reasons for their decision not to intervene in the
prosecution. He said that he expected a decision in relation to disclosure o f the material by
Christmas Eve but did not expect a decision in relation to the reasons for non-intervention
until some time in January. I confirmed to him that the ACC was disinclined to give any
disclosure until the Judicial Review proceedings had been resolved and that responding to the
request made in his letters to us o f 22 and 23 December also clearly involved work which both
the ACC and ourselves would prefer not to do if in fact the proceedings were going to be
stayed by the Divisional Court.

He asked me if I could indicate when the ACC would be able to respond to the requests in his
letters o f 22 and 23 December. I said that would not be possible until the New Year. I gave
the reason as this: the absence o f the ACC and his advisers on holiday over the Christmas and
New Year period. M r Croston said that he himself is on holiday from 24 December until 4
January and was more than happy not to have a reply as he had no intention o f breaking his
Christmas holidays to come back to deal with this.

He confirmed that I did not need to reply in writing to his letters as he now understood the
position o f the ACC from our telephone conversation namely that the letter would be given
attention in January.

We had a brief general discussion about the proceedings set for 7 January and he shared my
view that the date was absurdly early. He has no intention even if he is advised by London to
give disclosure o f actually sending any material at all to the HFSG. All that he proposes to do
if he has the ACC’s consent as requested in the letter o f 23 December and a direction to that
effect from London would be to invite HFSG to attend at CPS in York and allow them to
view the material and to have any o f it copied at their expense.

He agreed therefore that even if the decision was to proceed with disclosure there was no
possibility o f effective disclosure being given even o f the limited CPS material until some time
after 7 January.
                                    FILE NOTE

                                                                                              %
Client Name:     South Yorkshire Police - Assistant Chief Constable
Matter:          Hillsborough
Fee Earner:      MLS
Date:            22 December 1998
Time Engaged:



Telephoned clerk to Miss Louise Varty on                  and booked Miss Varty to do the
next hearing o f this case on 7 January at 10.00 am at Leeds Magistrates’ Court. I told the
clerk we were well pleased with Miss Varty’s work and the clerk was gratified because she
had recommended her for this particular job.
                                      FILE NOTE



Client Name:      South Yorkshire Police - Assistant Chief Constable
Matter:           Hillsborough
Fee Earner:       MLS
Date:             21 December 1998
Time Engaged:



3.00 pm

Telephone call between MLS and ACC Daines. MLS reported on what had happened. ACC
Daines said that he was minded to send a letter to the HFSG asking them what they would like
first, second and third and setting out some terms as to the basis on which voluntary disclosure
might be given by South Yorkshire Police but only once the Judicial Review proceedings have
been resolved.

MLS said he would draft a letter for consideration by ACC Daines after consultation with
PCM. Later the same afternoon MLS spoke with PCM who was in broad agreement with the
concept o f sending a letter to HFSG but wanted to be careful as to what was said having
regard to HS letter to HFSG o f 14 December in which we had said that ACC would comply
with CPS/DPP guidance both before and after the decision as to whether or not to intervene.
PCM referred MLS to correspondence with CPS and in particular CPS letter dated 15 July
1998 setting out various restrictions conditions that there might be on disclosure if it were
decided to give voluntary disclosure after a decision by DPP not to intervene.
                                     FILE NOTE



Client Name:      South Yorkshire Police - Assistant Chief Constable
Matter:           Hillsborough
Fee Earner:       MLS
Date:             21 December 1998
Time Engaged:


2.00 pm

B rief meeting with Miss Adlington after close o f Court proceedings at which she handed me a
document headed “R 0 . David Dukenfield and David Murray Submissions as to issue o f
Summonses” which she said set out the basis upon which the prosecution say that the papers
which they are seeking are material evidence.
                                      FILE NOTE
                                                                                        —          < % ?
                                                                                                     A ■/>

Client Name:       South Yorkshire Police - ACC
Matter:            Hillsborough
Fee Earner:        MLS
Date:              21 December 1998
Time Engaged:




Hearing before the Leeds Stipendiary Magistrate, M r Cadbury commencing 11.15 am, 21
December 1998.

Opening by M r Alan Jones OC for the Prosecution:

Sir, the Court has pencilled in for 19 April the Committal Proceedings. All parties received
notice on Friday last that the DPP is not intervening. Therefore the proceedings should
proceed. There are problems with the paperwork which are that:

(i)     DPP has always said that if decision favourable to prosecution there would be
        voluntary disclosure o f their material; and

(ii)    Hammond Suddards on behalf o f South Yorkshire Police by letter dated 14 December
        have said that their clients would follow the guidance o f CPS.

The prosecution have been in touch with CPS. Prosecution have been told by M r Harrison
that Murray will ask for Judicial Review. Miss Varty has been in touch with M r Croston and
it seems she may not want to make voluntary disclosure by SYP until after Judicial Review
determined.

CPS is considering whether to disclose in any event. Prosecution are told they will make a
decision before Thursday this week.

As DPP is considering voluntary disclosure you may think there is no sufficient indication o f
refusal. So I do not think that I can argue convincingly that there has been a refusal.

I am therefore asking for an adjournment in order to establish the D PP’s attitude to disclosure
in writing. I ask for the earliest time after this week.          The Prosecution will make
representations to the Director. We will argue the proceedings in this Court should not be
held up by Judicial Review as the Defence will need to ask for leave and for a stay.

We deplore the delay o f 5 months. No doubt everyone will want to proceed with despatch to
ensure that there is no unfairness.
                                      FILE NOTE
                                                                                                   A

I asked the Defence to indicate now when they will move the Divisional Court.               The
prosecution will want to be present on their application.

Leave is unlikely to be granted as the Defendants can defend themselves in the proceedings
themselves. I will resist any application to adjourn the date for Committal in this Court.

Only if leave were granted for Judicial Review and the Hearing Date for Judicial Review was
fixed beyond April would it be right to delay the Committal proceedings.

As prosecutors we are entitled to see the material to decide which witnesses to call.

We ask for a firm date o f 19 April and to fix the first convenient date for the hearing o f the
Witness Summons. If the DPP does disclose to us the application in respect o f South
Yorkshire Police becomes less urgent as there are over 500 statements. If however the DPP
does not disclose then we need to get on.

I would like to deal with the position o f the Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire. We have
been asking for access to the archive for 5 months. Hammond Suddards say that they will
give consideration after the decision in relation to Judicial Review.

Miss Varty cannot tell us who can authorise the release o f the material in the archive. One o f
the problems posed by this case is how does it come about that South Yorkshire Police hold
entire archive o f documents. We are told this by a parliamentary answer made last week. The
documents have been required for a history o f purposes such as Taylor, Coroner, Complaints
Authority etc.

The West Midlands force were the investigators. Our submission is that the ownership o f the
documents is that o f the body on whose behalf they were taken by West Midlands Police.

It appears that South Yorkshire Police consider that they own the material as they were the
first to call in the West Midlands Police. The West Midlands Police were acting as their
agents. Our position is that whatever the reason may be, South Yorkshire Police possess them
and the Summons is rightly made against them.

We don’t want them to say that we have issued the Summons against the wrong person and
we asked them to make their position clear.

I would like to use the time today to see which o f the documents in our Schedule satisfy
Section 97 (3).
                                       FILE NOTE


Michael Harrison OC Responded on behalf o f Murray:

M r Harrison said: There are two applications which I can extract or distill, from what my
friend has said which affect Murray and they are one, the application to adjourn and two, the
application to make 19 April a firm date.

May I make it clear that the Judicial Review application will be lodged.

We have asked the Director for his reasons for not intervening and expect these by Thursday.
The application will be lodged in the first two weeks o f January.

It seems to us that keeping 19 April gives us a lever with the High Court but if we get leave
we think it will go beyond 19 April. If it looks like that then we will come back to you.

The Stipendiary Magistrate said:

It would assist me if you applied for a stay.

Paul Isaacs OC on behalf o f Duckenfield said :

I adopt what M r Harrison has said and ask if M r Duckenfield can be excused attendance on
the next hearing.

M r Harrison said:

Please excuse Murray as well.

Louise Vartv - Counsel for South Yorkshire Police said:

The stance o f the South Yorkshire Police is a neutral one.

We have significant misgivings about the appropriateness o f the Summons.

My intention was to ask for time. The Force took the view it was inappropriate to review
voluminous documentation with costs implications if the DPP may intervene.

Now we have heard that there is to be a challenge to the decision o f the DPP.

We have attempted to incorporate this into our thinking. The exercise would be a huge
exercise. We do not want to look at voluntary disclosure if there is to be a challenge by way
o f Judicial Review. Therefore our first position is that the Summons should be postponed
until after the Judicial Review proceedings.

In any event we want to consider voluntary disclosure but we do not want to spend money on
it yet.
                                         FILE NOTE



It appears that the Prosecution have real potential for obtaining documents from CPS. They
may not need to persist with their Summons if they obtain documents from CPS. There is no
means by which we can be compensated in costs. M r Jones has raised a new point for us this
morning. We cannot give any undertakings about the documents as we have not had any
opportunity to consider them. Once Judicial Review has been resolved then we will consider
voluntary disclosure.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

If you are not prepared to consider voluntary disclosure there is no alternative to the
Summons.

Miss Vartv

It is not established that the Prosecution need to make the application until they have a
decision from CPS.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

I may need guidance as to what CPS have and what South Yorkshire have. Can you deal with
relevance?

Miss Vartv

Yes but not now. But I can deal with legal argument under Section 97 as to whether the
process is appropriate. However there has been no dialogue with the prosecution.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

I am minded to consider a short date. I am not sitting again until 4 January. I will not vacate
19 April today as that will be a lever with the Divisional Court.

Alan Jones

I ask for an early date in the first week o f January.

Paul Isaacs

Confirmed that Duckenfield will also apply for Judicial Review.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

I will adjourn this case until 10.00 am on Thursday 7 January but I want to deal with points o f
principle while we are here as I am concerned with how much power I have.
                                     FILE NOTE
                                                                                     ______




Alan Jones

I ask you to look at Section 97A. The critical words are “likely to be material evidence”. I
refer you to Schedule A. There are a number o f statements and these are material evidence as
witness statements are admissible if accepted.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

The 38 in Schedule A are the ones you have already served.

M r Jones

Yes we want to check the statements against the originals.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

If the Defence don’t want them then they would have to be handed in.

M r Jones

Yes. I refer to Schedule B. These are documents compiled or collected by West Midlands
Police. We do not have copies o f all o f them. We want to see the ones that we do not have
copies of.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

Are they supporters?

M r Jones

Yes. We know all these documents are kept in a homes computer or in a hard copy. We want
to look at them to see if they are material evidence.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

So you have not yet decided to call them.

M r Jones

No.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

You can only have the Summons returnable in the proceedings themselves.
                                       FILE NOTE

                                                                                       ------


 M r Jones

 I agree. The Police and the CPS have been asking for guidance. Different people can give
 guidance and I ask you to express a view yourself in these letters .

 The Stipendiary Magistrate

 Obviously it will make for a more orderly Committal if voluntary disclosure takes place but I
 cannot order it.

M r Jones

 It cannot be expensive or inconvenient for them to give disclosure.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

Do you have a view o f what they are likely to say.

M r Jones

Yes.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

I think it would be sensible if South Yorkshire Police provided them. Otherwise it will cause
delays.

M r Jones

Witnesses have a right to refresh their memory from statements. I refer to Schedule C. These
are witnesses who gave evidence at the Inquest.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

You will have a transcript o f that.

M r Jones

Yes. Much o f the questioning by the Coroner was about the drink people had had. There is
important evidence in relation to what happened in 1988 as to the Police watching (aspects o f
entry to the ground).

They didn’t do this in 1989. This goes to the issue o f^ rje e a b ility . The South Yorkshire
Police have been defending themselves for 9 years in civil proceedings. I asked South
                                      FILE NOTE


 Yorkshire Police to forget their conflict o f interest and to disclose the documents. The
                                                                                                   %
 statements which they sent to the DPP were selective. The Coroner’s report is based on 12%
 o f the total statements. Many statements are not included in the bundle sent to the DPP. Of
 the 35 statements which we have served only a quarter went to the DPP. There is no point
 waiting to the end o f the Judicial Review. We should proceed as if the case was going on. I
 turned to the Schedule D which is Exhibits. The CPS have lists o f Exhibits. They say that
 they have returned them or a lot o f them to South Yorkshire Police. We have been through
 the master document list and isolated these as our strong evidence. One accepts some are
 more likely to be material than others e.g. item 91. Often we have no information as to what
 these are other than that they are in the Schedule. This was prepared by West Midlands and is
 now in the possession o f South Yorkshire Police. We have asked for an explanation and none
 has been given. These were documents prepared for the Public Enquiry so why they are in the
 possession o f the body in whose possession they are is dubious. I asked my friend to indicate
 which documents in these lists are within Section 97 and which are not.

 The Stipendiary Magistrate

 Said: I think there must be many documents in Schedule D which are material and hope that
 this is being taken on board.

 M r Jones

I turn to Schedule D - this deals with video material. For example document 180 the South
Yorkshire Police are in possession o f documents from the Metropolitan Police about visits to
Wembley. I turn to the relevance o f transcripts about breaking down o f the gates, the tapes
show communications between various officers o f South Yorkshire Police. I can see no
reason why they w on’t disclose them unless they are appalled by the evidence which they
disclose. I refer to Edmondson - this statement disclosed to us this year refers to a transcript
o f a tape in which it is said the fans had broken down the gates.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

Said: You could Summons him.

M r Jones

I have asked Hammond Suddards for addresses but they have refused to give them.


The Stipendiary Magistrate

So you would have to ask for Witness Summonses to get the addresses. The problems are not
insurmountable but without co-operation they would be difficult.

M r Jones
                                      FILE NOTE

                                                                                                  %

The South Yorkshire Police are paying the Defendants’ costs so money is clearly not an object
for them.

Miss Louise Vartv for the Respondent

Said: Many o f the comments which my friend has made are unfair as we have not had time to
consider voluntary disclosure.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

Said: Yes in relation to the documents but perhaps not in relation to the witnesses.

Miss Vartv

Said: My friend has used emotive language and argued that it is not too much trouble to give
disclosure so why not give it. However it is plain from Sections 97 and 97A that there is no
power o f disclosure. The Court can order a person to produce documents or give a
deposition. However the parties must isolate the issue to which the document or statement
relates. The Applicant must show how the document is relevant and admissible. It is not
enough that it would be useful. It is not a discovery procedure.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

What about refreshing memory.

Miss Vartv

That does not make a document an admissible piece o f evidence. It is not appropriate for Mr
Jones to say that we have been unreasonable. He is not in a position to go through these
documents in detail and show how each o f them is relevant and admissible.

The Stipendiary Magistrate

You are right. I do not want to do that today.

Miss Vartv

The South Yorkshire Police are not privy to the prosecution and the issues in it. Until we
know what each document goes to we do not know whether it is relevant. This is a discovery
application. We appreciate that feelings are high but we are anxious as there are all sorts o f
ramifications for police forces if an application can be made in cases like this on a generic
basis. The private prosecution is on its own and the prosecutor cannot get these documents
without co-operation. We are doing our best to comply with the legal requirements to which
we are subject. We will look at this carefully but there is not enough time by 7 January. We
                                      FILE NOTE


are very dependent upon the Prosecution making out a case as to why each document is
relevant and admissible. No doubt the Prosecutor will tell us to what extent we can be
relieved if they get substantial discovery from the Crown Prosecution Service.

M r Michael Harrison OC for Murray said:

The Court should observe the legal requirements. A Prosecution witness statement is not
material evidence for the Prosecutor. It is only material evidence for the Defence if the
witness gives evidence inconsistent with his written statement.

M r Paul Isaacs OC for Duckenfield said:                         /

If there is to be voluntary disclosure then we want the Praoeoution to undertake to disclose to
the Defendants whatever they undertake to the prosecution.

The Stipendiary Magistrate said:

They will have to disclose to you as well in that event. I cannot make a decision today. None
o f what I have said in the course o f these proceedings is in any way binding.

M r Alan Jones OC said:

I understand that we will all have access at York but after Committal there will have to be full
disclosure. The issues are what they have always been. It is evident now that they are an act
o f negligence and perversion o f the course o f justice.

The Stipendiary Magistrate suggested that the bundle supplied to him with thumbnail sketch
should be supplied to South Yorkshire Police and ordered that neither Defendant should be
required to attend the proceedings on 7 January. The Court adjourned.




Noteshillsborough.dec23
                                        FILE NOTE



 Client Name:       South Yorkshire Police - Assistant Chief Constable
 Matter:           Hillsborough
 Fee Earner:       MLS
 Date:             21 December 1998
 Time Engaged:




File note o f pre-hearing meeting in Courtroom 12 between Alan Jones QC and Ann Adlington
for HFSG, Michael Harrison QC, Paul Isaacs QC for the Defendants together with their
respective solicitors, Louise Varty and MLS for ACC SYP.

The meeting had already commenced before Louise Varty and MLS entered the room as we
had been on the phone in another room having the conversation with George Croston, detailed
in a separate note.

Louise Varty (LV) said that Croston was o f the view that as there was to be Judicial Review
there should not be voluntary disclosure.

Alan Jones (AJ) asked whether there would be Judicial Review.

Michael Harrison (MH) said yes by mid January.

LV said if there had been no Judicial Review we would have wtjaM ' a month but now as there
is no cover for the costs we would propose that our consideration o f the question o f whether
to give voluntary disclosure should be postponed until after resolution o f the Judicial Review
application.

AJ asked if we (Hammond Suddards) were acting for West Midlands Police.

MLS said “we are instructed to advise South Yorkshire Police in relation to your Summons”.

AJ asked whether we accepted that we had control over all the documents referred to in the
Summons and whether the Summons was properly directed to the ACC.

MLS said “we are not prepared to say anything*about the Summons at this stage as to whether
they are our papers or not. It is not for us to advise you about your Summons we are advising
the South Yorkshire Police” .

AJ asked “does the policy o f not supplying copy statements o f witnesses still remain in force”.
                                       FILE NOTE


AJ said “will you agree to supply us with the originals o f statements o f which we have copies”.

MLS said “we have no instructions to agree anything. The matter will be considered”.

M H said “it is inappropriate to have a fixed date for the Committal”.

AJ said he disagreed and was not prepared to adjourn the timetable and accused M H o f using
delay as a weapon not a grievance. He said there was no reason why the Judicial Review
could not be expedited and asked why the Defence could not make the application earlier than
mid January.

M H said - “we might - its an outer time limit”.

AJ said that he could not see any reason to postpone the 19 April hearing.

M H said “but you can’t even meet that date yourself’.

AJ said “I don’t think you will get leave for Judicial Review. I do not think we should vacate
the date o f 19 April because if it is taken out we may not be able to get back on before the
Autumn. We may have to call witnesses without statements. The Committal will take about 2
weeks”.

M H said “when will you fit in to your timetable an application by the Defence to stay the
proceedings as an abuse o f process?”

AJ said “the time for such an application is at Committal. You can call witnesses at
Committal” . H e said abuse should only be determined in the Committal proceedings
themselves.


Noteshillsborough.dec23
                                       FILE NOTE



 Client Name:       South Yorkshire Police - Assistant Chief Constable
 Matter:           Hillsborough
 Fee Earner:       MLS
 Date:             21 December 1998
 Time Engaged:


 7.00 am - 9.15 am

 Attending in Peter M etcalfs room and reviewed his files in relation to Hillsborough and in
 particular in relation to the application for a witness summons. Also reviewed cases in his files
 o f previous law reports. Reviewed section in Wilkinson in relation to evidence and
 documentary evidence and obtained full copy through Simon Hills o f the Derby Justices
 decision. Travel to Court.

 9.30 am

M et Louise Varty o f Counsel. Gave her the recent correspondence which PCM had had with
HFSG. Discussed the case and agreed that in the first place we would ask for an adjournment
in order to consider voluntary disclosure and if that was not granted then we would oppose
the application for the Summons. Miss Varty handed to me an outline submission which she
proposed to make on behalf o f the Assistant Chief Constable.

 10.00 am

M et with Michael Harrison QC and Paul Isaacs QC who are appearing on behalf o f the
Defendants and was informed by them that they intend to apply for Judicial Review o f the
decision by DPP not to intervene in the proceedings.

M et with Alan Jones QC and other Counsel and solicitors and was asked by Alan Jones QC to
telephone M r Croston at CPS on               to see what he had to say as he had spoken to
solicitors for HFSG.

At approximately 10.15 am I telephoned Croston with mobile phone. He said that CPS had
sent out letters with the decision not to intervene in the proceedings and were currently
waiting for a decision from London on the issue o f disclosure. He said that CPS had not yet
made a decision on disclosure but he understood that the Chief Constable would give
voluntary disclosure subject to privilege and immunity. I said that I did not think that he was
advising the Chief Constable and that I considered it to be inappropriate to give any disclosure
until the Judicial Review proceedings, which I had been told by solicitors for the Defendants
were to take place, had been resolved. If there were to be Judicial Review proceedings then
he would expect deferment o f voluntary disclosure until after Judicial Review but he was
waiting for a letter from London.
'98     17:44       ©01904 456577                          A;PS 4th floor
                                                                                                                                                 @001
                                   0 1 9 0 4 456577                                                                                            I*
                                                                                                                                                 y •• •.
                                                                                                                                m
                                                                                                                             CPS
                                                                                                                           GattreC Cate***c
                                                                                                                                 0Wc< W»**r«
       Facsimile                                                                                                                        Pitrattidf
                                                                                                                                r« * H7f

                                                                                                                   Oi/«c Ciwr a tK ^ 566'n
                                                                                                                   S^taiaaard! 0I9OJ-J10UTT)
                                                                                                                     rxerwwl«: OlVii-iSSSTT
                                                                                                                        0.X Mo. HJZCS forko
  Attention of:         K ite £

  Address:         M M h O n D

      rax No:

      Frocn:            C^.P.

  CPS Divisioa:

      Dace:                        Time:            17 ^ -b

  This tax transmission, consists of this pags plus 12L others.

      Please aclogs*k5dge cecsipc:


  If transmission is not property received please call 01904—

 R z           (fiL L S S o S x ^ ty

/^UscAa^<Xft                                  sclodoJt, sAcwXf$ ft*                                            w   US-aoJ.
c<r\ C/3 f £ £ s e s $ u Z t ^ . c&toid&ftef duf\A<^ c*iJ
 m i- U x H        uv     (9 9 c ) c ^ d            19*77.


 I uXuU rt b t-g fo J fa -L (f^ jc n                                    cjmM                  <s>cUcaJe u Ju cA c£
He pJUctQb&txJtel uftHi                                                                                     tb Ptf /kgal
p iu ( & ) 2        o &      ti& e fc n               f l a t £>             ^         c U ^ c J L o ^ e o l, n M + c U c f
          i-iaJ& eJ (pot s\^bj£oJ & & 0 <n flof~                                                                   ffe fu&UL
 c K j^ o u i^ l^ o j             Voh p h c u d                        la      tfo tfo iM tc F C eH h t& L *)
                                              ti$     S C fL tjT A C j)                    O ncl                          ( f

 if&AO CCs\ ht dU^ChteoL t?*7 tt& CPi.
 I a n c u M tlU ^ t P d e c J 'fa cl* t> u M lU / cr /o t t j
 cfis sU ajJ dLq u rt \M m !zV u di^okauSr p*cT to O vyjW U
 X Q s iU jd                                                                             b& ow               c J u \jfh &           ^      ■

                                    C n ~ *           S * r * c t -.        u> tfw m ro > « re p f'i> u m
                                       HILLSBOROUGH CASE

     SCHEDULE OF MATERIAL KNOWN TO HAVE BEEN CONSIDERED BY CPS PRIOR TO 30th AUGUST 1990


NUMBER     DESCRIPTION OF ITEM                                          COMMENTS

1          WEST MIDLANDS POLICE REPORT PREPARED FOR TAYLOR ENQUIRY

           •     MASTER INDEX OF WITNESSES AND DOCUMENTS                Showing pagination and allotted
                                                                        part numbers plus amendments.
                                                                        See Appendix 1.
                 PART I INTRODUCTION
                 Report -                                               Pages 1 to 22
                 Statements -                                           Pages 1 to 348

                 PART I INTRODUCTION CONTINUED
                 Statements                                             Pages 349 - 751
                 Documents                                              1-43

                 PART II
                 Report -                                               Pages 23 - 68
                 Statement -                                            Pages 752 - 1128
                 Documents -                                            44 - 108

                 PART III
                 Report -                                               Pages 69 - 83
                 Documents -                                            109 - 177
                 Statements -                                           Pages 1129 - 1144
PART IV
Report         Pages 84 - 118
Statements     Pages 1145 - 2456
Documents      178 - 191
PART V
Report         Pages 119 - 157
Statements     Pages 2457 - 3480
Document       192 - 207

PART VI
Report         Pages 152 - 165
Statement      Pages 3481 - 3706
Documents      Pages 208 - 220A

PART VII
Report         Pages 166-318
Appendices -   Pages 319 - 335 (sequence of
               events)
               Pages 336 - 344 (correspondence
               re Taylor Enquiry)
               Transcripts of Interviews of
               Graham Mackrell
               Supl. Roger Marshall
               Supt. Bernard Murray
               Asst. Ch. Const. Waller Jackson
               Supt. Roger Greenwood
               Ch. Supt. David Duckenfield
ADDITIONAL LOOSE DOCUMENTS FOR REPORT AT 1 ABOVE

Unumbered Document and Video                                  Criminal Interview with
                                                              Peler Edward Smith
                                                              Parts 1 and 2


ADDITIONAL STATEMENTS FOR REPORT AT 1 ABOVE


Statement of Brian Wallace dated 28/4/89                      Pages 2677 A - H
Statement of Gordon Sykes dated 18/7/90                       Pages 2963 A - C




TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS AT LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR’S ENQUIRY
WITH CORRESPONDING STATEMENTS                                 Eleven folders covering dales
                                                              15/5/89 to 28/6/89


TRANSCRIPTS OF PROCEEDINGS AT LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR’S ENQUIRY
WITH CORRESPONDING STATEMENTS                                 3 Bundles containing evidence of:
                                                                D. Bownes
                                                                G. Mackrell
                                                                W. Eastwood
                                                                ACC Jackson
                                                                Ch. Supt. Nesbit
                                                                Ch. Supt. Duckenficld
                                                                Supt. Chapman
                                                                Ch. Supt. Mole
                                                                Supt. Marshall
                                                                Supt. Greenwood
                                                                Supt. Murray
              WEST MIDLANDS POLICE INTERIM REPORT NUMBER 2                 Report prepared for CPS/PCA,
                                                                           being revised copy of the one
                                                                           prepared for Lord Justice
                                                                           Taylor, dated 12/10/89. Table
                                                                           of contents attached at Appendix
                                                                           2.


              ORIGINALS PETITIONS FROM HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP
              AND OTHERS                                                   Three bundles


at->     8    INTERIM REPORT OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR’S ENQUIRY

to
Oh
M
              COUNSEL’S JOINT OPINION RE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
              DATED 6/8/90

         10   CORRESPONDENCE FILES                                         Between:
                                                                           CPS/Police/LSLO/
1^-
I*- S)                                                                     Other interested parties/relatives
in
<D                                                                         of victims.
in


         11   FIRST TUESDAY VIDEO TAPE

         12   2 VIDEO TAPES ENTITLED MRE2/AE and MRE2/AF

in            QUANTITY OF LOOSE PAPER PERTAINING TO FORENSIC EVIDENCE
         13
               ON CRASH BARRIERS




                                         ■0
                f
                                            HILLSBOROUGH REVIEW

                            LIST OF MATERIAL CONSIDERED AT 1997 CPS REVIEW


MATERIAL                        DATE OF ITEM      ORIGINALS PRODUCED    COMMENTS
                                                  OR HELD BY


HFSG letter                       4/3/97    '     Trevor Hicks          Received 4/3/97

T. Hicks draft statement                          T. Hicks

Opinion of A tun Jones QC                         T. Hicks              Obtained by HFSG

Annexes A to G of Opinion                         T. Hicks              See Appendix 1

Lord Justice Taylor’s
 Interim Report                   1/8/89          CPS

Joint Opinion of
  Gareth Williams QC and          6/8/90          CPS
  Peter Birts QC,
  concerning allegations
  of criminal misconduct
  by police

Background Note sent to
 Attorney General                 Undated         CPS                   Circa 1990
                               Statements of P.C Ryan           5/5/89
                                                                9/1/90   South Yorkshire Police

                               Statements of P.C. Bichard       5/5/89
                                                                9/1/90   South Yorkshire Police
                               Notebook of P.C. Bichard         2/5/89

                          10   Master Exhibit Index for
                                Lord Justice Taylor's                    South Yorkshire Police
                                Enquiry
floor




                          11   Computer Exhibit List for
                                Lord Justice Taylor’s
4;PS 4th




                                Eqnuiry re Exhibits
                                TB/I AND 2                               South Yorkshire Police
           01904 456577




                          12   Master Video Schedule for
                                Lord Justice Taylor’s
                                Enquiry                                  South Yorkshire Police

                          13   Compilation Tape schedule
456577




                                for Lord Justice Taylor’s
                                Enquiry                                  South Yorkshire Police
©01904




                               Compilation Video Tape
                                (Taylor Eqnuiry Document
                                142 and Inquest Exhibit
                                C238)                                    South Yorkshire Police   VHS Master Copy seen
17:46
’98
22/12




                           *
                           f                                i                   *
                                                                                c*
Exhibit TB/1 and TB/2
 Video Tape Schedules for
 Lord Justice Taylor's
 Enquiry                                        South Yorkshire Police

Exhibits TB/1 and TB/2 Video
 Tapes                                          South Yorkshire Police   VMS Master Copy seen

Inquest Exhibit List                            South Yorkshire Pplice

Inquest Exhibit C539
  Video Tape                                    South Yorkshire Police   VHS Master Copy on show at Inquest

Inquest Transcripts of
  evidence of P.C. Bichard
  P.C. Ryan, P.S. Goddard
  P.S. Killoch                                  South Yorkshire Police

Copy correspondence re
 viewing of Unused Material
 at Nechells Green Police
 Station prior to Inquest
 Hearings                                       South Yorkshire Police

Original Statement of
 Dr. Edward Walker             20th July 1989   South Yorkshire Police   Copy with CPS

Police Action message
 referring to warning
 of Dr. Walker for Court       2/4/90           South Yorkshire Police
Statements o f James Wardrope,
 Consultant                       6/6/89     South Yorkshire Police

Transcript of Inquest
 Evidence of James Wardrope       18/4/90    South Yorkshire Police

Body File of Philip Hammond
 No. 93                                      South Yorkshire Police

Transcript of Inquest Evidence
 o f Professor Alan Usher
 Pathologist                                 South Yorkshire Police

Transcript of Inquest Evidence
 of Dr. David Slater                         South Yorkshire Police

Transcript o f Inquest Evidence
 of Dr. Ernest Gumpert                       South Yorkshire Police

Transcript of BBC Radio 5
 Broadcast                        13/4/97    Tellex Monitors Ltd.

Inquest Video Tape showing
  production of Exhibit C539
  in evidence                                 South Yorkshire Police

Granada Drama re Hillsborough                 CPS

Home Office PPD: questions and
 police replies                   20/12/96    South Yorkshire Police

Hillsborough Case Chronology                  CPS




                                                        *       ♦
                                             _____=____ *L_____
34      Correspondence File                                   CPS                                Between CPS and UPSG/Mome
                                                                                                 O ffice/L SLO /Police/R elativcs of
                                                                                                 Victims


NOTE:   Items 2 1 - 2 8 form a special evidence bundle prepared by South Yorkshire Police for the 1997 review - See Appendix 1
                                                                           A ffg v iK *        I




      the HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
      15 April 19S9




                                       IHDEX
                                                                                   Page Ho^
      Document

      1.        Annex A
      Skeleton Argument presented in
      Divisional Court hearing 1 November 1993
                                                                                   a - 23
       2.        &ftn.g*_5
                                                                                   24 - 68
       Judgment-of Divisional Court 5 November 1993

       3.         Annex C
       Affidavit of Roger Houldsvorth and supporting                               69 - 92
       documents
       4.         m m x   PI
                 Transcript of evidence of Police Constable
       i         MICSAEL VINCENT RYAN to the Taylor Inquiry                        93 - 115

                   Transcript of evidence of Police Sergeant
       ii>                                                                         116 - 164
                   MICHAEL GODDARD to Taylor Inquiry
                   Transcript of evidence of Police Sergeant
        iii.                                                                       165 - 264
                   tdtCHAEL GODDARD to the Inquest

           5.     «ntex p2
                  Transcript  of evidence of Police Constable
           i.                                                                       265 - 310
                   TREVOR BICHARD to Taylor Inquiry
                   Transcript, of evidence of Police Constable                      311 - 369
           ii.
                   TREVOR BICHARD to the Inquest
           iii.    Transcript of evidence of Police Constable                        370 - 418
                   HAROLD GDEST to Taylor Inquiry
           iv.     Transcript of evidence of Chief Inspector                         419 - 440
                   Mc ROBBIE to Taylor Inquiry




                                                       ZZS9S* *0610
TtO                              •IOOTJ H I* S « f'i             ;;coc*   f,n tt
        Stat^ent of Chief Inspector McROBBIE                           441
v

6.      O TH k*
T r a n s c r i p t of Day 77 of Inquest
Part of Coroner's summing up

7.      AHKEX F
Evidence of Dr ED WALKER
8.      AMHEX Q
i. Transcript of evidence to Inquest re
Philip Hammond 2 May 1989
±i. Article British Medical Journal
30 November 1991




    S v tp fib   W E S    •      P *                 * .2    ° v t3

                           » P i (WITS
                             P l|, PAfcr              1 « u *2

                                  C539




                              j o o i j g a t sd:t          LLSSSt *0610.0 .
                                                  P r ^ r c ^ J U IX



    Statement of Dr Edward C Walker dated 20 July 1989




    Action Number A8559 referring to warning of Dr Walker dated

2   2 April 1990




3
    Statements of James Wardrope, Consultant in charge                                of
    Accident and Emergency, Northern General Hospital




    Transcript of        evidence      of James Wardrope           on Wednesday 18

4   April 1990




    Body file of Philip Hammond, Number 93




6   Transcript   of   evidence   of   Professor
    Pathologist, on Wednesday 18 April 1990
                                                                       AJ.an     Usher,




7   Transcript of evidence of Dr David Slater on Friday 4 May
    1990




8    Transcript of evidence of Dr Ernest Gumpert on Friday 4 May
     1990




9

                                 zzqq<;t7 *0610
            j o o t j m t sd:?              LL$9$t    fOBTOffl                 «fi   7.T/7.Z
       ,23/12 '88    11:02         ©01904 4S6577                      cps     4th floor                                                     @001




              Tel:
              Fax:
                                                                                       Crown Prosecution
                                                                                       Service
                                                                                       Central Casework
                                                                                       United H ouse
                                                                                       YORK Y 0 1 9 P Q




              To:      M. Shepherd Esq                                From:     George Croston

              Fax:                                                   P ag es: 2

              Phone:                                                  Date; . 12/23/98                                       •




              Re:      Adiington v DucKenfield & Murray              Tone:

              □ U rgent        □   For R eview       □ P le a se C om m ent    □ P le a se Reply            □ P le a s e R ecycle


              • C om m ents:

              Schedule previously sent.




                                                                    I00Z *82 ETT0
TOO®                                             SflNVfHTflS (TWOTffVIT           Tfin/   frfi?   fT T ft   w   J   f7   1
                                                                                                                         t t     nrtu o n     •
       23/12 '98     11:03       ©01904 456577                               CPS 4th floor                                                @002


                                                                                                                         BUM
        Miss D. H. SbarpHng
        Chief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                           CPS
                                                                                                                         CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                                         United House
                                                                                                                         Piccadilly
                                                                                                                         York YQ1 1PQ .

                                                                                                               SwUeJitoeHk 01304450070
              HAMMOND SUDDARDS                                         "I                                         n xso: 65204 York 6
              Solicitors
              FAO M Shepherd Esq                                                            Aaimilc: 0J9fl4r5 6 5 7 7
              DX: 26441 LEEDS
                                                                                       Direct Line


                                                                                     Our fttfercncc           YBF/3341/89
         L                                                             J             w M ^ec              POM.SB.CIU.57-9


                                                                                                              23 December 199S


              Dear Sirs

              RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFfEI.D and MURRAY

              Further to my fax o f yesterday, attached are the two schedules o f material reviewed by the
              CPS in 1990 and 1997 and still in our possession.

              We have been asked by the HFSG to commence disclosure immediately and without waiting
              for any judicial review hearing to be set following the intimated application by both defcnce
              solicitors. This requestis being considered and a response will be given as soon as possible.

             Tn order to assist in the provision o f voluntary disclosure o f relevant and material documents
             in the possession o f the CPS, I would be grateful if you could indicate which o f the police
             generated items may be disclosed by us. I presume that as South Yorkshire Police have
             custody o f the Hillsborough archive that the Chief Constable can give permission for
             disclosure or the waiver o f PII re West Midlands police material.

             Perhaps you could arrange for a copy o f ihe schedule to be annotated as to:-
             1.    Items subject to PJ1 which is not waived.
             2.    Item subject to PII which can now be waived.
             3.    Item subject to PH which is known to be in ihe public domain (and therefore
                    previously waived).
             4.     Items not subject to PII which known to be in the public domain (and therefore
                   previously waived).
             5.    Item not subjcct to PII and not in the public domain which can be disclosed
             6.     Any other claim for items.

          I am mindful o f the rules concerning the disclosure o f witnesses’ addresses and their
          statements without their consent. This is a point we may need to consider for those
          statements not in the public domain.




                                 Crown prosecution Service       •                           of
room                                       O /T M V /T /m O   «TkTAT«irVTT          TAA »    C.AW   rtT T A    TOT   i
         2A/12 '98   Uii3      ©01904 486377                              CPs 4th floor                       <21003




             I would begraleftil if you could indicate today when you might be able to provide a
             substantive reply so that I can inform the parties to the private prosecution of any delays in
             the making of the CPS decision re voluntary disclosure.

             Yours sincerely




             George R. Croston
             Prosecution Team Leader




                                                                    T00Z P83 ETT0
onnPBi                                    n m T V ffffn n   <TkTAt»(rrm
2*3. DEC. 1998 13:12                                                       1                                         NO. 3668   P. 1/6

                                                                W A L K E R
                                                                M O R R I S
                                                                 Solicitors

                     Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 2832500.
                    Facsimile 0113 2459412. Document Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Email mfo^igalkgrmnfrig^A.^k
                                              Web: http://ww.walkermorris.co.uk


                                   FACSIMILE                            TRANSMISSION




           To                    Michael Shepherd                              From             Walker Morris RBM
           At                    Hammond Suddards                              D ate            23 December 1998
                                                                               Page 1 of 4
           Telephone                                                           M atter Number MUR.313-1




                                                    PLEASE SEE ATTACHED:-


       Letter




                                    Private and Confidential
       This facsimile may contain information that is privileged, confidential or otherwise
       protected from disclosure. It must not be used by, or its contents copied or
       disclosed to persons other than the addressee. If you have received this
       in error please notify us immediately by telephone at the number listed above and
       return it to us by mail. We will reimburse postage.

           A lu t r fd x ftm m ' n m a u c fa i u wpcrwi n A t th n e    ReguUta! by The Lem Soday MA t am ina i f
                                            w A L K E R
                                            M O R R I S
                                               Solicitors


            Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 2832500,
            Facsimile 0113 2459412. Document Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Email info^wilkennorrkco.uk
                                      Web: http://www.walkermorris.co.uk


 FAO Michael Shepherd                                                Our ref          Rbm/bqw/MURRa
 Hammond Suddards                                                                     Y
 DX 14347                                                            Your ref
 MANCHESTER
 BY FAX                                                              23 December 1998




 Dear Sir

 RE : HILLSBOROUGH

 We understand that you will be advising the Chief Constable on the question of
 disclosure pursuant to the proposed witness summons and the request for disclosure
 therein. We can tell you that on behalf of our Client the writer is meeting Mr Michael
 Harrison QC on Thursday morning for the purposes of beginning the preparation of an
 application for Judicial Review.

We noted from our telephone conversation of 22 December that you made reference to
a conversation between yourself and Mr Croston of the Crown Prosecution Service from
Court on 21 December. Like us, you woe told that the Crown Prosecution Service had
already a draft of a letter setting out the basis and reasons for their decision and    it
was anticipated that it would be provided no later than 24 December. We enclose
herewith a copy of the letter received on die afternoon of 22 December. We have
responded to them by fax to say that we find this position to be totally unacceptable and
against the assurance that we were given (which assurance was alsn given to you).

 You will remember that during the course of the dialogue before the actual hearing itself
 and during the course of die hearing, we stated that it was our intention to apply for
 Judicial Review. We indicated that we expected to make (hat ajy li^ tion             the
week of 11 January. At this Mr Alun Jones QC for the Prosecution asked why it was
not possible for the application to be lodged during the week of 4 January if the matter
were given due expedition. We believe that even had the response of the Crown
Prosecution Service been provided on 24 December, it would have been impossible to
have been able to categorically assure die Court that we could lodge an application
within the week of 4 January. The response of the Crown Prosecution Service now
makes that absolutely impossible and we shall work with all speed to try to ensure that
the application is issued in the week of 11 January.

You will further recall that the Stipendiary Magistrate invited us to include within the
application, a further application that the Magistrates’ Court proceedings be stayed
pending the determination of the application for Judicial Review.

We confirm that our application will include a request for a stay.
                                                      Ke&Uci   Ib tL tw &efag> tm Ac comima e f m m m em b m m
Ill our view, it would be inappropriate for any disclosure of any documents to be given,
pending detennination of the application to stay the proceedings in the Magistrates’
Court pending the detennination o f the Judicial Review application.

We enclose herewith a copy of the letter that we have sent to the Clerk to the Justices
so that he may bring this to the attention of the Learned Stipendiary Magistrate.

Yours faithfully




PAETNEE
Enc
      21 DEC; 1958 13:13
                                            01904 456b/’/


      Nl»D.H.Sh»i»iiag
      CfcefCw»n ftoeeo**
                                                                                     % i-
                                                                                                       r* jS #». , -- _

                                                                                                    S r S IPO


         WALKER MORMS
         Solicitors                                                                                                       :'    i
         Kings Court
         12 Kings Street                                                 Dina lM i
         LEEDS LSI 2HL
                                                                        (M0K4>^       TOF/G03341/89
                                                                                      kb^ w m o ie a y
                                                          J

                                                                                      22 December 1998
•MR
                                                                                                                               it.


          Dear Sirs,

          RE* a DLINGTON — v - M DUCKENFIELD a n d MURRAY1                            >                  ...,
          LEEDS MAGISTRATES COURT 21 DECEMBER 1998                                              ■   ■ i;r v

          Thank you for you leiler of 18 December 1998.                                      v

          H ie Crown Prosecution Service is considering your requests, but a s u b s m i t i v e i ^ n «
          cannot be made before January 1999.

          Youis faithfully                                                                  -




          George R. Croston
          Prosecution Team Leader                                                                   f s ;




                                 Cram fm ta d m SmAx *W»tmg m A* mbe/tHS tf ji«*«8ir
                                                                                     .pf i i t t fmi| j .Mr.         11*11
>*«
                                                              W A L K E R
                                                              M p R R I S
                                                               Solicitors


               Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 2832500.
              Facsimile 0113 2459412. Document Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Em*a iafotf9walkermorrkco.uk
                                        Web: http://w w .w »lk ermorris.co.uk


 N Cadbury Esq                                                                              Our ref           RBM/BQW/MURRA
 Stipendiary Magistrate                                                                                       Y
 Leeds Magistrates’ Court
 DX 703016                                                                                  Your ref
 LEEDS 6

 BY FAX                                                                                     23 December 1998

 Dear Sir

 RE : ADUNGTON -V- MURRAY AND DUCKENFIELD

You are aware of our instructions on behalf of Mir Bernard Murray, one of the two
Defendants in this matter before the Court on 21 December. The proceedings stand
adjourned to 7 January.

Information had been given to us and the Solicitors for the Assistant Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire by the Crown Prosecution Service in the person of Mr George Croston.
He said that the Crown Prosecution Service already had a draft of the basis and reasons
upon which they had made their decision not to intervene and that he expected to be
able to provide that reply no later than close of business on 24 December.

Consequent upon that information we had made plans to meet with Leading Counsel on
24 December and again on 6 January. We then expected to be in a position to advise
the Court of either the lodgement of the application for Judicial Review nr a fairly
precise date when such lodgement would be made which was anticipated no liter than
a day within the week commencing the 11 January. This would, of course, have
significant bearing on any decision that the Court was asked to take at the h irin g on
7 January. We say this because die Learned Stipendiary Magistrate invited any
application for Judicial Review to also include an application to stay the Magistrates’
Court proceedings pending the detennination of the Judicial Review.

For our part we confirm that it is intended to include such application for a stay within
the application for the Judicial Review.                                         ,

The copy letter attached hereto from the Crown Prosecution Service is not only, ientirely
contrary to the advices given in the telephone conversation but it makes it certain that
even working with utmost expedition, no application for Judicial Review can be lodged
with the Court until some date in the week commencing 11 January.

Our submission is that no Order should be made for the disclosure of any documents
until such time as the Court has made an adjudication to stay the proceedings in the
Magistrates’ Court pending the determination of the Judicial Review application.

     A lu t c f th ep m n m ' iu m a it tpen v WftCBM a the     tdJvnu R tgmlmmi ly The Lmv Society im Ae eomdna i f mvegtmau hft'ilfli
We wonder iwhefter the Court in knowledge o f these events siace the last hearing ie d s ' *•
that the date for the parties legal representatives to come back before f ie .C to if t'^ iii ;
be varied to a date at the end of the week which commences on 11 January JJ99.

This letter is being written immediately before the Christmas break and the writer will
be away from the office during the period between Christmas and New Y ear and will
next be in the office late in the afternoon on 4 January.

Yours sincerely




R B Manning
PARTN ER




                                                                                 •fe- •
23. DEC. 1998 13:51                                                    i                                          NO. 3681

                                                                 W A L K E R
                                                                 M O R R I S
                                                                  Solicitors


                      Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 2832500.
                    Facsimile 0113 2459412. Document Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Email info0walkermorris.eo.uk
                                                      Web: http://irswwalkermorris.co.uk


                                  FA C SI MILE                      TRANSMISSION




           To                    Michael Shepherd                           F rom             Walker Morris RBM
           At                    Hammond Suddards                           D ate             23 December 1998
                                                                            Page 1 o f £> .
           Telephone                                                        M atter Number MUR.313-1




                                                   PLEASE SEE ATTACHED:-


       Letter




                                   Private and Confidential
       This facsimile may contain information that is privileged, confidential or otherwise
       protected from disclosure. It must not be used by, or its contents copied or
       disclosed to persons other than the addressee. If you have received this facsimile
       m error please notify us immediately by telephone at the number listed above and
       return it to us by mail. We will reimburse postage.

           A lia c f& tftm m ' n jm a iio p m » iAipKOM at (if        R c^U teJ by T ie Ltm Soaay in J x axu/»a    hom es.
23. DEC. 1998 13:51                                                                      i                                                      NO. 3681    P. 2/6

                                                                           W A L K E R
                                                                           M O R R I S
                                                                            Solicitors


                           Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 2832500.
                         Facsimile 0113 2459412. Document Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Email info^dkermonisxo.uk
                                                   Web; hltpy/'trarar.valfcermorrij.co.uk


        FAO M ichael Shepherd                                                                             Our ref               RBM/BQW/MURRA
        Hammond Suddards                                                                                                        Y
        DX 14347                                                                                          Your ref
        MANCHESTER
        BY FAX                                                                                            23 December 1998




        Dear Sir

       RE : HILLSBOROUGH

       I attach a copy o f the letter that I have received from HFSG addressed to this firm. I
       also enclose a copy o f my reply. It seems to me that whereas I was considering whether
       I should seek to persuade the Crown Prosecution Service not to mnh» disclosure, the first
       sentence o f the third paragraph o f the letter makes it clear that the necessity now arises
       and I shall write to them accordingly.

        As to the letter to the Police Authority I think that this is absolutely disgraceful. Of
       course, I have no reason to believe that the Police Authority have done anything other
       than act in accordance with proper procedures. I have never come across an instance
       where the Prosecutor has tried to argue that the Defendant should not be funded. The
       feet that negligence may have been admitted by the Chief Constable in no way negates
       the belief that “the Officers acted in good faith”. At no time did they act maliciously.
       They have, in hindsight, not done things that they may have wished they had done or
       vice versa, but that is hardly “acting in bad faith”. No doubt you will advise as to a
       suitable response. Frankly I think the Prosecutor had no locus standi in this regard
       which is no doubt the reason why in the last paragraph they talk about “supported by
       some South Yorkshire tax payers”

       Yours sincerely




      pa r tn er




           A t i l l c f* tp * r a u » ‘   iitp n u   U q K a lc n   A r     U tr tu .       by 7 b l w   S e d a ? in lb c m   k   'fm m tm v u h m a t.
   23. DEC. 1998 13:52                                                                     m issi         p.
                                              01512361936

/ ■ *



         s o p itfr
                            Hillsborough Family Support Group



   Walker Morris
   Solicitors
   King's Court
   12 King Street
   Leeds LSI 2H1

        December 1998


    Ref: RBM/BQW/MURRAY


    Pear Mr Manning,


    I enclose as a matter o f courtesy for your information, copy o f a letter I have today sent to the
    South Yorkshire Police Authority. It affects your position.

    Yesterday, counsel instructed by you told the magistrate that you had decided to apply for judicial
    review o f the decision o f the Crown Prosecution Service not to takeover theprosecutionofyour
    client and Mr Duckenfield. It was apparent that you, and Mr Duckenfield's lawyers, had taken
    dris decision even though you had not received what Mr Harrison described as “reason?* in the
 ^ o u n sel and solicitor meeting, and ‘‘policy’*before the magistrate.

   The effect o f announcing this concluded decision was to cause a deferment o f any question o f
   vnhmftwy diactoflyn* n f Ann wiMtim hy the Crown Prosecution Service and South Yorkshire Police.
   Undo-Order 53 RiJe 4 ofthe Rules oftheSupremeCourt.it is necessary that any application for
   judicial review should be filed ^promptly and in any event within three months”. The decision you
   have made to apply for judicial review causes delay in the matter o f disclosure. Since all die
   factors that have hnpdi^i you to announoe a concluded decision have been known to you for
   several months, there can, I suggest, be no reason why you should not be able to lodge your
   application fo r leave and supporting evidence by Friday 8* January 1999, however long a
   Christmas holiday you take. You will have all evidence you need, and the grounds for your
   application are obviously capable o f being expressed now.

   We have suggested in court that you are using delay as a weapon In the case, rather than as a
   genuine grievance- If you do not todge your application for judicial review fay g*January 1999,
   we give you notice that we shall otyect, in the absencc o f a compofliag explanation, to the grant
   o f leave and/or substantive relief on the ground that you did not apply “protnptiy*.

                                          .
                   Phone 0151236 1919 Fax 0151236193&E M id
                 1st Floor Central Bonding* 41 North John Street Lrm pool L2 O S
23. DEC. 1998 13:52                                     k
                                                                                         NO. 3681      P. 4/6
                                         01512361936


We also confirm that we w ishtobe heard in opposition to thr grant o f leave even though the
application be strictly expcrtr, and that, if you ask for the question o f leave to be detennined on
*he papery you brog this lecw to the attention o f the aiqglejudge. We aak you to provide nt with
a full copy o f your application when you lodge it with the Crown Office.


Yours Sincerely,



Ann Arlington
 HFSG                                                      Our ref    RBM/BQW/MURRay
 1st Floor
 Central Buildings                                         Your ref
 41 North John Street
 LIVERPOOL
 L2RR                                                      23 December 1998




 Dear Sirs

 ADLINGTON -V- DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

 We acknowledge your letter o f 22 December together with enclosure. We believe and
 are advised that the decision o f the Director o f Public Prosecutions not to t«1n> over
 the Prosecution is one which ought to be the subject o f an application for Judicial
 Review. Although on their behalf ihe Crown Prosecution Service have set up various
 policies and bases for the decision they have not definitively said anything more flian
 the decision o f which we are all aware. The Crown Prosecution Service acknowledge
 that they have to give reasons. They had, we were all told, a letter in dra|t form
 setting out the reasons and policies which led to the decision. We were told that this
 letter would be provided to us not later than close o f business on 24 December.

 You have no need to tell us what fee rules say about the time for an application for
Judicial Review of the criteria. We are not prepared to be dictated to by you as to the
position that you will take if an application has not been lodged by 8 January 1999.
Your heard M r Harrison say that on the assumption that A c letter from the Crown
Prosecution Service were received on 24 December, he would anticipate that the
application for Judicial Review would be able to lodged in the week commencing 11
January. We now know from the Crown Prosecution Service that “a substantive
response cannot be made before January 1999".

Since the application is “strictly ex-parte” that is the way in which we would expect
it to be dealt with.

We utterly reject your yet again stated assertion that we are seeking to delay as a
weapon in the case. This was rejected by Mr Manning at an earlier hearing. It was
very forcibly and utterly rejected by Mr Michael Harrison QC when this was
suggested by M r Alun Jones QC.




H:\WP\CRIM-Ma T\RBM\REVIBW\MURRAY51.LET\23 December 1998
                                                                                ,HF5 0
                                                                    23 D e c « ^ f i 9 I
                                                                                Page 2


 T ie invitation o f the Learned Stipendiary Magistrate was for us to include within the
 application o f Judicial Review, an application to stay the proceedings in the
 M agistrates’ Court pending determination of the Judicial Review application. We
 intend to include an application to stay within the application. It is an inevitable
 consequence that the matter o f disclosure whether voluntary or not is bound to be
 affected by the application to stay the proceedings in the Magistrates’ Court pending
 the determination o f the Judicial Review application. In the circumstances, we would
 suggest that in the interest of saving costs, the hearing of 7 January be vacated with
 liberty to restore it immediately on the determination o f the application for Judicial
 Review,

 Yours faithfully




 R B Manning
 PAMTOER




H:\WP\CRM-MAmBMWEVIEWttviURRAYSl.LEra3 Deowrtw 1998
                                                                                                   Trinity Court
                                                                                                   16 John Dalton Street
                                                                                                   Manchester M60 8HS
                                                                                                   Telephone (0161) 830 5000
                                                                                                   DX No. 14347 Manchester 1
                                                                                                   Fax (0161) 830 5001
                                                                                                   Michael.Shepherd@HammondSuddards.co.uk
 Walker Morris
 Solicitors
 DX 12051
 Leeds 24

 BY FAX:
 AND BY DX


 Our Ref:                                                           Your Ref:                                                      Date:
 MLS.JH                                                             RBM                                                            23 December 1998


 D ear Sirs

 H illsborough

 We acknowledge receipt o f both o f your letters o f 23 December, one timed at 13.12 and the other
 timed at 13.51. We have left a message at your office to deal with the confusion which may have
 arisen as you seem to think that we act for the South Yorkshire Police Authority in this matter. We
 do not. We have therefore not seen the letter which you refer to as having been written by HFSG to
 the South Yorkshire Police Authority and no copy o f it was enclosed with the facsimile o f your
 letter. I f you want us to see it then no doubt you will forward it.

The letter from Ann Adlington to you dated 22 December is not one really for us to comment on
save that she makes no comment in relation to the hearing fixed for 7 January which it seems to us
ought to be further adjourned as irrespective o f any decision which may be made by CPS or the
ACC in relation to whether the question o f voluntary disclosure should be postponed until after
resolution o f the Judicial Review proceedings there is insufficient time between now and 7 January
for CPS and the ACC to consider voluntary disclosure. We say this because CPS have still not
obtained guidance from London on the issue o f voluntary disclosure and we understand that that
guidance will at the earliest be available only by Christmas Eve. By that time both M r Croston and
the ACC will have departed for their Christmas holidays, not returning until 4 January.

Yours faithfully




H A M M O N D SUDDARDS
lmanning.dec23




O Slices also at:

2 Park Lane                       7 Devonshire Square               Pennine House                    Suite 688 Lloyd’s                     Avenue Louise 250
Leeds                             Cutlers Gardens                   39-45 Well Street                One Lime Street                       1050 Brussels
LS31ES                            London                            Bradford                         London                                Belgium
Telephone (0113) 284 7000         EC2M 4YH                          BD1 5NU                          EC3M 7HA                              Telephone (00) 32 2 627 7676
Fax (0113)284 7001                Telephone (0171) 655 1000         Telephone (01274) 734700         Telephone (0171) 327 3388/3399        Fax (00) 32 2 627 7686
                                  Fax(0171)655 1001                 Fax (01274) 307239               F a x (0171)621 1217

A list of Partners can be viewed at the above address. This firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct o f investment business.
                                                                                                    Trinity Court
                                                                                                    16 John Dalton Street
                                                                                                    Manchester M60 8HS
                                                                                                    Telephone (0161) 830 5000
                                                                                                    DX No. 14347 Manchester 1
                                                                                                    Fax (0161) 830 5001
                                                                                                    MichaeI.Shepherd@HammondSuddards.co.uk
 G R Croston Esq
 Crown Prosecution Service
 Central Casework
 United House
 Y ork Y O l 9PQ

 BY F A X :_____
 AND BY POST


 Our Ref:                                                            Your Ref:                                                      Date:
 M LS.JH                                                             YBF/3341/89                                                    23 December 1998


 Dear Sir

 A dlington -v- Dukenfield and M urray

 Further to your letter o f 23 December I am able to confirm that I have discussed this letter with the
 Assistant Chief Constable and because o f the holiday period when both he and his legal advisers are
 absent on holiday he will not be able to give any attention to this matter until after 4 January 1999
 which is his first day back in the office. We understand that you yourself are away until that date in
 any event. We are sure that you will appreciate that the Assistant Chief Constable has his normal
 police workload to deal with and inevitably he will be very busy immediately upon his return. He
 will need to take advice in relation to these matters both from ourselves and from the Force
 Solicitor.

It has been confirmed to us that the Defendants in these proceedings will be making an application
for Judicial Review. We understand that they will also make an application for the proceedings
before the Leeds Stipendiary Magistrate to be stayed. We understand that you are still awaiting
guidance from London in relation to whether or not CPS will give disclosure in any event but it may
be helpful to you to know that the Assistant Chief Constable’s view is that any question o f voluntary
disclosure should be postponed until the resolution o f the Judicial Review proceedings.

No doubt if you receive any further guidance from London before close o f business on Christmas
Eve you will let us know and otherwise we will be in contact with you again about these matters
during January.

Kindly note that until 12.00 noon on Thursday 24 December this matter is being dealt with by Mr
Shepherd at our Manchester Office. The office closes at 12.00 noon on 24 December and the matter


O ffices also at:

2 Park Lane                       7 Devonshire Square               Pennine House                     Suite 688 Lloyd’s                     Avenue Louise 250
Leeds                            Cutlers Gardens                    39-45 Well Street                 One Lime Street                       1050 Brussels
LS3 1ES                          London                             Bradford                          London                                Belgium
Telephone (0113) 284 7000         EC2M 4YH                          BDI 5NU                           EC3M 7HA                              Telephone (00) 32 2 627 7676
Fax (0113) 284 7001              Telephone (0171) 655 1000          Telephone (01274) 734700          Telephone (0171) 327 3388/3399        Fax (00) 32 2 627 7686
                                 Fax (0171) 655 1001                Fax (01274) 307239                Fax (0171)621 1217

A list o f Partners can be viewed at the above address. This firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct o f investment business.
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                23 December 1998
                                                                                  G R Croston Esq
                                                                         Crown Prosecution Service


will be dealt with when the office re-opens by Mr Peter M etcalf from our Leeds Office.

Yours faithfully




HAM M OND SUDDARDS
lcroston.dec23
13. DEC.* 1 998 17:05                                                                     i                                                 NO. 3723       P.
                                                                           W A L K E R
                                                                           M O R R I S
                                                                             S o l i c i t o rs



                     Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 2832500.
                    Facsimile 0113 2459412. Document Exchange 12054 Leeds 24. Email infoffrwalkermorri5.co.uk
                                              Web: http://www.walkerniorris.co.uk


                                       FACSIM ILE                                  T R A N SM ISSIO N




            To                         Michael Shepherd                                       From              Walker M oms RBM
            At                         Hammond Suddards                                       Date              23 December 1998

            Fax                        I                                                      Page 1 of 9
            T elephone                                                                        M atter N um ber MUR.313-1




                                                             PLEASE SEE ATTACHED:-



        Letter




                                       P rivate and C onfidential
          This facsimile may contain information that is privileged, confidential or otherwise
          protected from disclosure. It must not be used by, or its contents copied or
          disclosed to persons other than the addressee. If you have received this facsimile
          in error please notify us immediately by telephone at the num ber listed above and
          return it to us by mail. We will reimburse postage.

              A list o f die pm y~n‘   tw o w j   it open a itupccdon at     eboix tJJn x. X cpJm d by T belM i Sooty m Ac am bict o fin va m m t hmneu.
23. DEC..1998 17:05                                                                                                                            NO. 3723      P. 2/9

                                                                    W A L K E R
                                                                    M O R R I S
                                                                         Solicitors


                     Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL- Telephone 0113 2832500.
                    Facsimile 0113 2459412. Document Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Email info@walkermorris.co.uk
                                              Web: hccp://www.walkenn0fris.c0 .uk


       Mr Shepherd                                                                                        Our ref             RBM/BQW/MURRA
       Hammond Suddards                                                                                                       Y
       DX 14347
                                                                                                         Your ref
       MANCHESTER

       BY FAX                                                                                            23 December 1998



       Dear Sir

       R E : HILLSBOROUGH

       We apologise for the confusion and note that you are instructed by the Chief Constable
       o f South Yorkshire, Since you had not therefore had sight o f the letter from HFSG to
       the South Yorkshire Police Authority a copy is attached,

       Yours faithfully




       R B Manning
       PARTNER
       Enc




           A lia o f the p a n tleu ' fum es is open to iw pcoicn « she Jom e o d jitx , R tgkhud by The L*v> Society in ihe conduct o f m e m n i bm nos.
C
CV
  .DEC. 1998 17:05
 O
                                                                                            NO. 3723   P
  J                                         uisujbiyjt)




 V         sappcS5
                             Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                                                                strppd^




      W J Wilkinson BA(Econ) CPFA
      Clerk and Treasiirer
      South Yorkshire Police Authority
      P O Box 37
      Regent Srreet
      Barnsley
      South Yorkshire S70 2PQ

      22 December 1098

      Dear Sir


      Adlimtton v Murray: Ad'liniEton v Duckenfield



      I-       I am the prosecutor in the above case, in which the defendants are charged before the
               Leeds Magistrates Court with serious offences arising out o f the disaster at the
               Hillsborough Football Ground in April 1980. I write on the advice o f leading counsel,
               as solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support Group to express concern about the
               decision to fund the defence o f these two men. As you know, the defendants were
               senior police officers on duty at the ground when the disaster occurred. Both are
               charged with manslaughter- o f two representative victims, and with misfeasance. Mr
               Duckenfield is also charged with attempting to pervert the course o f justice.

              It has recently been admitted publicly by Mr Ian Daines. Assistant Chief Constable,
              that the South Yorkshire Police Authority has agreed co fund the defence o f these two
              men, We have suspected this for some time. The purpose o f this letter is to argue that
              the decision to provide finance appears to have been made irrationally and unlawfully.

      ’•     • We refer to the following documents, all o f which are in your possession.

               A.    The Home Office Circular o f 4,fc December 1987 No .77/87
               B.    The Home Office Circular o f 17* February 1998 HOC 4/1998
       x     ' C.    Minute 38 o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting o f 1st August
                      1997
              £>.    Minute 62 o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting of 19th September

                                                     -   1- ___

                  Phone 0151 736 191^. Fax 01512361936.EM i3iafo@ iil9g.org
                 1a floor Central Bofldlngs 41 Nortfa'Mv Street liverpool L2 6RR
23. DEC..1998 17:05                                                                    NO. 3723     P. 4/9
                                      01512361936

                      1997.
             E.       Minute 151 o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting o f 27th February
                      1^08/
             F.       Minute 174 o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting o f 24th April

             0.       T he letter o f 25* September 1998 from Maureen Oades to me.
             H.       Minute 86 of the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting o f 30th October
                      I ^>8.
            I         The South Yorkshire Police Authority Scheme of Delegation.
            J         A document headed “Standing Orders. Interpretation. Issued January 1996"
                      on the headed paper o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority.

            The Home Office Circular No 77/87. suggests that, in the case of a private
            prosecution, where a police officer has been acquitted and has not been awarded all his
            costs, the police authority may make up the difference. It also suggests that, in the
            ease o f a private prosecution, the authority should provide or fund legal advice and/or
            representation if the authority is “satisfied" that the officer has acted “in good faith”
            and has cxercised his judgment "reasonably”.

           The Home Office Circular o f 17"1February 1998, 4/1998, replaces with immediate
           effect the 1987 circular, and suggests that under the very wide terms o f section 111(1)
           o f the Local Government Act 1972, “it could be argued" that payment o f money to
           “officers (either former or serving) involved in criminal proceedings would in some
           wny facilitate or be conducive to a police authority's broad functions." The Circular
           emphasises that a police authority must take its own advice. It is noticeable that the
           “guidance"' has been prepared after consultation with “ACPO”. the Superintendents
           Association, the Police Federation, and thj Association of Police Authorities; it does
           not purporr to be an independent legal opinion.

           This C irculnr seems to have coincided almost exactly with the report o f the “Scrutiny"
           o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in February o f this year. I note that on 27th Februaiy this
           year, your authority agreed to authorise the Clerk and Treasurer to consider
           applications from officers, serving or retired, for financial assistance in relation to
           possible private prosecutions arising out o f the “Scrutiny*.

           For a reason which is not clear, the Resolution was taken under the replaced 1987
          Circular. There is therefore no lawful authority to validate the decision taken on that
          day. The assertion, recorded in the minutes, that the members o f the Authority •
          “remain o f the opinionthat the officers acted in good faith"7s extraordinary. The
          Enquiry o f Lord Justice Taylor o f 1989 found that there had been negligence, and
          blamed the two defendants (among other police officers). The failure o f these two to
          seal o ff the tunnel to the central pens at the Leppings Cane" end o f the ground was a
          “blunder o f the first magnitude", and the immediate cause ofHeath. The then Chief
          Constable or’ South Yorkshire Police, uneqflfvocably accepted these findings.

          Further. Lord Taylor found, at page 16. paragraph 98 o f his Interim Report that Mr
          Duckenfidd misled Graliam Kelly and GfefriCirton o f the FA and Graham Mackrell o f

                                                  -2-
        23. DEC. 1998 17:05                                                  *                       NO. 3723     P. 5/9
                             [0!512<>Oiy.io                       « - - -                                           , a . uu
                                                         01512361936


/         '                 Sheffield Wednesday, at a.time when he knew there were fatalities (and that there
                            would therefore be an inquest and no doubt other formal inquiries). Duckenfield
                            indicated that a gate had beat forced and there had been an inrush o f supporters, and
                            pointed out to them the (ate allegedly forced on the screen.

                  9.        in 1998. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith upheld these findings after, his “Scrutiny” referring
                            scathingly 10 Duckenfield's “disgraceful lie**.

                  10.       In July 1991. rhe Police Complaints Authority directed that charges o f neglect o f duty
                            be preferred against both men. These charges were never determined because the
                            Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire retired Mr Duckenfield on “health grounds", and
                            it was thought to be unfair to try Mr Murray,

                  11.       It is impossible in the light o f this history to understand how your authority could have
                           been satisfied in February 1998 that “the officers had acted in good faith"; and also
                           impossible to understand how the other condition in the 1987 Circular, namely, that
    ^                      the officers had exercised their judgment reasonably, could be thought to have been
                           satisfied. The minutes show that this condition was not even considered.

              7/ic IVVff Circular             ----------------------------       i
                                                                                                         ■*-
                                                                                          • •   +

                  12.      The 1998 Circular was not appIk<L_lfit had been, it would have.become clear in my
                            view that its terms were not met. and thatjhere was no lawftil authority for the
                            provision o f tax-payers' money in this w a y to fond the defence in this case. There is
                           no statutory authority. There is a limited power in relation to civil proceedings to pay
                           damages and costs; but no power evenjn civil proceedings.to fund an action brought
                           against an individual officer. Section 88 of the Police Act 1996 deals with "Liability
                           for wrongful acts o f constables", and allows for the provision o f costs incurred and not
                           recovered.

              1-V          Parliament has not provided for the payments o f any fines incurred by constables; or
                           for reimbursement o f costs incurred and not recovered. To have done so would have
                           been surprising, since criminal liability is*iudividual and personal. You will note that
                           the Circular indicated at the highest that “it could be argued" that to allow the payment
                           to be made to officers, (either former or retired) involved in criminal proceedings
                           would 'in some Way facilitate or be conducive to a police authority’s broad functions.
                           For example, failure to provide financial assistance could Adversely affect the morale of
                           the force if officers had to meet their costs after acquittal,"

              I           This is legal nonsense. The case law indicates that section 111(1) o f the 1972 Act
                          cannot be used in this way. The practice in relation to costs incurred by an acquitted
                          person is set out in the Practice DiwctiotL& j& ts in Criminal P rucecJin^) ,91 Cr.
                          App.R.8 which provides that a person acquitted after trial bn indictment should
                          normally have his costs paid out o f central funds except where the defendant has
                        * brought suspicion upon himself andlias misled the prosecution into thinking the case
                          against him is stronger than it is; or where he has been acquitted on a meritless
                          technicality. How can it be said that police morale woulii suffer if the officers o f a

                                                                         -3-
23. DEC.. 1998 17:06                                          4                                  NO. 3723     P. 6/9
                                               uioi^joiajo

                    force heard that one o f its members had been refused its costs on one o f the reasnmihf*
                    grounds set out in this direction?                                             reasonable
                                        -                                               i

          15.
                    In any event the South Yorkshire Police Authority seems to have gone wav bevnnH
                    this highly dubious guidance in the 1998 Circular and authorised. L FebruarvT ^s
                    a M lS r "   r SS'StanCe 16 bC Siven by lhe C,erk and Treaswer in respect o f
                    applications from serving or retired officers for potential and future criminal
                    proceedings, in which, o f course, a defendant could be
                    instructed on this basis able to advise that a defendant plead guHty?)


        / h'/cyiio'o/t and hlxdnsion o f the public

                            ? * * * ]leltef 10 me 0f25,k SePte«nber 1998 says that the public were
                   manef          1 ‘^          1,16 T * " 5 whw this matter wa3       with as it was a
                   prosecution of an any “ ? ?            In connect,on ^ lhe prevention, investigation or
                   prosecunon of any crime/ It seems to have been the basis for granting the f a c ia l
                   assistance that there was no crime at all. and that the officers had acted in good faith
                  In any event it is submitted that paragraph 14 of Schedule 12A to the Local
                  S v T tT ir"* Act * ^2,'refers to prosecutions by South Yorkshire Police and nor by a
                  private prosecutor against two former police officers.

        I?         Funherrnort I do not understand how such a decision, even if it could be lawfully
                  made, could be delegated to the Clerk and Triajffier. The Authority resolution of 27
                             T PUrP°-. ! 1° ddeSa“ - abs°luttl* 1116           ma^'ng process^ t
                               S             “ °"e and " * “ “                         F ~ to the
                  r llZ      i j            WaS a JOinf repon of the CIerk and Treasurer and the Chief
                  Constable. I understanu that the Clerk and Treasurer is not a Solicitor. ^ is imDlicit in
                 L T e«al'oroc "H r* 5'2‘5’ th al.any ^ d e r a t i o n o f applications for financial assistance
                 would thiK H               7°      U,iaSrtaaren °y a Person who is legally qualified and
                 would thus understand the danger of granting open-ended financial provision.

    Some features o f the current criminalproceet/ingx

    IS,          You also s u r e s t in that letter that this relegation "was not viewed as a delegation
                AssistantCh' T r " d              nMmths” Tt“'s        have     because Mr tfcines
                ™ r S h k l-                   ,he SoU,h Yorkshire Poli“ .         asserted earlier this
                he i^ M h -                  ny        P /o ^ 'io n s would “&H atthe first hurdle". Did
                he repfttt (his a< the meeting of27**elSriHry? We do not know Wi,a< applications have
                bJn              M U^yand Duckenfie[d- but we assume, for reasons that appear
                  ow. that authority has been given for anyjudicial review proceedings of the CPS
                old
                old Istyle
                        t committal
                           « f° d!r proceedings,
                                      tinU!.!he ~ as well
                                                      3ndas at'trial.                c o u n X appeal

    9        ?.nJ 8* P^embci- 1998. the Crown Prosecution Service, after five months of carefol
             study, rejected the applications of the defendants to take over and discontinue the
23. DEC, 1998 1 7:06                                                                        NO. 3723     P. 7/9
                                         01512361936


                 prosecutions, ft is clear that the criminal proceedings are now likely to be protracted
                 complex and very expensive.                                                          ea*




                 The prosecutions are straightforward. We enclose for your guidance a copy o f the
                informations presented to the Leeds Magistrates Court last July on the basis o f which
                Ihe summonses were issued. You will see that the allegations are based upon the
                findings o f the Taylor Enquiry in 1989. supported by evidence that has come to the
                Family Suppo^ Group ,n 1997-98. Negligence has been admitted again and again by
                the Chief Constable in court proceedings. It has never been disputed that the acts
                alleged agamsr the defendants were the acts o f negligence that caused the deaths of the
                % people.

      21 .       Before the decision o f the Crown Prosecution Service was announced on IS"*
                December, the solicitor for Mr Murray indicated that it was highly likely that an
                adverse decision ot the CPS would be challenged by judicial review proceedings. At
                the hearing o f the case before the Leeds Magistrates Court on 21“ December it was
               made clear by leading and junior counsel for Mr Murray, in the presence of his
               solicitor. Mr Manning, and by junior counsel for Mr Duckenfield. that a decision haH
               already been made to seek judicial review ofthe CPS decision. The magistrate was
               told this by counsel for the defendants when he was dealing with the questions of
               timetable and voluntary disclosure o f documents.

              However. i( was also made clear, although a concluded decision had been made to
              apply for judicial review, that the defendants had asked the CPS for their “reasons”-
              alternatively i h d r > l i c y ' behind the decision, and that those reasons of policy might
              be received by 2'J* December.

               No legally-aided lawyers could proceed in this way. Professional obligations exist
              which require that a lawyer musr assess the prospects o f success before committing
              nard-pressed public funds to an expensive application f o r judicial review. I am advised
              by leading counsel rhat-the prospects o f quashing the CPS decision in such proceedings
              are small on the following, among other, grounds. The CPS have told us all what
              criteria ihey were applying; the defendants argued that the CPS were in a good
             position to assess the public interest involved in the prosecution: the CPS, Police
             Complaints Authority and Coroner were air misled by a cover-up by the South
             Yorkshire police, the magnitude o f which has become apparent only after the Home
             ottice ordered ihe release ot documents.thjs year; and the defendants have alternative
             remedies in :he Magistrates* court.
   24.
             The facr r!iat the court was assured that applications for judicial review would be made
             suggests that the South Yorkshire Police Authority has already agreed, before the CPS
             decision, to fond these applications, irrespective o f their merits. Counsel would not
             have told the court that the applications would be made, if funding was not in place
             Neither would they have told counsel for South Yoricshire Police o f their decision to
             apply to the High Court: they knew that the fact o f impending applications wa*

                                                     -S - '
23. DEC. .1998 17:07                                           *                               NO. 3723       P. 8/9
                                              01512361936


                     ro i^ . o d«d»ioTO,h.t the South Votfahire police and the CPS were nak,„s th,t
                     day abou t voluntary disclosure to the prosecution o f documents in their DosseSlon i,
                                              boadi“ decidcd , 0 * * " *
                     becaucc>o f the assurance from counsel that Judicial review applications would be
                     lodged r i n the first two weeks o f January") on behalf o f both defendants.
                                               *.                                    v


         25          J 1’? ? , 0SeCUti°n 3l!d the CourT hive also feeen told that both defendants have estimated
                    aside f ^         I aL C3St ™U beftneeded « committal proceedings. The court has set
                    aMde four weeks b a n n in g 19* April 1999, and the time was chose to accord with the
                    convenience o f leading counsel for the defence. The court has been told that two
                    leading counsel will appear, one for each defendant. No doubt two juniors will also
                               r ° f,SOl,Cltr  Lwdl,W            for M r Murray has indicated that there
                  win d so be an abuse of process application to the magistrate to stay the proceeding
                  He intends to aryue that this should be heard on a different occasion from the
                  committal, and before it. I suspect that the defendants will seek leave to move for
                 judicial review o f any adverse decision upon this issue. This is hardly surprising as
                 your Authority does not appear to have placed any restriction as to the amount or
                 duration of the financial assistance to the defendants.

       26                     nY k T Sati T nSCl      lhe Prosecutl°n h4S rstrong prima facie case on
                 the charges alleged; and that an abuse o f process application is likely to fail We have
                                   j ,,Iourr , s5es? orrwhich has c° me r° °s in * • ^
                that the South Yorkshire Police force has_coyered up facts which are embarrassing as
                to the nature and extent o f its admitted negligence, and that the CPS. Coroner and
                  once Complaints Authority, infer ii/hk were misled when they were pursuing their
                various enquiries between 1989 and 1992. I shall willingly help you fa th e r about this
                V » ll i      ,




       -7.     Of| course, tne trial o f this matter could take many months. From all these facts, you
               will see that ihe exposure o f the South Yorkshire taxpayer (in relation to its own costs.
               i t n r rl!e m u ” o f t^ \ 0rd?r o f " * n s ° f P°unds- I should make it clear that neither
               i nor the Hillsborough Family Support Group, on whose behalf 1 act. wish in any way
                o      deprive either defendant o f the means to conduct a proper defence to these charges
                     S^ u / U/ y apJ >ly‘ l,ke any°ne else- for leSal w'd if they are unable to fund the
                     ° the de^encc themselves. In that event they would be subject to the usual
               restramrs and discipiines ofthe legal aid system. I believe that the defence, with access
              to puolic tunds from your authority, are seeking at present to inflict unnecessary
              expenses upon us by recourse to every possible type o f legal hearing, in the knowledge
              mat we do not have such access, and are instead dependent on private donations and
              fund-raising events. Neither defendant lives in South Yorkshire, but the South
              defendantSP° IlCe ^       8                ° fitS own in the dijicharSe or acquittal of these

  1'tmtiuxiuH
   \



  28-         The decisions taken pursuant to the Resolutions ofthe Sciith Yorkshire Police

                                                         -6-
                                                     k   .                            NO. 3723    P. 9/9
23. DEC, 1998 17:07
                                      uidujdiwd



              Authority appear, on the information available to. me, to be unlawful. Irrational, ultra
              vires and proccdurally improper on various grounds. We have an interest, as do you
              and South Yorkshire taxpayers, in ensuring that public money is not wasted or spent
              wrongly in the course o f this criminal litigation. I look forward to your reply. You
              will appreciate that we are obviously considering an application for judicial review
              ourselves, supported by some South Yorkshire taxpayers, and an approach to the
              District Auditor, We invite you to reply by the 15* January 1999.


       Yours sincerely




       Ann Adlinjjton
       Solicitor




                                                         -7-
                ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD & MURRAY



                 OUTLINE SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF
                    ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE OF
                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE



1.    South Yorkshire Police seek only to do what is right and proper with
regard to this application.     Nevertheless, they have a number of concerns
about the proposed witness summons. They can be summarised as follows :


(a)   whether it is appropriate for the Court to issue the summons which is
sought;


(b)    there has been no time properly to consider voluntary disclosure ;


(c)   the cost involved.


IS IT APPROPRIATE TO ISSUE A SUMMONS :


2.    Pursuant to sections 97 and 97A of the Magistrates Courts Act 1980, the
Court must be satisfied that:


(a)   the Assistant Chief Constable is able to produce “a document or other
exhibit likely to be material evidence” for the purposes of committal
proceedings ;


(b)   that the Assistant Chief Constable will not voluntarily produce the
document.


3.    In order to determine whether a document is likely to be material
evidence, the Informant must show that each document sought is both relevant
and admissible. (See Reg v Greenwich Juvenile Court ex p Greenwich LBC
[1977] 76 LGR 99 and R v Reading Justices ex parte Berkshire CC [1996] 1 Cr
App Rep 239 and H(L) [1997] 1 Cr App R 176.) Determining whether a
document is relevant involves relating the document to specific issues in the
case.     Thus the issues in the case must have been isolated before it is
appropriate to issue a summons. Each document must also be shown to be
admissible in evidence. Documents desired merely for cross-examination or
to identify a relevant line of inquiry or challenge, cannot be obtained by this
route.


4.       It is clear from the above requirements that an informant cannot use
section 97 or 97A of the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 to obtain discovery to
found a prosecution.


5.       Further, it is said that there is no power o f discovery in a magistrates’
court and section 97 cannot be used for such purpose (R v Sheffield Justices ex
p Wriglev [1985] RTR 78 and R v Skegness Magistrates’ Court ex p Cardv
[1985] RTR 49).


VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE


6.       The Force have had no time within which to consider voluntary
disclosure.


COSTS


7.       There are vast quantities of documentation sought, who is to pay for the
cost of the work to be undertaken in dealing with it all ?
                         In R e David Duckenfield and B ernard M urray




                             Submissions as to Issue o f Summonses




The inform ant

1      Ann Adlington is solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support G roup, which supports
       this application. The G roup’s members are relatives o f victims o f the Hillsborough
       disaster in April 1989.


The issue o f sum m onses.

2      A m agistrates’ court has jurisdiction over any indictable crime com m itted in England
       and W ales by virtue o f section 2 o f the M agistrates Courts A ct 1980,

3      The Informant applied to the South Sefton M agistrates C ourt for summonses identical
       to those now sought. Those summonses w ere issued on 26th June 1998. Solicitors for
       M r Duckenfield and M r M urray objected that under section 1 o f the M agistrates Court
        1980 there w as no pow er in a justice in M erseyside to issue a summons. There
       followed correspondence between the informant, the court and the Clerk which is
        attached as A nnex I. The summonses were withdraw n by consent for the reasons set
        out in the letters.

4      The Informant appeared, together w ith leading counsel, before the Chairman o f the
       Bench at South Sefton and the Clerk to the Justices when the summonses were
       granted. The same annexes w ere presented to the justice as are attached to this
       application, except A nnex I. These submissions are a slightly expanded and modified
       version o f those presented at South Sefton.

5      The decision has been made to lay informations before this court because M r Murray
       lives in Pontefract, in the county o f W est Yorkshire, and a justice in Leeds has
       jurisdiction to issue the summonses, on any view, by virtue o f section 1 (2) (c) o fth e
       Act, because M r M urray resides in his “area” . The “area” to which the section applies
       is by virtue o f section 1 (8) a ’’commission area” . This phrase has the meaning, by
       virtue o f section 150 o f the Act, as amended, given by section 1 o f the Justice o fth e
       Peace Act 1997, namely “every metropolitan county” and “every retained county” .
       Leeds and Pontefract are therefore in the same “area” .

6        A justice therefore has jurisdiction to issue a summons to M r Duckenfield, who lives
        in B ournem outh, by virtue o f section (1) (2) (b). It is subm itted that it would be
        “expedient” to proceed against M r Duckenfield in Leeds, rather than commencing
        separate proceedings against him in Dorset.
7     Leeds has been selected by the Informant because it one o f the nearest convenient
      locations for people travelling from Liverpool which is unlikely to be the subject o f a
      technical jurisdictional challenge.

8     The justice is therefore invited to consider first the summons against M r Murray, and,
      if it is granted, to consider the summons against M r Duckenfield.

The reasons fo r the laying o f inform ations

9     David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray, then respectively a C hief Superintendent and
      a Superintendent in the South Yorkshire Police Force, w ere on duty in the control box
      at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, on 15* April 1989, w hen a semi-final o fth e F.A.
      cup w as to be played betw een Liverpool and N ottingham Forest football clubs.
      Attached are chapters 1 to 5, 9 to 11, and 16 o f the Taylor R eport. The facts set out
      therein form the basis o f the allegations against the tw o potential defendants. (Annex
      A)

10    O ther sections o f the Taylor report make other criticisms o f the police in general, and
       o f other bodies.

11    Lord Taylor said at paragraph 265 o f his report;

               “The immediate cause o f the gross overcrowding and hence the disaster was
               the failure, when G ate C was opened, to cut o ff access to the central pens
               which w ere already overfull.”

12    The evidence o f forensic pathologists called at th e mini inquests in 1990 w as that in
       almost all cases death resulted rapidly from unconsciousness that was caused by the
       crushing that followed the inrush o f spectators, in full view o f the tw o men, following
       the order to open the gates, and a failure to divert the incoming spectators from pens 3
       and 4.

13    M r Duckenfield w as in overall charge, and primarily responsible for the decisions and
      lack o f decisions which led to the deaths. M r M urray shares in this responsibility. H e
      knew the ground much better. H e had been in an im portant position o f responsibility
      at the identical semi-final the year before, when the Liverpool supporters w ere also at
      the Leppings Lane end o f the ground. A similar concentration o f supporters in the
      pens 3 and 4 had occurred, as w as clear to him, but crushing had been avoided by the
      simple expedient o f diverting the incoming supporters from the tunnel which led to
      those overcrow ded pens.

14    In 1989, M r Duckenfield w as entitled to call on M r M urray’s experience. M r Murray,
       like M r Duckenfield, failed, in breach o f his duty, to take, o r to demand, o r to
       recommend, the obvious steps to avoid the obvious dangers.
The right to bring a private prosecution

15      This right w as preserved specifically by section 6 o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act
        1985. The provision w as reviewed in R v. Bow Street M agistrates Court, ex pa rte
        South C oast Shipping C om pany (1993) 96 Cr. App. R. 405 (A nnex B ).

M anslaughter

16      It is alleged that the actions and omissions o f the tw o w ere a substantial cause o f
         death; that they ow ed the deceased a duty o f care and w ere neg lig en t; and that a jury
         is entitled to find that the negligence w as o f such a gravity as to amount to a crime
         within the principle in i? v. A dom ako [1995] 1 A.C. 181.

                 “The essence o fth e m atter which is supremely a jury question, is w hether
                 having regard to the risk o f death involved the conduct o f the defendant was so
                 bad in all the circumstances as to amount in their judgm ent to a criminal act or
                 omission.” [1995] 1 A.C. 187E. (Annex C)

17      This test w as not thought to be correct in 1990 when the D PP decided not to
         prosecute any individual in relation to the disaster. The prevailing legal view w as that
         involuntary manslaughter o f this kind involved the complicated concept o f recklessness
         deriving from statutes setting out crimes o f causing death by reckless driving and o f
         criminal damage.

 18     In Adom ako, the H ouse o f Lords did not change the law. It declared that gross
         negligence rather than recklessness w as and is the basis o f the crime. That approach
         governs the facts o f this case.

 19     Tw o representative victims have been selected for the manslaughter allegations.

 M isfeasance in p u b lic office

 20     The same facts will be put forward to support allegations o f this offence, the
         ingredients o f which are set out in R v. D ytham (1979) 69 Cr. App. R. 387 (A nnex D).
         P ro o f that gross negligence w as a substantial cause o f death is not a necessary element
         o f the offence.

 D oing a cts tending a n d intending to pervert the course o fp u b lic ju stice.

 21       This allegation against M r Duckenfield alone refers to the allegation that he lied about
         the cause o fth e disaster, shortly afterwards, when he must have realised that inquests
         and/or other legal proceedings, would flow from the tragedy. H e falsely and
         deceitfully alleged that the gates had been broken by the supporters. (Taylor,
         paragraph 98)

 22       The offence is very wide. It consists in



                                                     3
           “The doing o f some act which has a tendency and is intended to pervert the
           administration o f public justice”

           R v. Vreones [1891] Q.B. 360, 369, (Annex E ) and it includes;

           “conduct which relates to judicial proceedings, civil or criminal, w hether or not
           they have yet been instituted but are within the contem plation o f the w rong­
           doer w hose conduct w as designed to affect the outcom e o f them. That
           conduct includes giving false information to the police w ith the object o f
           among other things putting the police on a false trail.”

           R v. Selvage and M organ (1982) 73 Cr. App. R. 333 (A nnex F)


history o f the case


   This is set out in the chronology, A nnex G . Verdicts o f accidental death w ere
   recorded by the jury in 1991, and w ere not overturned by the High C ourt in 1993. The
   verdicts are, however, no bar to the bringing o f criminal proceedings, and it is the
   contention o f th e Hillsborough Family Support Group that the inquest proceedings
   w ere deeply flawed. N o prosecutions o f any kind have been instituted.

   A “Scrutiny” into the new evidence which the Group suggests became available after
   the judicial review proceedings w as conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith for the
   Home Secretary in 1997-8. H e upheld the findings o f Taylor LJ, but found no grounds
   for referring the m atter to a fresh inquiry, for quashing the inquest verdicts, o r for
   requesting the D irector o f Public Prosecutions to re-open the investigation.

   A summary o f the “Scrutiny” is to be found in H ansard\ for the 18th February 1998
   (A nnex H ). The facts as set out in that report show why the institution o f proceedings
   is justified. A full copy o f the report o f Lord Justice Taylor and the “Scrutiny” o f Lord
   Justice Stuart-Sm ith will be supplied on request.

  Preparations for the committal bundle are well advanced. Statem ents o f dozens o f
  witnesses are available now, although the prosecutor does not yet have the originals.
  Reliance will be placed on admissions o f basic facts m ade by the tw o proposed
  defendants in evidence to the Taylor enquiry and the inquest. It is not thought that the
  justice will consider it appropriate at this stage to consider the evidence, but these
  copy statements and transcripts o f evidence will be supplied if requested.
The timing of the prosecution


27    It is submitted that this is not a factor in the decision w hether to issue summonses.
      How ever, it is pointed out here that although the prosecutor has had the transcripts o f
       evidence given to the Taylor Enquiry and to the inquest, the majority o f the eye­
      witnesses now relied on w ere not know n to the prosecutor, because they had not given
       evidence at those earlier enquiries. These statements have been disclosed to the Group
       in the last year, in the course o f the “Scrutiny” .

28    Further, the prosecutor believes, and has grounds for this belief, that the D irector o f
      Public Prosecutions was given selective and incomplete accounts o f the disaster in
       1990, to the advantage o f the South Y orkshire Police, when the decision was taken
      not to prosecute anyone in connection w ith the disaster. This m atter is at present the
      subject o f further study.




3 Raymond Buildings
Gray’s Inn
London WC1


10 July 1998                                                          Alun Jones QC
C hronology o f case

15th April 1989        The day o f the disaster

17th April 1989        L ord Justice Taylor appointed to conduct enquiry. Evidence taken in
                       M ay and June.

4th August 1989        Publication o f Taylor interim report.

15th December 1989     Implicit admission by solicitors on behalf o f C hief Constable o f South
                       Y orkshire Police o f negligence

18th April 1990        “Mini” inquests held

6th August 1990        Tw o leading counsel apparently advised D PP not to prosecute
                       (Opinions not available).

19th November 1990     Inquests resume before a jury.

29th M arch 1991       Jury returns accidental death by majority o f 9 to 2.

11th July 1991         Police Complaints Authority direct disciplinary proceedings against
                       Duckenfield and M urray for neglect o f duty.

November 1991          D uckenfield retired from police on grounds o f ill-health. Disciplinary
                       proceedings abandoned thereafter against both men.

April 1992             H illsborough families request A ttorney-General to apply for fresh
                       inquests.

August 1992            Attorney-G eneral declines to apply.

April 1993             Six bereaved families w ere granted leave to m ove for Judicial Review
                       o f inquest verdicts.

5th November 1993      Application for judicial review dismissed.

5th December 1996      G ranada Television broadcast “H illsborough ” and presented new
                       evidence.

30th June 1997         Secretary o f State for the H om e D epartm ent appointed Lord Justice
                       Stuart-Sm ith to conduct a “scrutiny” into the fresh evidence.

February 1998          L ord Justice Stuart-Sm ith reported.
1085                                                       18 FEBRUARY 1998                         Hillsborough                        1086

                            Hillsborough                                   The main causes of the disaster have long been clear.
                                                                         They were identified by Lord Taylor in his interim report
                                                                         in August 1989. Lord Justice Taylor did not attribute all
3.31 pm                                                                  the blame to a single cause or person, but in paragraph
   The Secretary of State for the Home Departm ent                       278 of his report he made it clear that
(Mr. Jack Straw): With permission, Madam Speaker,                        “the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control”.
I should like to make a statement about the Hillsborough
stadium disaster.                                                        Both Lord Taylor, and now Lord Justice               Stuart-Smith,
                                                                         have been damning in their condemnation              of the senior
  Few events in recent years have touched the lives of so
many people. The families and friends of the 96 Liverpool                officer in charge that afternoon, the                 then Chief
fans who died at Hillsborough have suffered                              Superintendent Duckenfield. Lord Justice             Stuart-Smith
immeasurably. The whole nation has been profoundly                       refers in his report to
disturbed by what occurred that day. Although almost                     “Mr. Duckenfield’s disgraceful lie”
nine years have now passed, many of the families and
others felt very strongly indeed that new evidence was                   about one of the gates at Hillsborough—
available that would cast new light on the events. As                    “Gate C being forced open by fans".
Home Secretary, I was determined to do all that I could
to establish whether that was indeed the case.                              The South Yorkshire police have in turn accepted the
                                                                         main share of responsibility for the disaster. Sheffield
   On coming into office in May last year, I gave that                   Wednesday football club and the local authority were also
   estion intense and urgent consideration, and on 30 June,

«
                                                                         criticised by Lord Taylor.
   innounced to the House that the Attorney-General and
   [ had decided to appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,                 With any major disaster, it is almost inevitable that,
   a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, to conduct over time, some new information may become available,
an independent scrutiny of the matter. His terms of                  but that does not necessarily mean that the outcome of
reference were                                                       any previous inquiries would have been different. What is
  “To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster
                                                                     crucial is not just whether the information is new, but
at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not           whether it is of such significance—to use the phrase in
available;                                                           the terms of reference—as to justify a new inquiry.
(a) to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or                    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has considered in great detail
(b) to the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General       all the evidence put before him. That included all the
for the purpose of discharging their respective statutory                relevant evidence presented to the earlier inquiries and
responsibilities; or                                                     inquests. He has looked equally rigorously at all the
(c) to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire Police in relation to        information presented to him, by individuals and official
police disciplinary matters;                                             bodies, including those representing the families of those
                                                                         who died and others who have acted in support of them.
and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously
available is of such significance as to justify establishment by the     He has produced a thorough and comprehensive report
Secretary of State for the Home Department of a further public           and goes into immense detail to analyse and reach
inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any   conclusions on each of the submissions made to him.
evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant
to their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other        Let me briefly summarise what Lord Justice
action which should be taken in the public interest.”                    Stuart-Smith says on the key allegations relating to video
                                                                         evidence and the cut-off time of 3.15 pm for the inquest,
  Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted his report,                and allegations of interference with witnesses. I refer first
which I am publishing today. It is available in the Vote
                                                                         to the video evidence. Two sets of allegations were made
Office. His scrutiny is the latest in a series of lengthy and
                                                                         to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith about video evidence. They
detailed examinations of the evidence in this case. The
                                                                         were, first, that video tapes were stolen from the club’s
public inquiry led by the late Lord Justice Taylor
                                                                         control room to conceal material evidence from the earlier
considered fully the causes of the disaster and made
wide-ranging recommendations about crowd control and                     inquiries. There is no dispute that the theft of two tapes
safety at sports events. Those have had a profound and                   took place. The tapes were pictures from the club’s closed
positive effect on both crowd safety at football grounds                 circuit television cameras, not from police cameras.
and on the policing of football matches.                                 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that, in any event, the
                                                                         tapes would have shown nothing significant. Moreover,
   The deaths that occurred were also the subject of                     he is satisfied that all the police tapes were made available
inquests conducted by the coroner for the Western district               in their entirety to Lord Taylor’s inquiry and to the
of South Yorkshire in two parts in 1990 and 1991. Those                  coroner.
inquests involved more than 80 days of public hearings.
A further investigation was conducted by the West                           The second allegation relating to video tapes, with
Midlands police, supervised by the Police Complaints                     which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith deals at considerable
Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds                   length, was made principally by Mr. Roger Houldsworth,
for criminal or disciplinary proceedings against the police.             a video technician at Sheffield Wednesday football club.
That investigation involved taking more than 5,000                       It was that the police had blamed their failure to see
statements. At a later stage, in November 1993, a judicial               overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 on camera 5 being
review of the coroner’s proceedings upheld the inquest                   defective, when it was not; that evidence of the video
verdict of accidental death and the conduct of those                     tapes taken by camera 5 was deliberately suppressed and
proceedings. We have now had this further detailed                       concealed; and that two police officers gave deliberately
scrutiny by a senior Lord Justice of Appeal.                             false evidence that camera 5 was not working correctly.
       553 CD I22-PA G2/I
    1087                     Hillsborough             18 FEBRUARY 1998                       Hillsborough                        1088
    [Mr. Jack Straw]
                                                                 authorities that could cause them to reconsider the
                                                                 decisions that they have already taken. He also concludes
      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that the police did         that none of the evidence that he was asked to consider
   not try to blame their failure to spot overcrowding on        added anything significant to the evidence that was
   the terraces on faulty CCTV equipment. He says that           available to Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.
   the police controllers had a good view over the terraces
   from the control box, and did not pretend otherwise.             I, the Attorney-General and the Director of Public
   He also concluded that                                        Prosecutions have considered Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
                                                                 report very carefully. We have no reason to doubt his
    the importance of Mr. Houldsworth’s evidence has been        conclusions. That will, I know, be deeply disappointing
   exaggerated out of all proportion’*,
                                                                 for the families of those who died at Hillsborough and for
   and that Mr. Houldsworth’s existence and evidence were        many who have campaigned on their behalf.
   known to the Taylor inquiry and to the coroner.
                                                                    I fully understand that those who lost loved ones at
   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes that the allegation
                                                                 Hillsborough feel betrayed by those responsible for
   that the police hid video tape evidence of the terraces
   is “unfounded”.                                               policing the Hillsborough football ground and for the state
                                                                 of the ground on that day. I hope and believe that the
      There are allegations about the conduct of the             changes that resulted from the Taylor inquiry will mean
   inquest, and in particular about the cut-off time of          that such a disaster will never happen again.
   3.15 pm. One of the issues that has unquestionably
   caused most distress to those bereaved at Hillsborough         However, there is another sense in which the system
   was the decision of the coroner to rule that all those       has failed the Hillsborough families. As Lord Justice
   who had died had received the injuries that caused their     Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of his report:
   deaths by 3.15 pm. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that           I understand the dismay that they have that no individual has
   the coroner did not say that all those who died did so       personally been held to account either in a criminal court,
   before 3.15 pm, or that all those who became                 disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent of losing their job”.
   unconscious subsequently died. It was only in relation        That highlights some of the serious shortcomings in the
  to how or by what means the deceased came to their            police disciplinary system. Earlier this year, the Select
  deaths that the cut-off time was imposed. Lord Justice        Committee on Home Affairs produced a report that made
  Stuart-Smith says that the cut-off time did not limit the     major recommendations for change. I shall respond fully
  inquiry undertaken by the inquest, and that he does not       to that report soon, but what happened after Hillsborough
  consider the inquest to have been flawed. The Taylor          is a prime example of why we must improve the current
  inquiry considered in detail the response of the              arrangements.
  emergency services after 3.15 pm as well as before,
  and concluded that no valid criticism could be made             Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also comments on whether
  of them.                                                     coroners’ proceedings are appropriate at all in respect of
                                                               a major disaster that has already been the subject of a
    The main allegations concerning interference with          public inquiry. He endorses the recommendation of
 witnesses were that specific witnesses had had pressure       a Home Office working group on disasters and
 put on them by the West Midlands police, and that the         inquests—published in March 1997—that the role of the
 South Yorkshire police had collected evidence from            coroner after such a public inquiry should be limited.
 their own officers in an unacceptable manner.
                                                                   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report emphasises the
    On the first allegation, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith          exceptional difficulty of the coroner’s task in conducting
 concludes that there was no improper attempt to alter          the main inquest. It placed an unreasonable and, I think,
 the evidence of those witnesses. On the second, he             unnecessary burden on the families involved, given that
records that a number of the initial statements made            the Taylor report had covered substantially the same
by South Yorkshire police officers were subsequently            ground. Certainly, I am sure that Hillsborough proved that
amended on the advice of solicitors to the force before        the inquest system in its present form is an unsuitable
being submitted to the Taylor inquiry. He says that in         means of dealing with disasters of that kind. I think it
a very few cases, which are referred to in appendix 7          would be far better—above all, for the bereaved
of the report, what was excluded was either factual or         families if there were one fully comprehensive inquiry
comment in which factual matters were implicit He              into the causes of death and the wider circumstances.
says that
“it would have been preferable”                                   When I instigated the scrutiny, I said I would do my
                                                               best to ensure that the evidence considered by
for those matters not to have been excluded, but he is         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was published. Most of the
satisfied that Lord Taylor’s inquiry was not in any way        main material that he has considered is contained in
inhibited or impeded by what happened.                         appendices to his report. Much of the other evidence that
       report also deals comprehensively in appendix           he has considered is already in the public domain,
10 with the 10 questions posed by the Granada Television       consisting of transcripts of public hearings or material
programme in December 1996.                                    considered by the Taylor inquiry. As I told the shadow
                                                               Home Secretary, I am arranging for the other material
   Taking those and all other considerations into account,
                                                               considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be placed in
the overall conclusion that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                              the Library of the House, save where there are overriding
reaches is that there is no basis for a further public
                                                              reasons for doing otherwise. Let me make it clear that the
inquiry. He also finds no basis for a renewed application
                                                              material that will be published will include all the original
to quash the verdict of the inquest, and he concludes that
                                                              statements made by South Yorkshire police officers,
there is no material that should be put before the Director
                                                              together with the amended versions submitted to the
of Public Prosecutions or the police disciplinary             Taylor inquiry.
  554 CD I22-PA G 2/2
                                                                                                 Hillsborough                       1090
                            Hillsborough                  18 FEBRUARY 1998
1089
                                                                        how it happened in the worst tragedy in British sporting
  All hon. Members will have profound sympathy                          history are now closed as far as the Government are
with the families and friends of those who die at
Hillsborough. We can scarcely begin to comprehend what                  concerned?
they have suffered. In his report, Lord Justice                             M r. Straw: I am grateful to the right hon. Gentleman
Stuart-Smith says:                                                      for his opening comments. Of course, the whole House
   “I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment   agrees with the eloquent and compassionate words that he
to them”—                                                               used to express some understanding of the nightmare that
the families and friends of those who died                              the families have faced since that afternoon. He asked four
                                                                        questions, the first of which was whether I am personally
“especially since they have had their hopes raised that something        satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fully examined the
more could be done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my
judgement. I have had to look dispassionately and objectively at         new evidence, or the claimed new evidence that has
what is said to be fresh evidence, in the light of the evidence which    emerged. Yes, I am satisfied, and so is my right hon. and
had previously been considered” .                                        learned Friend the Attorney-General.
 My right hon. and learned Friend the Attorney-General,                      It does not follow that when one establishes an inquiry
 the Director of Public Prosecutions and I have had to                   of this kind, one is bound to accept its conclusions, but as
 consider Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report in the same                 the right hon. Gentleman will have seen from the
                                                                          summary in chapter 7, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has
 light, and we accept its conclusions.
                                                                          conducted a most careful examination of the evidence and
     The entire country is united in sympathy with those                  has reached clear conclusions. It would have been
  who lost loved ones at Hillsborough. We cannot take                     extraordinary if my right hon. and learned Fnend the
  the pain from them, but I hope that the families will                   A tto rn ey -G en eral and I had not followed those
  recognise that the report represents—as I promised an                   conclusions in those circumstances.
  independent, thorough and detailed scrutiny of all the                      The right hon. Gentleman asked whether I am satisfied
   evidence that was given to the committee.                               that the families’ complaints about the 3.15 pm cut-off
                                                                           point have been dealt with satisfactorily in the report.
     Sir Brian Mawhinney (North-West Cambridgeshire):                      I am satisfied about that so far as the report is concerned.
  I thank the Home Secretary for his courtesy in letting me                Lord Justice Stuart-Smith states on page 41, paragraph
  have early sight of his statement, and even earlier sight ot              12 that in his view the coroner had been “widely
  the report. It is a long report, and, as the right hon.                   misrepresented” about what the 3.15 pm cut-off point was
  Gentleman will understand, I have not had the opportunity                 meant to mean. He states:
  to read it all, but I have read carefully the chapter that                 “It should be noted that the Coroner, did not say that all those
   summarises the findings in Lord Justice Stuart-Smith s                 who died did so before 3.15, or that the medical evidence was to
   own words. I also thank the right hon. Gentleman for his               this effect.”
   willingness to publish all the material, both unamended       The point about the 3.15 pm cut-off was much narrower.
   and amended. I am sure that that was the right thing to do.   I do not think that that will be accepted by the families.
        We, like Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, express great        The combination, the conjunction, of the coroner’s inquest
   sympathy for the relatives of those who died, and the         before and after the major public inquiry raises concerns
   spectators who were injured. We, too, find it difficult o     about the purpose of such inquests when there is such a
   imagine anything more horrific than the experience of         major inquiry, about which I commented in my statement.
   those who endured it, and of those who lost their                   The right hon. Gentleman asked whether the families
   fam ilies— including children—in that appalling incident.      will be disappointed. Inevitably, there was always a risk
                                                                  that in accepting, as I did, that there was, prima acie,
        I have four questions on the report. First, is the Home   sufficient new evidence needing this kind of scrutiny, the
    Secretary satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith ful y      families’ hopes would be raised and that that could lead
    examined all the so-called new evidence that has emerged,     to one of the four possibilities that are mentioned m the
    not least from the families, since the Taylor inquiry. Is he  terms of reference. That was inevitable. I do not m
    personally satisfied that none of it was newly significant/    the least think that it was wrong to set up the inquiry,
    Secondly, is he satisfied that the families’ complaints        and I know that the right hon. Gentleman supported me
    about the so-called 3.15 pm cut-off point have een
    comprehensively addressed by the judge? No doubt the           in doing so.                                              >
    right hon. Gentleman realises that, although his decision          The  families are disappointed. With Madam    Speaker  s
    to establish this independent scrutiny was broadly             permission,    I saw  them  at 2.15 pm  this afternoon and
     welcomed, it always carried the risk that it would heighten    again with her permission, I gave them copies of the
                                                                    report. They are upset, disappointed and angry about its
     expectations, particularly those of the families who were
     involved. That brings me to my third question. Does he         conclusions. They are also angry that I have accepted
     accept that they will be disappointed by the outcome of        those conclusions. I understand that, but what I ask them
                                                                    to do—and, obviously, what they were not able to do in
     the inquiry and that some of them may feel let down.
                                                                    the three quarters of an hour that I had with them—is to
         My fourth and final question to the Home Secretary is       read the report carefully and, I hope, m time, to com
      this. By agreeing that there is no basis for a further         to understand that the establishment of this further
     judicial inquiry; for a reopening of Lord Taylor s inquiry,     scrutiny and the way in which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
      for a renewed application to the divisional court, for         conducted it show great respect for their bereavement an
      the Attorney-General to exercise his powers under the          continuing concerns.
      Coroner’s Act 1988; or for any new material to be put             Finally, the right hon. Gentleman asked me whether
      before the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police        I believe that, as it were, this matter is now closed
      Complaints Authority, is he suggesting to the House and         We are announcing today that there are no groun
       the country that matters relating to what happened and

         555 CD122-PAG2/3
  1091                       Hillsborough                    18 FEBRUARY 1998                     Hillsborough                   1092

  [Mr. Straw]                                                             followed by a comprehensive inquiry, which, in practice,
                                                                          would include the purposes of subsequent main inquests
  reopening a further full public inquiry of the sort that was            under a senior judicial figure, and a final, formal inquest,
  conducted by Lord Justice Taylor, the coroner’s inquest,                which would simply receive the main inquiry’s report!
 disciplinary matters against the police or certain other                 In our judgment, that would be a far more satisfactory
 matters. Those are our decisions and they will have to                   way of dealing with these matters, and far less frustrating
 stand.                                                                   to the relatives and friends of the bereaved.             °
    The feelings of the families will live with them for ever,
 so the matter is not closed in that sense. All of us who                    M r. A. J. Beith (Berwick-upon-Tweed): Although the
 have lost children in any circumstances have some                        report has not provided the Home Secretary with support
 understanding of the way in which people never get over                  for a further general inquiry, does he recognise that this
 the deaths of children, even if they die from natural                    outcome will make it even harder to lift the cloud of grief
 causes; it is still more terrible if they die from violent               and frustration that hangs over the families and friends of
 causes such as this. However, there are other lessons that               those who lost their lives? Bearing in mind Lord Justice
 we have to learn. As I have said, those relate to the                    Stuart-Smith’s reference to the “disgraceful lie” of a
 purpose of coroners’ inquiries, to the fact that we should               senior police officer, the evidence of material omitted
 not put families through the mill twice, as happened in                  from police evidence and Lord Justice Taylor’s assertion
 this case, and to the need to change the police                          that the principal cause was a police failure, is it not
 disciplinary system.                                                     understandable that the families will be bitterly
                                                                          disappointed that the door seems finally to be closed on
    M r. Eddie O ’H ara (Knowsley, South): One has to live                any disciplinary action against particular individuals who
 on Merseyside to understand the palpable sense of grief,                 should bear some responsibility? Will the right hon.
 resentment and anger that still exists in our part of the                Gentleman look again at that aspect of the issue and give
 world at what we regard as the continuing injustice as a                 priority to a reform of police disciplinary procedure?
 result of the Hillsborough affair.
    My right hon. Friend has rightly pointed out that Lord                   M r. Straw: The right hon. Gentleman asks whether
 Justice Stuart-Smith had to consider two questions: was                  it will not now be even harder to lift the clouds of grief
 there new evidence; and was it sufficiently strong to be a               over the bereaved families. I cannot speak for them, but
 basis for reopening the inquiry? I draw my right hon.                    it would have been far worse had I not set up this further
 Friend’s attention to paragraph 14 and related paragraph                 scrutiny. They came forward with serious new allegations
 13 on page 41 of the report, which deal with the 3.15 pm                 and it was important that they were examined by someone
 cut-off, which is one of the most important sources of                  of the experience and distinction of Lord Justice
 anger. Referring to new evidence about whether people                   Stuart-Smith. However, the right hon. Gentleman is
 were alive after 3.15 pm, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says:               right—there can be no dispute about it—that the families
 “it is difficult to see the relevance of further evidence that person   are bound to be bitterly disappointed by the fact that no
 A was alive at 3.15 pm but died subsequently”—                          one has taken the blame for what happened. Lord Justice
                                                                         Stuart-Smith makes that clear and shares the bitter
referring to whether people might have survived if they                  disappointment of the families, as do I and, I believe, the
had been given better medical treatment. He justifies that               House. As I said in my earlier remarks, that underlines
conclusion by referring to the divisional court, which                   the need for there to be significant changes to the police
rejected such grounds, concluding that such questions                    disciplinary system.
“were not relevant to the inquiry into how— i.e. by what means—
the deceased had come to their deaths.”
                                                                            M r. Andrew Miller (Ellesmere Port and Neston):
If a person had a cardiac arrest in hospital and was not                 My right hon. Friend has mentioned in the context of the
satisfactorily treated, would that be regarded as simply                 report his consideration of the future conduct of inquests.
death by cardiac arrest, or would the consideration of                   Will he extend his review to consider carefully the way
neglect come into it?                                                    in which relatives are treated during inquests? They are
                                                                         treated in a most dispassionate way, which results in much
     M r. Straw: The point that my hon. Friend raises is                 of the grief that is expressed vocally by many of the
 often raised in relation to the conduct of inquests. It comes           people, including my constituents, who suffered in this
 up when, for example, there have been allegations of                    terrible tragedy.
 deaths in custody and in many cases when there has been
 a violent or unexpected death. The relatives believe that                  M r. Straw : Yes, I will. We have the helpful report of
 part of the purpose of the inquest is to allocate blame for             the disasters and inquests working group, established
 what has happened, whereas the purpose of the inquest                   under the previous Administration, which made
 is much narrower: to try to identify the cause of death. It             recommendations in March last year. Part of the reason
 is in that context that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith makes his             for the frustration— often anger—at inquests, of relatives
remarks. It is important to recognise that all that he says              and others who are bereaved, goes back to a
in paragraph 14 on page 41 follows the decision of the                   misapprehension about their purpose. To some extent, that
divisional court, which followed a thorough judicial                     will be dealt with by the kind of changes that I have
review hearing, not to grant a reopening of the inquest.                 already outlined for inquiries into major disasters.
    Again, my hon. Friend flags up a need for changes in
the way in which investigations are held into major                        M rs. Louise Ellman (Liverpool, Riverside): My right
disasters such as Hillsborough. I repeat that we believe                 hon. Friend acted promptly and properly in
that, in future, there should be what are called                         commissioning the scrutiny, for which I thank him.
mini-inquests into the immediate causes of death,                        I agree that the bereaved parents will remain upset.
   556 CD 122-PAG2/4
 1093                            Hillsborough          18 FEBRUARY 1998                    Hillsborough                    1094

  disappointed and angry and, in that knowledge, will he           aside, as the families would have wished him to do. It is
  give the matter further consideration? Does he accept that       a matter of huge frustration that no one has been brought
-*it is not possible for all of us at this early stage to assess   to justice. That represents severe defects in terms of police
 ’the report’s full implications and to read it in detail to       discipline, and I have spoken about the need for that to
  form our judgment? Therefore, will he support calls for          be changed. It is not possible to put the clock back nine
  an opportunity for the House to consider the report              years to do so.
  further, so that we may give a reasoned assessment of the
  report and attempt to deal with the unresolved problems             M r. Robert N. W areing (Liverpool, West Derby):
  and traumas faced by the parents? I support them in not          Does my right hon. Friend accept that there will be deep
  wishing to leave matters simply as they stand.                   unease on Merseyside and elsewhere, and that people will
                                                                   feel that there is no justice in this world? Does he further
   M r. Straw: I am grateful to my hon. Friend for her             accept that because few of us have had the opportunity to
 opening remarks, and I fully understand her concern—              read the report—although he was kind enough to analyse
 which is widely shared—that there should be a debate on           it with the parents—far more scrutiny is required by the
 the matter. I am probably one of the few who has had an           House of Commons; possibly by the Select Committee on
 opportunity to read the report thoroughly, and I shall pass       Home Affairs, which should be asked to report?
 on my hon. Friend’s remarks to my right hon. Friend the              Furthermore, I add my voice to that of my hon. Friend
 President of the Council. I hope that my right hon. Friend        the Member for Liverpool, Riverside (Mrs. Ellman) and
 will take them into account.                                      ask that there should be a proper debate following a
                                                                   reasonable period to allow us to read the report. For
   M aria Eagle (Liverpool, Garston): I thank my right             example, it would seem that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
 hon. Friend for his statement and for his consideration in        ruled as not significant a couple of videos stolen from
 seeking your permission, Madam Speaker, to speak to the           Sheffield Wednesday. How on earth could he say that they
 families first before making it. He has accepted the deep         were not significant if he had never seen them? Many
 disquiet that they feel as a result of the report by Lord         questions have been raised by the report, and the parents
 Justice Stuart-Smith, and I know that it is deep.                 will not feel that justice has been done until they are
 I particularly welcome my right hon. Friend’s                     answered.
 undertaking to publish all the available evidence. What
 would his attitude be if, at some stage, the families were            M r. Straw: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith explains why he
 to consider private prosecutions or taking further action?         came to that conclusion and how he could judge that the
                                                                    videos were not significant when he had not seen them.
    M r. Straw: Subject to certain constraints, individuals         One of the videos was from a misplaced camera angle.
 in this country may take private prosecutions. That is             It was known that it had been pointing at a wall.
 entirely a matter for them and for the judicial processes.        Therefore, the tape was of no value, even though it was
 It would be improper for me to comment.                            stolen. As for the other video, two points are made. One
                                                                    is that it was a club video. Police videos in part covered
    M r. Derek Twigg (Halton): I speak with some                   the same area. In addition, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
 knowledge, as I was on the terraces at Hillsborough that          makes the point that the police admitted that they could
 day and not in some directors’ area. I had to wait for two         see with their own eyes what was going on on the terraces
 hours to see whether my friends were alive, and I know             and did not need this crucial video evidence. That is one
 that a number of people from my constituency and that of           example of why it is very important that everybody should
 my hon. Friend the Member for Weaver Vale (Mr. Hall)              read the report’s details. When they do, they may be
 were killed on that day.                                          reassured that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has gone into the
                                                                   matter in great detail and with great care.
    May I express my bitter disappointment—not at the
 Home Secretary, whom I thank for organising                           That brings me to my hon. Friend’s first point. I have
 the scrutiny—but at the conclusions of the report?                already accepted that it is a matter of fact—there is no
 The families will be bitterly disappointed by the fact that       question about this—that there is great disappointment
 no one has been brought to justice, and such an injustice         among the bereaved families and friends of those who
 does not give confidence in our judicial system. I ask my         died on that terrible day. I do not think that it is correct
 right hon. Friend for his comments on that. If we cannot          to say—to pick up my hon. Friend’s words—that there is
 have a debate on the Floor of the House on the report,            no justice in this world. On reflection, he will perhaps
 would you, Madam Speaker, be prepared to allow an                 accept that Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry was conducted
 Adjournment debate on the subject in the future?                  impeccably, with great thoroughness. There has been no
                                                                   criticism of either the way in which he conducted that
    M r. Straw: Of course, I understand my hon. Friend’s           inquiry or his conclusions. That may be only partial
 personal feelings in the light of the fact that he was            justice in the context of this terrible tragedy—it is partial
 present on that terrible day. I understand, too, that those       justice. I understand that the conduct of the inquests was
 feelings will live with him for the rest of his life. The         controversial, but that has a great deal to do with the
 families are bitterly disappointed and, as I said, I hope         system of inquests, and that was not found to be unjust.
 that their disappointment will be directed at my right hon.           It is inevitable that an inquiry’s conclusions may be
 and learned Friend the Attorney-General and me as well            uncomfortable to one side or another. I hope that those
 as at Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, because it is our view that      who read the report will understand that it represents a
 he has done a thorough, comprehensive and detailed job            thorough inquiry in the best traditions of British justice.
 with the utmost integrity. He has gone into all the
 allegations carefully and, as he said, it was his job to look      M r. Vernon Coaker (Gedling): As one of the
 at the evidence presented to him and to put compassion            Members of Parliament who represents the Nottingham
i-      C D I 2 2 - P A G 2 /5
tx
                             Hillsborough                 18 FEBRUARY 1998                      Hillsborough                    1096
1095

[Mr. Vernon Coaker]
                                                                          why he was chosen to hold the inquiry. When my hon.
                                                                         Friend has had a chance to digest Lord Justice
area, may I take this opportunity, on behalf of those                    Stuart-Smith’s report, he will appreciate that it has gone
Members, to express our sympathy with the families and                   into the allegations with great care.
people of Merseyside? Does the Home Secretary agree
                                                                            M r. Tony Clarke (Northampton, South): Does my
that the people of Nottingham, along with those on
                                                                         right hon. Friend accept that it is that clear evidence that
Merseyside, will want a full and frank debate on the
                                                                         will make it impossible for the families to accept
report, which amounts to more than 200 pages and has                     disappointment, inasmuch as they know that the police
only just been published today? Will he do all that he can               failed and that nothing is being done about that? Will he
to ensure a full debate, so that people will have                        say a few words about the evidence that Lord Justice
the opportunity to express their views and opinions to me                Stuart-Smith put forward in respect of the stolen tapes?
 and other Members of Parliament, and we can express                     Surely, if the stolen tapes are missing, we must ask two
 those views in the Chamber?                                             questions. First, who was responsible for that theft and,
                                                                         secondly, for what reason were they stolen if not for
  M r. Straw: I accept my hon. Friend’s point. I should                  concealment? It is for that reason that I add my support
                                                                          to the call of my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool,
have made the point in response to my hon. Friend the
                                                                          Riverside (Mrs. Ellman) for a full debate in the House to
Member for Liverpool, West Derby (Mr. Wareing) that
                                                                          examine the individual pieces of evidence and missing
there is obviously considerable feeling about the need for
                                                                          evidence before coming to a conclusion.
a debate. I shall pass that on to my right hon. Friend the
President of the Council.                                                    M r. Straw: I appreciate that I am one of the few people
                                                                          who have had the benefit of reading the report. If my hon.
    M r. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover): Is the Home Secretary                 Friend reads it, as I know he will, he will see that the
 aware that I find it difficult to believe that 95 people were            question of the two missing tapes is dealt with in some
 killed but nobody is to blame? Is he further aware that                  particular detail. I have explained why Lord Justice
                                                                          Stuart-Smith reached the conclusion that he did about
 inquests on the deaths of many people, such as after
                                                                          whether the fact that they were stolen was significant.
 mining disasters and for this matter, are not fit and proper
                                                                          This goes back to the point that I made at the beginning of
 places to start the procedure? He would do well, during
                                                                          my statement. When we consider whether a major public
 this Parliament, to introduce measures to ensure that
                                                                          inquiry into events that took place nine years ago should
 inquests are fit to deal with not just the death of three                be reopened, with all the inevitable problems caused by
 people in a house fire but with mass disasters. I have                   the effluxion of time, the issue has to be not only whether
 never believed that inquests are competent to do the job.                there is new evidence—which there might be—but
   Will the Home Secretary do me a favour? If, perchance,                 whether it is of such significance as materially to alter the
 there is another unfortunate incident of this kind, will he              conclusions of the first inquiry. That is what Lord Justice
 not invite these tinpot judges and justices—distinguished                Stuart-Smith has examined. He has come to the
 though they may be—to deal with the problem? I have                      conclusion that I have described about the two missing
 never believed that they understand working-class culture.               tapes.
 Over the past few years, all these people—Lord Justice                       It is a matter of supposition why the tapes were stolen.
 Scott, Lord Justice Taylor, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith—                   People steal things for the purposes of concealment or for
 have been investigating matters. What do they really                      more prosaic reasons. They may have wanted the tapes
 know about what makes working-class people tick?                          for their own use. No one has ever been apprehended for
                                                                           the theft of the tapes, but in the circumstances described
                                                                           and set out in the report, it is palpable that they were not
   M r. Straw: My hon. Friend makes the point that no                      material to the question whether the police were to blame
 one is to blame. It is not the case that the earlier inquiries            for failing to recognise that a serious disaster was taking
 found no one to blame. Indeed, on page 49 of his interim                  place at the Leppings lane end. That was the issue. If Lord
 report—Cm 765—Lord Justice Taylor was explicit and                        Justice Taylor had said that the police were not to blame
 damning. He said:                                                         and that the tapes were likely to disclose why, the tapes
                                                                           would have greater significance. However, Lord Justice
 “the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control .     Taylor said that the police were to blame. He also pointed
 There has been no cover-up of that. There was a failure of                 out—this was confirmed by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith—
 police control, and Lord Justice Taylor pulled no punches                  that one of the reasons why the police were to blame was
 whatever in reaching that conclusion. I hope that that                     that they did not have to rely on video evidence;
 gives the lie to my hon. Friend’s suggestion that judges                   they could see with their own eyes what was going on
 are incapable of holding investigations into matters of this               and they failed to make proper decisions following that.
 kind. I note that whenever there is a call for an inquiry,
                                                                              M r. Ross Cranston (Dudley, North): May I take my
 there is a great demand for members of the Court of
                                                                           right hon. Friend back to the issue of police discipline and
 Appeal to hold them.                                                      the feeling among the relatives that no one has been
     It is inevitable that not everyone will be satisfied by the           brought to justice? May I ask him specifically whether
  result of an inquiry because such judgments defy human                   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith addresses the issue of early
  behaviour. However, Lord Justice Taylor’s report showed                  retirement by police officers to avoid disciplinary
  great understanding of soccer and soccer culture. He was                 procedures? May I press him for a speedy response to the
  an ardent soccer supporter himself. I had the occasional                 Select Committee on Home Affairs report on police
  discussion with him about it. That is one of the reasons                 discipline?

       55X CD I22-PA G 2/6
1097                   Hillsborough                18 FEBRUARY 1998                                                           1098

   M r. Straw: I have already referred to Lord Justice                               P oint o f O rd er
Stuart-Smith’s remarks about the fact that no one has been
brought to justice and that no one has suffered any            4.21 pm
disciplinary proceedings or even lost their job as a result
either of those terrible events, or of Lord Justice Taylor’s      M r. Andrew Robathan (Blaby): On a point of order,
clear conclusion that a failure of police control was the      Madam Speaker. I have given you prior notice of this
principal cause of the disaster. By implication, it is clear   point of order, which concerns the accuracy of statements
that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is not happy with what          recorded in the Official Report. We all judge the Official
happened, and neither are we. I have looked in great detail    Report to be of immense use when we write our speeches
at the helpful report from the Select Committee, of which      or assemble arguments, and it is important that
my hon. Friend is a member. As I said earlier, we intend       statements recorded in it are accurate, so I ask your
to make an early announcement about that matter, with a        guidance. On 21 January, the hon. Member for Broxtowe
view to improving the system of police discipline.             (Dr. Palmer) introduced a ten-minute Bill about air
                                                               weapons. I have spoken to the hon. Gentleman and we
                                                               have discussed the matter, although sadly he cannot be
                                                               here this afternoon. I should say that I wish him no ill
                                                               and I am sure that it was confusion of facts, rather than
                                                               any other cause, which led to this point of order.
                                                               The Official Report states:
                                                                  “In the past few years, one police officer was killed and another
                                                               7,000 injured by airgun attacks.”— [Official Report, 21 January
                                                               1998; Vol. 304, c. 1014.]
                                                               However, in response to a written question from me, the
                                                               Home Secretary said that, although he had no figure for
                                                               the past two years, he could find no fatal injuries and a
                                                               total of 22 injuries recorded during eight of the past
                                                               10 years. I can find no other evidence of anybody being
                                                               killed. Every policeman injured is a serious matter, but the
                                                               discrepancy between 22 and 7,000 is large and I wondered
                                                               whether you could give your judgment on that, Madam
                                                               Speaker.

                                                                  M adam Speaker: The answer is a polite no. It is not
                                                               a point of order: the hon. Gentleman is challenging the
                                                               figures used by another hon. Member and that is not a
                                                               matter for the Speaker, but a matter for debate and
                                                               argument. It is not for the Speaker of the House to
                                                               determine the figures or to become involved in arguments
                                                               about the substance of debates. The hon. Gentleman may
                                                               try to use other methods to bring the matter to the
                                                               attention of the hon. Member for Broxtowe (Dr. Palmer).




 559 CD I22-PA G2/7
