                           POLICE CONSTABLE "2954 MORLEDGE
                           E GROUP
                           HAMMERTOE ROAD POLICE STATION




 At 8 .00am on Saturday 15th April 1989 I commenced duty at the Hillsborough football
 ground Sheffield, in conection with the semi final football match between Liverpool and
Nottingham forest football clubs* On reporting for duty I immediately made my way to
 the junction of Niagra road and Beeley Wood road where I controlled traffic travelling
 along Niagra road in an attempt to stop parking within the Police sports ground.


At 10.20am that same day I returned to the Hillsborough football ground and there
commenced duty at the entrance to the gymnasium car park and police room this entrance
being situated on Penistone road. While at this location I had a number of people speak
to me who were obviously from the Liverpool area these people were good humered but in
high spirits. I -stayed at this location until the main briefing had taken place, at the
completion of the briefing I obtained van keys in order to commence duties as prison
bus and prisoner transport from the ground to Hammerton Road or Ecclesfield police statation

   aoorox 1pm
xixaj^xaxx Due to the lack of activity within the police room at this time I made a visit
to the North Stand/Kop area of the ground in order to look at the pithh and also the crowd
I noticed at this time that there were far more Notts fans within the ground compared
to Liverpool, at the time I spoke to a member of the ground staff and we discused the
match that had taken place the year before and the lack of Liverpool support in the ground
compared to ^fixs years.


At approx 1.30pm I did a prison run to Ecclesfield police station together with PC 700
in order to get to the police station I travelled out of ,0* gate at Hillsborough along
Penistone road away from city, onto Penistone road North, Halifax road Chaucer road,
Yew Lane to the police station. I noticed throughout the journey which passed a number of
public houses    that there were large numbers of supproters who did not appear to be interestec
fen making any   attempt to travel towards the ground   and infact therewere large numbers
walking in the opposite direction. I dropped off the prisoners at Ecclesfield and made my
way back to the football ground asing the same route upto the junction with Leppings Lane
when I traveled along Leppings Lane into the ground through onto Penistone road North and
to the police    box. Again during the trip I noticed   large numbers offans who did not appear
to be making any attempt   th make their way towards    the ground, nearto the gates I saw fans
who were having to be forced by officers outside the ground to move towards the turnstiles
and e n t W the ground.
I parked the van outside the police room at the ground and made enquiries as to
 the position with any new prisoners, I was informed that there were a number
to be transported again to Ecctesfield. I noticed at this time that the officers
working in the police room were under great pressure due to the number of prisoners
being brought in. I assisted with collecting paperwork for the prisoners and at
approx 2.15pm I made a second run to Scclesfield police station together with a
number of D div. officers. I used the same route to travel to the station. While
travelling along Halifax road I noticed more fans again not making any attempt to                               (.■5

get to the ground* I heard transmissions on my personal radio re the crowd in
Leppings Lane and around the                       'K n y f M ^   l r > H h* n f f i f r r n   in   thu v n n
that we wera— starting'to lnn<» thi r nw».. I dropped the prisoners at the station and
returned to the ground again Bsing the same route, on the return I heard ani
officer on the radio ask that the kickoff be put back due to the crowd at Leppings
lane. I travelled along Leppings lane very slowly due to the crowds, as I did
this there were          messages on the radio to the effect that people were dying
As I reached the ground at Leppings lane I heard a v ice on the radio which I
recognised as that of PC 1285 Smith he requested bolt croppers in order to cut
the fence. Due to these transmissions All the other officers in the van dropped out
and moved into the crown at the Leppings Lane turnstiles. I continued round to
Penistone road using Parkside road. As I did this I heard requests for ambulanced
I moved onto Penistone road but could see that the road was becoming blocked and
the ambulances and police vehicles could not move due to this I parked my van
on the central reservation and ran into the ground through the gym car park entrance.
I made my way to the police room to be met by a small number of people being treated
by the St. Johns ambulance people, I could see by the reaction of people coming from
the playing area that more assistace was needed in that area. Iran onto the pitch#(-#0r
be..inet .
         wi th a scene of chaos I ran to a male who was unconscious on the grong and
asked the friens around him to let me in I could see that this person was not breathing
and gave mouth to mouth and heirt massage. After a short time I could see that there wa
was little point in continuing and asked for assistance to carry the body to the rear
of the gym. A number of supproters assisted me to carry the body to the rear of the
north stand where I could see that there were a number of bodjes laying on the ground
together with grieving friends and relatives making the job for the St Johns and
officers more and more difficult. I made a request to Insp. Barker that we start to
move bodies out of the area. A short time after this The bodies and a number of
injured started to be moved into the gme.
 By this time an ever growing number of people were carrying injured/bodies to this
area with each body there was six plus helpers who where then just milling in the
area getting in the wajs* I approached a number of bodies layed at the rear of the
 stand and attemted heart massage and mouth to mouth*, all these attempts were
hopeless. I returned to the playing area and moved around the track area asking
people sat against the wall if they needed any help. At this time I saw that a
line of police officers were forming a cordon at the Leppings lane end and also
a loose cordon infront of the Kop# After a short time I returned to the rear of the
North stand and assisted to get the injured into ambulances and also show doctors
that were arriving the area we appeared to need most help. I can remember lifting
a stretcher with an injured special constable and placing him in an ambulance.
After what appeared to be hours I moved into the police room in a state of shock,
I saw that the officers in the room were giving verble cautions to the prisoners
that had been on the prison bus. I left the room to be met by a drunken liverpool
fan who said whats the score pal, I told him Ill-IiTi uff aim yo home. I then
remember going to an injured male who was starting to have difficulty breathing
I k elt at his side to check his airway and fan in the stand above started to
urinate on the wall this urine fell onto myself and the injured a number of officers
shouted at the but they continued to do this and then slowly walked away.
I continued to get people onto ambulances asking any doctor I could find if they
knew of any urgent case that was waiting for an ambulance.
When the scene    started to slow down I saw a     large numberofpoliceofficers crying
and in a great    stae of distress.
After a while we were asked to sit in the North stand and wait for further instructions
on getting into the stand I was asked to board a PSV in Penistone road and take details
from friend^relatives of missing persons in order to attempt to trace them. I spoke
to the brotherof a missing person     and then he was transported toHammerton   Road
police station,    I then returned tothe North staid.
