                                                                                                                ■ .....

Other Document Form                      □a te and time raised                                  Number
                                                                                                           I£4-
Title                                SxA^t>(V6ftr4
(Include source end eny document number if relevant)


Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/No_______
                                                                                                            Receiver




Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                    Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Statement readers instructions                                                                             Statement
                                                                                                           Reader



Indexed as indicated                                                                                        indexer

No(s) of actions raised

   kmined - further action to be taken                                                                   0 /M            SIO
                                                                                                                           L i.



                                                                                                                 Hexer
Further action no(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
Hammond Suddards                                    PCM/JPA
Solicitors
Empire House                                        JTW/md
10 Piccadilly
BRADFORD
                                                    19 June 1990
BD1 3LR




Dear Sirs

HILLSBOROUGH

With reference to your letters of 25 and 31 May 1990 and the subsequent
requests by Belinda Nortcliffe for further enquiries to be undertaken, please
find enclosed a summary of the position in respect of the action taken to date,
together with enclosures as appropriate.

The ongoing matters will be concluded as quickly as possible, in particular the
Gordon Horn identification aspect referred to at 9g in the report which I
appreciate is required as a matter of some urgency.

Yours faithfully




Chief Superintendent
                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                            REF:
FROM: Detective Inspector Cleverley
                                            DEPTs Hillsborough Enquiry
TO: Chief Superintendent Wain
                                            DATE: 18 June 1990


            SUBJECT:    INTERIM REPORT:
                        RESULT OF ENQUIRIES
                        REQUESTED BY HAMMOND SUDDARD

With reference to letters received from Hammond Suddard Solicitors dated
25th and 30th May 1990, and memorandum dated 30 May 1990 from the Deputy
Chief Constable Mr Hayes, I report as follows:

The correspondence summarises to the following areas of investigaion:
1          An explanatory circulation to command officers likely to be
            involved in the October liability apportionment proceedings

2          A circulation of extracts from the Taylor Interim report for
            suggestions as to marking as disputed

3          Consideration of the Health and Safety Executive figures for
            persons entering gate "C" (2nd opening)

4          Further enquiry into the closure of the tunnel in 1988
            particularly as to involvment of SWFC and its stewards

5          Obtaining press cuttings of remarks made by Mr McGhee on his
            retirement
6          Obtaining comprehensive body plan for use at hearings

7          Further enquiry into extra   radial fencing gate mentioned in
            correspondence from 1985

The following additional task was identified as     naturally following on
from (4) above:

8          Further enquiry into the control of entry to the turnstiles
            in 1988, particularly as to involvment of SWFC and its
            stewards
Subsequent telephone and fax messages from Mrs Belinda Norcliffe of
Hammond Suddard raised a further area of enquiry, required to be
cowpleted as soon as possible for the purpose of "shock" claims cases
due to be heard commencing 19 June 1990i
9           Obtain evidence in connection with temporary          mortuary
            arrangements at ground and other connected matters


BEN2                                                               Page 1
The following tasks have been completed with the results shown:

1             Circulation has been made and officers replies       as       to
             availability are being collated at the incident room.

2              Circulation has been made and    a   reply    made to   Hammond
             Suddard under seperate cover.

3            HSE Submission to Taylor Enquiry
RESULT:      An examination of the conclusions drawn by the HSE in its
comprehensive submission on this point(Section 5 paras 1-8) cannot be
disputed.      It concludes that a "best estimate" of 2000 people passed
through the gate on the occasion in question.     The reasoning is sound,
and is consistent with the surrounding facts.    For example, this figure
agrees roughly with the total ticket sales for the terraces when
collated with turnstile figures. It is not out of step with officers
recollected estimates.     The figure cannot be challenged by      better
evidence.

5           Remarks made by Hr McGhee

RESULT:     The only local press cuttings are in The Star on 15and 16
March 1990.     No remarks relevent to the Club's liability are quoted.
Comments made on an earlier TV appearance (date and station not known)
are quoted in the second article, on the question of fans' behaviour.
Extracts are enclosed herewith (Documents 1,2).

6           Body Plan

This task   cannot be   progressed until   Coroner's Court    transcripts are
released.

9           "Shock" Claims Cases

The following specific enquiries have been requested:
(a)         Obtain copies of Force Standing Orders on Sudden Death
             procedures, and relevent     extracts from Major Incident
            Manual, Student Lesson Notes.

RESULT:     The copy documents     requested were   forward by   post on   11
             Junel990.

(b)         Rebuttal evidence re allegations of noise, disorganisation
             and the number of police officers on duty at the Temporary
            Mortuary, Hillsborough Gymnasium, made in a statement of FJ
            ECCLESTON.

(c)         Statements from officers i/c Temporary Mortuary        re (b) and
            general arrangements.

(d)         Ascertain how many officers were on "mortuary attendant"
             duties at Hillsborough Gym, and assess evidence re (b).

GEN2                                                                   Page 2
            The Temporary Mortuary was filmed, but not continuously.
            Explanatory statement to be    obtained from the camera
            operator.

<f>         Detective Chief Superintendent Addis to give      statement re
            movement of bodies to/from Temporary Mortuary.

RESULT:     Items (b) to (f) concern the same     general subject,      and a
            seperate summary sheet is attached.

(g)         Circumstances of identification of deceased Gordon HORN to
            be investigated in respect of alleged requirement of sister
                          [o identify body.
RESULT:     A statement has been obtained from Detective Inspector
            Timms, faxed on 15 June 1990 (Documents3,4,5).   Further
            enquiries are   being made and will    be reported when
            finalised.

(h)        Photographs of the viewing room at the Medico-Legal Centre,
            Watery St, Sheffield to be obtained.

RESULT:    The photographs   were forwarded   by first   class post    on .13
            June 1990

A copy of this report and the information summary relating to enquiries
9(b) to 9(f) will be forwarded to DCC Mr Hayes, for his information.

I request that this report and the attached documents be forwarded under
covering letter to Messrs Hammond Suddards,




 elective inspector




0EN2                                                                  Page 3
                                 SUMMARY

                     TEMPORARY MORTUARY ARRANGEMENTS

Enquiries 9 (b) to (f)

BASIS OF ENQUIRIES

These enquiries appear to have been instituted as a result of the
general impression given by Frederick James ECCLESTON in a statement
made by him in connection with the civil proceedings (Document 6
attached).   There is very little specific in the statement to identify
as criticism, but the tone overall leads to an impression that there was
no control or organisation by the Police; that the place was noisy; and
there were too many policemen about.       He also speaks of relatives
wandering about trying to identify the dead.

The statement is however contradictory       in many respects.        He
acknowledges the police organisation, and its reinforcement as time went
by, and even on his first attendance there, gives signs that proper
control was already in place; notably the division of the room and
control on entry through the door.

If ECCLESTON's testimony to the Taylor Tribunal is read (23.5.89.
morning session), it will be noted that on this subject he gave a quite
different impression.

POLICE EVIDENCE

Detective Superintendent McKay, already on duty at the ground was the
senior CID officer when the disaster occurred.     His report already on
file (R6: document 7 attached) is detailed as to how control was
established at the gym, and how officers, including then DI Charles,
were instructed to take command of particular tasks.

DI Charles remained at the gymnasium throughout, and he gives evidence
of the organisation and events (R137A, 137B, documents 8 and 9
attached).
Detective Sergeant McSloy (R178, S62 documents 10, 11 attached), and
Detective Constable Li Iley (R42, S63 documents 12, 13 attached) were in
the gym at the time of the disaster, and remained there throughout,
carrying out duties directly concerned with the running of the temporary
mortuary.    They describe their work, and the conditions that applied
throughout the day.
Detective Chief Superintendent Addis (R138 document 14 attached) took
overall charge after being informed by Detective Superintendent McKay,
and arriving at the ground.      He would confirm that the Coroner was
informed and consulted as events progressed.     Mr Addis is on leave
until 26 June 1990, and we have been unable to obtain an additional
statement as requested.     However, the question of body movements is
covered by the evidence of DI Charles.
BODY MOVEMENTS
The   Coroner had      originally decided that Kenyons     international
undertakers would be employed, and first arrangements for transport of
bodies from the temporary mortuary and the hospitals to the Medico Legal
Centre were made       with this in view.      Had Kenyons been used,
identification would have been organised in close liaison with them.
Later the Coroner decided that Kenyons would not be used, and the
subsequent arrangements were made by DCS Addis on his instructions,
including the carrying out of identifications at the temporary mortuary.
To do this it was necessary to move bodies from the hospital mortuaries
to Hillsborough. After identification    they were then transported to
the Medico Legal Centre.     20 remained unidentified at the end of the
day, and these were subsequently identified at the MLC.

VIDEO
Police Constable Wilkinson (S64, document 15 attached) was operating a
video camera at various times from 3.50pm in the Temporary Mortuary.
The total footage is quite short, but there is a soundtrack, and it
clearly shows conditions at various stages.        A summary has been
prepared (Document 16 attached).

DISORGANISATION
Undoubtedly, from all the evidence, immediately following the disaster
there was a chaotic situation in the gymnasium area.    There could have
been nothing else in the immediate aftermath of a major disaster.
Everyone, civilian and professional, was fighting to save lives, and
little concern was then given to those already beyond help.    Immediate
police actions were all directed towards assisting the emergency
operation.    Very quickly however, probably by 3.30pm, order had begun
to be imposed and the police were in control of the situation.    Indeed
most of the criticism voiced elsewhere has been of too much police order
in this respect.    An unenviable task was carried out with efficiency,
correctness, and compassion.

NUMBERS OF POLICE
There were many police officers present.   This was necessary as part of
the identification and continuity procedures adopted.      It should be
noted that many were CID officers, and that many of them were casually
dressed; either because they had been on anti-crime duties at the match,
or had come to the ground from being off duty.

On the question of overall numbers of people, the West Midlands Enquiry
computer has 632 names of police and others who went to the gym during
the incident.    Twenty police officers of Inspector rank or above were
there at some time.

Our own records indicate that some 17 officers carried out "mortuary
attendant" duties there (list attached, document 17), and of course many
more were employed on individual identification and other duties.

CONTROL OF RELATIVES
All the officers seen were adamant that relatives were not allowed to
"wander about".   It seems possible in the circumstances as described in
the evidence, and shown on the video that Mr Ecclestone mistook police
officers for   relatives,   There   are very few   relatives shown   on the
video.




                                                                     Page 3
                   DOCUMENTS
ITEH



Cutting front "Sheffield Star"


Cutting from "Sheffield Star"


Additional statement of DI Timms
(S52A)

Copy GEN 18 form re Gordon Rodney
HORN (deceased)

Copy Coroner's statements
PC 339 O'Shea
Copy Statement of FJ Eccleston

Statement of Det Supt McKay (R6)

Additional Statement of Ch Insp
Charles (R137A)

Additional Statement of Ch Insp
Charles (R137B)
Statement of Det Sgt McSloy (R178)
Additional Statement of Det Sgt
McSloy (S62)

Statement of Det Const Li Iley (R42)

Additional Statement of Det Const
Lilley (S63)

Draft statement of Det Ch Supt Addis
(R138)

Statement of PC Wilkinson (S64)
Summary of video
List of officers on"mortuary attendant"
duties
