                       Sheffield Archives Ref: f b t - H I |b W > 1 8                         M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                               Date and tim e raised                                    Num ber



T itle
(Include source ana any document number if relevant)         ^


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o   CT)         Ar        y 'jo u .- ^ A *                  AfljcC
                                                                                                                              Receiver
                                                     (q) tXte.     k> Ujfav\        Jnif
                                                     01    U k        k>                                                  1£<41
                                                                                                                              Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised    A 4 I4 S . A 4 I4 4 -.            A 4145                                                        icM .
                                                                                                                          Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                              Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                          O/M        SIO
 Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




 Further action No(s)
                                                                                                                     T1
When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form                             BJ
                                                                                                           20th April,1989




To Whom It Play Concern


I rarely put pen to paper but the depths to which the South Yorkshire Police
rorce has sunk to divert their gross Incompetance from the headlines has
sickened me enough to put down my observations of that tragic                                                   day.

liie arrived outside the ground at ten minutes past two, showedour tickets
                                  I . ' ' .................I M W i :   .........   . i . ......   ■ ** ’


to a policeman, he instructed us to walk to the other side of the ground,
realising as we approached the area we had been directed to that which bias
for the Nottingham fans. Ue informed a policeman protecting an entrance
to a side street of his colleagues directing not only our small group but
many others to the wrong side of the ground, he informed us wIt was not
his problem". We returned to the original policeman and once again requested
directions, he again directed us to the other side of the ground, when we
told him of his mistake he said "I don’t know I’m from Doncaster”.

Twenty minutes wasted, we approached the turnstile designated to us. The
area without supervision became a sea of people heading from every direction
to a small enclosed space with three turnstiles, the squashing became more
intense and a woman began screaming, her husband frantically informed us
she bias pregnant, linking arms and arching our backs we managed to give
this lady already on the point of hysteria breathing                                                 space, we pleaded with
a policeman for assistance to which he retorted "What can I do", which
seemed to sum up the total lack of orginisation and couldn't care less
attitude we had already encountered. The crush itself was by now beyond
his control, but he bias in a position to escort this lady and her unborn
child to safety. He didn't.

Initially when the match bias halted we were too far away to comment on the
happenings at the front of the standing area at the Leppings Lane end,
except to express disbelief at seeing whatmust have                                                been at least two
   .   .        t                                      m

hundred policemen lined up in front of the seated area we occupied, all of
whom must posses some form of knowledge in the art of life saving.

                                                                                                                        Contdt
Restraints mere not required these people where frozen to the spot witnessing
the tragic events happening in front of their eyes, all they could do was
to applaud occassionally the "hooligans" ripping down hoardings in an attempt
to ferry the dead, dying and injured to a place where something constructive
may be done.

Ue made our way down to the goalmouth after about ten minutes as my brother
had earlier left us to take his place in the Leppings lane end, fearing what
ue might find, we witnessed the professional and layman alike trying to breath
life back into friends, relatives and strangers many already beyond help but
still they tried. Ue found my brother Physically unhurt, but like us and many
thousand others mentally scarred.

I was proud to be a Scouser that day witnessing these so called "drunken louts"
thinking only of their fellow man.

Fans arrived at the ground with drink inside them last year and the police
numbers where fewer, we witnessed a great football match then, not a disaster.
Gross incompetance killed Ninety Five people nothing else.




Yours sincerely
To Whom It Hay Concern



I rarely put pen to paper but the dephts to which the South Yorkshire Police
Force has sunk to divert their gross Incompetance from the headlines has
sickened me enough to put down my observations of that tragic day.

We arrived outside the ground at ten minutes past two, showed our tickets
to a policeman, he instructed us to walk to the other side of the ground,
realising as we approached the area we had been directed to that which was
for the Nottingham fans. We informed a policeman protecting an entrance
to a side street of his colleagues directing not only our small group but
many others to the wrong side of the ground, he informed us " It was not
his problem". We returned to the original policeman and once again requested
directions, he again directed us to the other side of the ground, when we
told him of his mistake he said "Idont't know I'm from Doncaster".

Twenty minutes wasted, we approached the turnstile designated to us. The
area without supervision became a sea of people heading from every direction
to a small enclosed space with three turnstiles, the squashing became mors
intenee and a woman began screaming, her husband frantically informed us
she was pregnant, linking arms and arching our backs we managed to give
this lady already on the point of hysteria breathing space, we pleaded    with
a policeman for assistance to which he retorted "What can I do", which
seemed to sum up the total lack of orginisation and couldn't care less
attitude we had already encountered. The crush itself was by now beyond
his control, but he was in a position to escort this lady and her unborn
child to safety. He didn’t.

Initially when the match was halted we where too far away to comment on the
happenings at the front of the standing area at the Leppings Lane end,
except to express disbelief at seeing what must have been at least two
hundred policeman lined up in front of the seated area we occupied, all of
whom must posses some form of knowledge in the art of life saving.


                                                                     Contds-
Restraints where not required these people where frozen to the spot witnessing
the tragic events happening in front of their eyes, all they could do was
to applaud occassionally the "hooligans" ripping down hoardings in an attempt
to ferry the dead, dying and injured to a place where something constructive
may be done.

We made our way down to the goalmouth after about ten minutes as my brother
had earlier left us to take his place in the Leppings Lane end, fearing what
we might find we witnessed the professional and layman alike trying to breath
life back into friends, relatives and strangers many already beyond help but
still they tried. We found my brother Physically unhurt, but like us and many
thousand others Mentally scarred.

I was proud to be a Scouser that day witnessing these so called "drunken louts"
thinking only of their fellow man.

Fans arrived at the ground with drink inside them last year and the police
numbers where fewer. We witnessed a great football match then not a disaster.
Qross incompetance killed Ninety Five people nothing else.




Yours sincerely
