TEit                                         et^xrao

  o     r        u      r i ut ^ f t .

        *L<rJ.       ]>w a s ^   ^




                          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD.


                            INVITATION TO TENDER. SPECIFICATION


                          SCHEDULE OF WORK AND DAYWORK SCHEDULE


                       FOR THE FABRICATION AND SUPPLY OF STEELWORK


                                         FOR NEW EMERGENCY EXITS AND


                              ALTERATIONS TO EXISTING STAIRCASES




                                                                   EASTWOOD & PARTNERS
                                                                   CONSULTING ENGINEERS
                                                                   BOWMAKER               HOUSE
       JUNE 1979                                                   23 K I W G F I E L D    *°AD
                                                                   SHEFFIELD         S11    9AS
EASTW OOD & PARTNERS                                                                                         BOWMAKER HOUSE
                 C onsulting Engineers                                                                       23 KINGFJELD ROAD
                                                                                                             SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W. Eastw ood           B.Eno„ Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                                       Tel.: (0742) 583871
                       F.I.Struct.E., F .G .S . M.Cons.E.

A. A. Wood             B.Eng., P h .D . C .E no . F.I.C.E.,
                       F.I.Struct.E., M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.

A. G. Burdett          G.M ., B.Sc.(EnB), C.EnB., M.I.C.E.

A w d o te s :
G eoffrey Spir         C.En*., M .I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.

C. S. Greaves          B.En*., C .E n t.. M .I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E .

R. C. A. Eastw ood     B .S c.,C .E n* .,M .I.C .E ..M .I.S triict.E .

O m u h a n t:                                                                                 Our Ref:      WE/ACM/KH/1610
A. L. Percy            B .Sc.. c .E n t „ F.I.C.E.,
                       F .I.Struct.E .. F.I.M un.E., M .R.T.P.I.                               Your R e f:




   Peter Ward Engineering (Fabricators),
   Shsaf Bank,                                                                                               20 June 1979
   Gleadless Road,
   Sheffield,
   S2 3DA.




Dear Sirs,
                                             Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                         Construction of New Emergency Exits and Alterations
                                                                 to Existing Staircases
                 On behalf of our clients, Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club Ltd., we have pleasure in inviting you to tender for the
supply, fabrication, delivery and site welding of the
structural steelwork and handrails associated with the new
emergency exits and modifications to the existing staircases.


Drawings and Specification
                 Enclosed are single copies of our drawings 1610/23, 24,
27, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39 and 41 showing
details of the structural steelwork and handrails.


Programme
                 The Main Contractor is expected to begin excavation and
preparation work on 9 July.                                              The whole of the work on drawings
1610/23, 30-36 inclusive is to be substantially complete before
11 August 1979.                              The remainder of the works shown on drawings
1610/24, 27, 37, 38 and 39 to be completed as soon as possible
after 11 August.
                                                              Registered in England — No. 1134531
                                                                  SHEET    2




EASTW OOD £r PARTNERS




   Overtime
          The cost of any overtime working which may be necessary
    to ensure that delivery of the steelwork is made in accordance
   with the chosen programme is to be included in the tender price.


    Attendance
          The Contractor must allow in his price for the general
    attendance of one trade upon another, including all sub-contractors
    and for the provision of all plant and equipment.     The Contractor
    is to unload the steelwork at the site and then transport the
   members to their various positions around the ground.


    Conditions of Contract
          The Conditions- of Contract will be the Fifth Edition
    (1973) issued by the Institution of Civil Engineers and
    Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors, with amendments
    but the variation of price (Labour and Materials) clause is NOT
    included.


    Completion of Tender
          Your tender should be on a fixed price basis and include
    for any discount to the Main Contractor.    Please complete the
    enclosed schedules of work and daywork schedule.
          Your tender is to remain open for acceptance for a period
    of 4 weeks from the date of return.     The inviters of this tender
    do not undertake to accept the lowest tender, or any, received.


    Return of Tender
          All tenders must be returned in the envelope provided no
    later than noon on Tuesday, 3 July, 1979.


          We would be pleased if you would acknowledge receipt of this
    document and confirm whether you intend submitting a tender.          If
    you are unable to submit a tender, kindly return all the documents
    immediately.

                                          Yours faithfully,
                    SPECIFICATION OF WORKS FOR USE

                  IN CONNECTION WITH THE FABRICATION

               SUPPLY & ERECTION OF STRUCTURAL STEELWORK


DEFINITIONS           !• 01          The Contractor is the person
                      with overall responsibility for the fabrication
                      and erection of the structural steelwork.


BRITISH               1.02           British Standard Specifications
STANDARDS             are defined by their catalogue number,
                      e.g. B.S. 449 means the British Standard
                      Specification for the use of Structural
                      Steel in Building.   In all cases the B.S.
                      Specification must be the latest edition
                      issued, including any addendums and amendments
                      appertaining to the said Specification.


STANDARD OF           1.03           The work shall be executed
ACCEPTANCE            throughout to the satisfaction of Eastwood
                      and Partners, 23 Kingfield Road, Sheffield
                      Sll 9AS, hereinafter called the Engineer.
                      B.S. 449 together with the clauses specified
                      hereinafter shall apply as the minimum standard
                      of acceptance.


PROGRESS              1.04           At such intervals as may be
REPORTS               required, the Contractor shall submit progress
                      reports to the Engineer, in respect of all
                      mill deliveries, fabrication and erection.


SUB LETTING           ]_.05          No shop or sitework of any kind
                      shall be sub-let without the approval of the
                      Engineer.   Submissions in this respect shall
                      give details of the work involved and the
                      names of the firms proposed.


SUBSTITUTIONS         1.06           If any steel sections shown on
                      the drawings are unobtainable, the tenderer
                      shall include for the cost of substitutions
                      required by him of sections of no less
                      strength than those shown.   Any such intended
                      substitutions allowed for in the Tender must
                      be disclosed at the time of tendering.


SUPERVISION           1.07(a)        The Engineer will be in complete
& INSPECTION          control of the contract.




                                 3
             provide all requisite facilities for this
             purpose. All rolled steel shall be inspected
             by the Contractor immediately it is received
             from the mills and any with surface defects
             shall be remedied or rejected.  If necessary
             in order to avoid delay, replacement shall
             be made from stock, and no extra payment will
             be allowed in this connection.

             1.07 (c)   No condemned material shall be built
             into the structure and workmanship condemned
             on site shall be remedied without extra payment
             or extension of time.

             1.07 (d)   The Contractor shall notify the
             Engineer when each consignment of steel arrives
             on site so that he can make an immediate
             inspection of the surface condition.

             1.07 (e)   The Contractor shall not be absolved
             from responsibility for faults or errors
             discovered after inspection. The Engineer's
             decision regarding rejection shall be taken as
             final.


DIMENSIONS   1.08       The principal dimensions for setting
             out the works shall be those shown on the
             contract drawings, which are to be read in
             conjunction with all further drawings issued
             by the Engineer.

                        The Contractor, when requested by
             the Engineer, shall obtain any dimensions from
             site necessary to ensure that the steelwork
             he is supplying matches up with existing
             barriers, walls or other connecting structures.

                        The sizes of member supplied shall
             be those shown on the contract drawings unless
             authority is obtained from the Engineer to
             make substitutions.


MATERIALS    1.09 (a)   All materials shall be of British
             manufacture throughout.

             1.09 (b)   All structural steel shall comply
             with BS 4360. The appropriate grade shall be
             as specified on the drawings.

             1.09 (c)   Steel received from the mill without
             branding or marking in accordance with the
             relevant B.S. shall be rejected. Particular
             care must be taken to retain' the identifying
             mark for the duration of the work on every
             piece of H.Y. steel.




                         4
              approval, and he retains the right to reject
              any detail of which he does not approve, the
              sub-contractor will remain solely responsible
              for the structural adequacy of his details
              and for their accuracy.  The Engineer will
              try to send any comments on detail drawings
              reasonably promptly but reserves the right
              not to comment.   It is emphasised that the
              Engineer's examination of the drawings will be
              primarily concerned with finding errors
              which could lead to structural inadequacy and
              he will not be concerned with errors in
              dimensions etc.   The steelwork Contractor
              will not be required to wait for the Engineer's
              comments before commencing fabrication, but
              any abortive work arising from the Engineer's
              disapproval of a detail will be at the
              Contractor's expense.

              1.9(d)          The Contractor shall supply
              copies of all approved drawings to the
              Resident Engineer and to the General Contractor
              without charge.    The Contractor shall also
              supply without charge, additional copies of
              drawings for the use of any sub-contractor
              providing cladding-


BUILDING      1.10           Should any drawings and cal­
REGULATIONS   culations be required to be submitted to the
              Local or other Authority, copies of drawings
              and calculations prepared by the Contractor
              are to be made available without charge.


MATERIALS     1.11(a)       All materials shall be of
              British manufacture throughout.

               .11(b)       All structural steel shall
              comply with B.S. 4360.   The appropriate grade
              shall be as specified on the drawings.

              1.11(c)        Steel received from the mill
              without branding or marking in accordance
              with the relevant B.S. shall be rejected.
              Particular care must be taken to retain the
               identifying mark for the duration of the work
              on every piece of H.Y. steel.


TESTING       1 .12(a)        Mechanical tests shall be made
               at the mills on specimens cut from each rolling
              of each section and the certificates sent
               direct to the Engineer if required.

              1 .12(b)        When required b'y the Engineer,
               steel which is to be welded shall be subjected
               to chemical or other approved test to indicate
               weldability and steel shown to have unsuitable
               composition shall not be used for welded
               construction.


                          5
COSTS OF        1.13           The cost of the tests of
TESTS           materials shall be borne by the Contractor.


WORKMANSHIP     1.14           All workmanship shall be of
                first class quality in every respect; the
                greatest accuracy being observed to ensure
                that all members will fit properly together
                on erection.   All corresponding parts where
                required by the Engineer shall .be made inter­
                changeable.


STRAIGHTENING   1.15           All plates shall be flattened
                and all bars and sections straightened and
                made free from twist before any other work
                is done on them, so that when assembled
                the adjacent surfaces shall be in close
                contact throughout.   The methods adopted
                for the above shall be such as not to injure
                or mark the material.


PREPARATION     1.16           All cut edges must be left
OF EDGES AND    straight and true to,the satisfaction of the
ENDS            Engineer.   Any burring of edges shall be
                removed.   Hand flame cutting must not be
                used without the prior approval of the
                Engineer except where the cut is subsequently
                machined or ground to shape.


HOLING          1.17           Drifts shall be used only for
                drawing the work into position and shall not be
                used to such an extent as to distort the
                holes.   Drifts of a larger size than the
                nominal diameter of the hole shall not be
                used.


CONNECTIONS     1.18           Connections made off site shall
                be welded where possible.


BOLTING         1.19           Bolts and nuts except where
                indicated as high strength friction grip or
                turned bolts shall be grade 4.6 to B.S. 4190,
                not less than 16mm diameter and galvanised
                to B.S. 729 (1970).   The nuts shall fit
                hand-tight.


WASHERS         1.20           At least one washer and not
                more than two washers shall be used under the
                nut of every bolt.   No threaded portion of
                any bolt shall be within the thickness of the
                parts bolted together.




                                6
H.S. FRICTION   1.21           When connections are made
GRIP BOLTS      with High Strength Friction Grip Bolts the
                bolts shall comply with B.S. 4395 and they
                shall be used in the manner specified in
                B.S. 4604.   ’Coronet' load Indicator
                Washers by Messrs. Cooper & Turner Ltd.
                Vulcan Road, Sheffield S9 2FW or similar
                approved shall be adopted unless the
                Engineer's consent in writing has been given
                for the adoption of an alternative method.
                They will be used in accordance with the
                manufacturers recommendation.


TURNED BOLTS    1.22           When connections are made
                with turned bolts the bolts shall be machined
                throughout 2mm larger in diameter than the
                nominal diameter of the threaded portion and
                the bearing faces of heads and nuts shall be
                machined truly squared to the shank.   No
                part of the threaded portion shall be within
                the thickness of the parts bolted together.


WELDING         1.23(a)        When required by the Engineer
                means shall be adopted to enable welds to be
                traced to the welder by whom they were made.

                1.23(b)        Peening of welds resulting in
                deformation of the weld surface shall only
                be carried out with the express permission of
                the Engineer.

                1.23(c)       All slag and spatter shall be
                cleaned off every run of weld metal.

                1.23(d)        The Contractor shall arrange
                that each welder prior to his employment
                on this Contract, shall pass the qualifying
                tests given in B . S . 4872 for the type of
                welds on which he is employed.       The names
                of such welders, and details of the qualifying
                tests, shall be recorded and made available
                to the Engineer.

                1.23(e)       In addition to full supervision
                and test, in accordance with B.S. 5289
                carried out by the Contractor, all welds may
                be subjected to non-destructive tests by an
                independent third party.

                1.23(f)       The Steelwork Contractor shall
                if required make available facilities for
                such tests to be made, whether on site or
                off site, during normal working hours.

                1.23(g)       The cost of independent tests
                will be borne by the Employer except that
                the costs of any tests which reveal faulty
                welds plus the costs of any extra tests which




                               7
                are necessitated by the finding of faults
                will be borne by the steelwork Contractor.


SEALING OF      X. 24          Welded box or hollow sections
BOX SECTIONS    shall be sealed off and made airtight to
                the satisfaction of the Engineer, to prevent
                corrosion of the inside.


SURFACES LEFT   1.25(a)         Where H.S. Friction Grip
UNPAINTED       Bolts are used the surfaces in contact
                shall be clean and unpainted, complying
                with B.S. 4604.

                1.25(b)        Surfaces which will ultimately
                be welded or in contact with concrete or
                asphalt, shall be free of paint or any
                other applied finish, oil, dirt, rust and
                scale.   No paint shall be placed within
                75mm of a surface subsequently to be welded.
                The inside surfaces of sealed box sections
                (seeclause  .24) may remain unpainted.


DELIVERY        1.26           The Contractor shall deliver
                the steelwork to site in reasonable accordance
                with the sequence of erection.    A copy of
                each advice note shall be sent to the
                Resident Engineer.


ERECTION        1.27          Erection shall be carried out
                in accordance with B.S. 5531.

                               The Contractor shall have
                particular regard for the need for
                temporary bracing which shall be properly
                designed to resist wind forces.




PLANT AND       1.28           The suitability and capacity
EQUIPMENT       of all plant and equipment used for steelwork
                erection shall be to the satisfaction of the
                Engineer, but this shall in no way relieve
                the Contractor of responsibility in this
                respect.


STORING         1.29           The steelwork ‘will arrive on
AND HANDLING    site with the priming and undercoat of
                paint already applied.   To reduce the amount
                of touching up to paintwork after erection
                to a minimum the steelwork members are to be



                             8
              transported, unloaded, stored and handled
              with greatest possible care and protection.


SETTING OUT   1.30           The positioning and levelling
              of the steelwork, the plumbing of the
              stanchions and the placing of every part
              of the structure in accordance with the
              approved drawings, shall be carried out
              by the Contractor to the satisfaction of
              the Engineer.   Any checking or approval of
              the setting out by the Engineer or other
              persons shall not relieve the Contractor of
              his responsibilities in this respect.


SECURITY      1.31           The work shall be securely
DURING        bolted and if necessary, temporarily braced,
ERECTION      to provide safety for all erection stresses
              and conditions, including those due to
              erection equipment and its operation.


ALIGNMENT     1.32          Permanent connections shall
              not be made until proper alignment has been
              obtained.


SITE          1.33           Site connections are to be
CONNECTIONS   black-bolted or high strength friction grip
              bolted except where specified otherwise on
              the drawings.    All site connections, whether
              bolted or welded, shall be to the standards
              laid down in clauses 56 to 70 of B.S. 449,
              Section H (Work on Site).




                         9
                                                                            POSTS AND HANDRAILS
                                                                                                       Amount
Number                              Item Description                          Unit   Quantity   Rate



           Post and rails as shown on
           Irawlng 15TS/23 -- -------

   1.     Post A fixed by Main Contractor.                                    nr       14

   2.     Post B fixed by Main Contractor.                                    nr        2
   3.     48.3mm dia. rail, including
          site welding and wall fixing
          plates.Rails fixed to wall by
                                                                               m      40
          Main Contractor.
  4.      Cutting existing fence and
          repositioning.                                                              9.5
  5.      New length of fence to match
          existing                                                                    1.5

          Posts and rails as shown on
          drawing 1610/27.

  6.      Posts fixed by Main Contractor                                      nr        86

  7.      48 o3mm dia. rail, including
          site welding and fixing.                                             m      330


         PtJSQfit.               /t« m .   /I    I v c *-oQtSj   M * */


         6 c T '- r e «   (t.AiL   jT o ^              VJt.0tip
         (JpM&u-r/        ^   I " h&oi* TtS-iJ            *2.
         "/d                  firtt*' P*S7,          C?lS>£
                                           A<f-r U ™       GA.OOU9 ,




                                            10                            To Grand Summary
                                               NEW EXIT FROM SPION KOP
                                               SOUTH CORNER

                                                                     Amount
Number              Item Description        Unit   Quantity   Rate



         Door framing as shown on drawing
         151672*
   i.    254 x 79 channel frame including
         welded connections and welding
         on hinges. Channels fixed by
         Main Contractor.                     m        8.6




                           11          To Grand Summary
                                              EMERGENCY EXITS 1-4
                                              AT BOTTOM OF SPION KOP
                                                                      Amount
Number              Item Description         Unit   Quantity   Rate



         Gates and Frames as shown
         on drawing 1610/30, 3f

   1.    Remove existing frames, angle
         rakers and cut back mesh.            nr

   2.    Unhinge and remove existing gate,
         weld on new angle supports and
         mesh.                                nr

   3.    Gate frames, including site
         welding to existing mesh fencing.
         Base fixings by Main Contractor.     nr        8
   4.    Emergency exit gates including
         long bolts and hinges to
         pattern of existing.                 nr




                          12              To Grand Summary
                                              NORTH STAND
                                                                     Amount
Number               Item Description       Unit   Quantity   Rate



         Safety Barrier

         Steelwork as shown on drawing
         161o/32

   1.    Safety barrier.
         Base fixings by Main Contractor.     nr       9




                            13           To Grand Summary
                                              WEST STAND
                                              SOUTHERN ESCAPE STAIR
                                                                       Amount
Number               Item Description         Unit   Quantity   Rate
                                                                        £       P


         Handrails, standards, mesh and
         gate as shown on drawing 1616/33,
         51~E"r a including site welding..
         and erection.

         Steel frame and 'Durbar' plate
         deck including M24 holding
         down bolts.                           nr        1

   2.    Steel Staircase.                      nr        1

   3.    Handrail standards. Fixed by
         Main Contractor to concrete slab.     nr        5

   4.    Handrails welded to standards.        m       18

   5.    Handrails fixed to wall, fixing                                            /
         by Main Contractor.                   m      8.2
   6.    Security fence standards.             nr        2
   7.    RHS framing around staircase.         m     10.5

   8.    Steel mesh, including welding                                              ✓
         and angle framing.                    m2      23

   9.    Security gate with long bolts
         and hinges.                           nr        1

  10.    Handrail standards including
         erection.                             nr        3




                            14            To Grand Summary
                                                            WEST STAND
                                                            NORTHERN ESCAPE STAIR

                                                                           Amount
Number              Item Description              Unit   Quantity   Rate



         Handrails standards, mesh and
         gate as shown on drawing 161*0/33
         x S6 including site welding

   1.    Handrail standards.       Fixed by
         Main Contractor.                          nr         7

   2.    Handrails including welded to
         standards.                                m       8.6
   3.    Steel mesh, including welding-
         and angle framing.                        m2         7

   4.    Cut existing fencing as required.               item

   5.    New emergency exit gate with                                               /
         long bolts and hinges.                    nr




                           15                 To Grand Summary
                                        SOUTH STAND - GANGWAYS EXIT STAIRCASES
                                                                          Amount
Number               Item Description            Unit   Quantity   Rate




         Alterations to Gangways and Exit
         Staircases from South Stand as
         shown on Drawings 16107^7 .W.'Sfe
         m                --------- —

         Supply handrail brackets
         including all welding and drilling

   1.    Bracket type 1.     Fixed by Main
         Contractor.                             nr         33

   2.    Bracket type 2.     Fixed by Main
         Contractor.                             nr         58

   3.    Bracket type 3«     Fixed by Main
         Contractor.                             nr         22

         Supply brickwork support columns,
         including all welding and
         drilling.

   4.    Column type 1.    Fixed by Main
         Contractor.                             nr         15

   5.    Column type 2.    Fixed by Main
         Contractor.                             nr          6
   6.    Column type 3.    Fixed by Main
         Contractor.                             nr          4

   T.    Handrail, including site welding.       nr         165

   8.    Posts.   Fixed by Main Contractor       nr          24




                           16                To Grand Summary
                                                                             Amount
Number                 Item Description             Unit   Quantity   Rate




         Grand Summary

         Post and handrails               Page 10

         New Exit from Spion Kop
         South Corner                     Page 11

         Emergency Exits 1-4 at
         bottom of Spion Kop              Page 12

         North Stand                      Page 13

         West Stand, Southern
         Escape Stair                     Page 14

         West Stand, Northern
         Escape Stair                     Page 15

         South Stand - Gangways
         and Exit Staircases              Page 16



         General Contingency Allowance




                              17              Total Tender Sum
                                       DAYWORK


                                            Quantity   Unit    Rate
Item
 No.


            The rates quoted below are
       to include for the allowances and
       conditions set out in the
       Daywork Schedule on pages 19
       and 20


       Chargehand or Working Foreman                          per
                                                              hour

       Craftsman                                              per
                                                              hour

       Labourers                                              per
                                                              hour

       Allow profit on other charges for
       materials delivered to site.


       Plant

            Percentage addition (if
       required) on Plant as scheduled in
       Section 3 of the Schedules of
       Daywork carried out incidental
       to Contract Works referred to in
       Clause 52(3) of the I.C.E.
       Conditions of Contract.




                                18
Provisions and Conditions attached to the foregoing Daywork
                             Schedule


             That the time of Gangers or chargehands working
             with their gangs is to be paid for under
             appropriate items, but the time of foremen and
             walking gangers is not to be included but is to
             be covered by Site Supervision and Staff.


   (ii)      That overtime when chargeable under the Contract
             and previously authorised in writing by the
             Engineer is to be paid to the workmen - thus,
             if a man works one hour overtime for which he
             is paid for l| hours the Contractor is to be
             paid l£ hours for such a man.


  (iii)      That the rates for plant are only to apply to
             plant which the Contractor has available upon
             the site.


   (iv)     That the rates for materials are to cover delivery
            at the usual points at which materials are
            received on the site and not distribution to the
            individual sites where daywork is in progress,
            the cost of such distribution being chargeable
            in addition.


    (v)      That the daywork rates are to cover the use of
             such Contractor’s wagons and temporary tracks
             as are already in position on the site of the
             work to be done by daywork, unless such wagons
             and tracks are used exclusively for daywork,
             then they are to be paid for.


   (vi)      That the cost of watching and lighting specially
             necessitated by daywork is to be paid for
             separately.


  (vii)      That daywork charges will only be accepted for
             work previously authorised in writing by the
             Engineer to be carried out as daywork.


 (viii)      That craftsmen's rate will only be paid for
             skilled work.


   (ix)      The labour rates will apply to all the General
             Contractor's sub-contract labour.




                        19
1.   Labour

     The rates quoted are to include for wages, bonus
     or other incentive payments, travelling allowances,
     payments in respect of time lost due to inclement
     weather, overtime, other than overtime authorised
     by the Engineer, all payments allowances and
     expenses due in accordance with the rules and
     decisions of appropriate wage fixing authorities,
     all statutory charges, National Insurance and
     Graduated Pensions, Normal Contract Works, Third
     Party and Employers* Liability Insurances, Annual
     and Public Holidays with Pay, Non-contributory
     Sick Pay Scheme, Industrial Training Levy,
     Redundancy Payments Contribution, Contracts of
     Employment Act, Site Supervision and Staff, Small
     Tools, Protective Clothing, Head Office charges
     and Profit, Subsistence or Lodging Allowances and
     periodic travel allowances.

2.   Materials

     Percentage addition required on the cost of
     materials delivered to Site.  (The cost of materials
     means the invoiced price of materials delivered
     to site without the deduction of any cash discount,
     not exceeding 2\% ).


3.   Plant

     Percentage addition (if required) on Plant as
     scheduled in Section 3 of the Schedules of Daywork
     carried out incidental to Contract Work referred
     to in Clause 52(3) of the I.C.E. Conditions of
     Contract.


4.   Supplementary Charges

     Will be paid for as defined and scheduled in Sectior
     4 of the Schedules of Daywork carried out incidental
     to Contract Work referred to in Clause 52 (3) of
     the I.C.E. Conditions of Contract.




                 20
                SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD.


          CONTRACT FOR CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKS CONNECTED

             WITH THE CONSTRUCTION OF NEW EMERGENCY-EXITS

             fe ALTERATIONS TO TSXISTINE STAIRCASES

                AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND


To   : Sheffield Wednesday FoQtball Club Ltd.,
       Hillsborough,
       Sheffield S6 1SW.




GENTLEMEN:            '

      Having examined the Drawings, Conditions of Contract,
Specification and Bills of Quantities for the construction of
the above-named Works, we offer to construct, complete and
maitrtain the whole of the said Works on conformity with the
said Drawings, Conditions of Contrac                 H and
Bills of Quantities for the sum of


or such other sum as may be ascertained in accordance with
the said conditions.

     We undertake to complete and deliver the whole of the
Works comprised in the Contract within the time stated in
the Appendix hereto.

   , Unless and until a formal Agreement is prepared and
executed, this Tender, together with your written acceptance
thereof, shall constitute a binding Contract between us.

     We understand that you are not bound to accept the
lowest or any Tender you may receive.
                        APPENDIX



Amount of Bond   (10)                                       Not required

Minimum amount of third party
insurance (23(2))                                           £250,000

Time for completion     (43)
The work shown on the following drawings to be
substantially complete before 11 August 1979.
1610/23,25,26,30,31,32,33,34,35,36.
The remainder of the work shown on drawings                 Please enter date
1610/4,5,24,27,28,29,37,38 & 39 to be completed             below
as soon as possible after 11 August.

Liquidated damages for delay    (47)                        £1000/week

Period of Maintenance (49(1))                               52 weeks




Percentage of adjustment of
P.C. Sums (59(2)(b) and 5(c)

Percentage of value of goods and
materials on site included in
Interim Certificates (60(2)(b))

Minimum amount of Interim
Certificate (60(27))                                        £1,000




                                       We are, Gentlemen,

                                       Yours faithfully,


                                          Signature

                                          Address



                                          Witness


Date
