                                                                                                          M IR .15



   OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                              Date and time raised                             Number


   Title          L_eU«-j
   (In c lu d e source an d a n y docum ent n u m b er
                                                    U! i
                                                       I If irelevant)
                                                              d c v a i i L /




   Receiver's instructions — urgent action                                            'jouiAZcJj SU^tcj    -
                                                                                                                                  Receiver




                                                                                                                                  Indexer
             ecjj^fen
   Document registered/indexed as indicated

   No(s) of actions raised

   Statement reader's instructions                      m„                                                                    Statement Reader




   Indexed as in y a t e d                   cC Ji bo                                      rc     £cal>bO*iS5Sf~                  Indexer


^ ^ lo ( s ) of actions raised
                                                          AO^uAOutO             A ?



   Examined - further action to be taken




   Further action No(s)                                                                                                            ndexer


   When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                        Derbyshire



                                                        Telephone ,

                                                        16th April, 19p9.

Dear Sir,

                 Nottingham Forest v Liverpool - 15 .4.?-9

           Yesterday it was my Tiisfortune to attend the Notts Forest v Liverpool
F.A. Cup Semi-Final in Sheffield anri the events I witnessed there, what I have
subsequently read in newspapers, and what I have seen on T.V. has prompted Tie to
write to you.

           I an not a supporter of either Club but over the last 30 years I must
have attended over 1,000 Football matches in over 50 grounds. I drove to Sheffield
with my 15 year ole son who had purchased two tickets in Nottingham arriving on the
City side of Hillsborough shortly before l.^Opm. It was a lovely day. We had lunch
on grass by the car before setting out in what was a carnival atmosphere at 1.45pm.
I have been to Hillsborough on many occasions before but never have I seen so much
drinking in the streets before the game. Crowds, all Nottingham Forest supporters,
had gathered outside pubs drinking from glasses, cans, or bottles they were
carrying with them. Many empty cans, bottles, and glasses littered the floor. I
suspect the same applied to Liverpool supporters at the other end.

           On arriving at the ground at 2.00pm we went straight inside to stand at
the very back of the Spion Kop - c a r . I say at this stage if I had not got a ticket
I would have not gone to Sheffield at all. I was suprised at this early time to see
the centre of the terraces at the opnosite end of the ground tightly packed with
swaying supporters whist the wings were almost deserted. Even at kick-off time the
wings at the Liverpool end were not full which was most supprising as all tickets
had been sold. We wer? not aware of the mayhem outside the ground at kick-off time
which was obviously caused by a). Ticket holders arriving late, and b),Many people
arriving without tickets at all. Could not the kick-off nave been delayed or did
no one inside realise what was happening outside? Those on the terraces at 2.00pm
were obviously ticket holders. They were well behaved, patient, and not like those
who arrived at the last minute - worse for drink.

           What happened at 5• 07pm and subsequently is now history but it was
obvious that the Liverpool terraces 'had suddenly filled to full ana overflowing
very quickly.

           Being aware that football supporters from the City of Liverpool have no
regard for authority or the need to purchase tickets in advance it comes as no
suprise that many thousands turned up at the turnstiles without tickets. I suspect
the common purpose was to gain admission for everyone especially as press reports
since the draw was made had made great play on the 'unfairness' to the 'loyal'
Liverpool supporters. Was there no Police intellegence from Liverpool with regard
to numbers travelling without tickets? As yet I have heard no condemnation of the
thousands who intended to gain illegal entry into the ground and my sympathy lies
with the Police commander who was faced with a riot outside the ground or risk a
crush inside. In retrospect I am sure he/she will agree that it was wrong to open
the gates but I am also sure that had he/she not done so the supporters with and
without tickets would have broken down gates and gained admission.



                                                                 Contd
                  The truth of the matter is that the hooligan element have won again.
    They have escaped criticism and at the same time as killing 100 true Liverpool
    supT>orters who had sufficient foresight to arrive early and properly they have
    managed to point an accusing finger at the Police.

                 This is not to say that the Police are free from criticisn. No one
    seemed to be in charge. Many of those officers who were rushed into the ground, like
    me, did not appear to know what was going on or what to do. The least that could
    have been expected was swift and truthful loudspeaker annoucements and appeals -
    there was none. Whether the maniacs pushing in at the back would have backed off we
    shall never know but it would have been worth a try.

                 Where does this all leave us for the future? I have heard cries for
    all seater stadiums, and it looks as though identity cards will be introduced.
    Neither would have prevented the horrors of yesterday as those who intended to gain
    entry would have done so. In fact masters may have been worse.

                    I am sorry to be so negative but I just don't know what to suggest.
    I do make    the following recommendations which ma y help:-

    1. The building of a new and second National Stadium in the north so it and/or
       Wembley can both be used for big matches.

    2.   The use of more   video cameras to monitor crowd movements   in streets   up to 20C
         yards away from grounds.

    3.    Perimeter fencing consisting of hueh swinging type gates which when unlocked
         and opened can allow easy access to the pitch (keep the small gates for the
         Police and stewards to enter the terraces).

    4. Audible and efficient loudspeaker systems are essential both inside and outside
       all grounds no matter how small.

    5. Better medical and first aid facilities are required by law.

         Ground stewards and Police should be issued with personal radios on a ratio of
         1 radio to two persons so they all can be made aware at an early stage of what
         is required rather than passing messages by word of mouth.

                    Thankvou for taking the time to read m y letter.




                                                 Yours faithfully,




     Copies to:-
     Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
     Chief Constable, West Midlands
     Colin KOYNIHAN M.P.
     The Football Association.


4
