    <CHKIST0PH2R JAMBS PARKIN. Ts--)       ^
                                                                       G>oR
    POLICE C0NSTA3L3 130.                                                     c^Sx     .


    O’/.'jR 21. Bora |

    ADV.’ICK POLICE STATION - D0NCAST2R. Tel. Kexborough 5 83 1 51 .

    SUMMARY OF DUTY FOR SATURDAY 15th APRIL 1 9 8 9 .


    Since September 1979 I have been a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police
    and since July 1935 I have been attached to A 3 sub-Division, Doncaster. At present
     I am a member of the Directed Patrol Unit, stationed at Adwick police Station,
    Doncaster.

    At 8am., on Saturday 15th April 1989 I paraded for duty at Adwick Police Station
     from where I was transported to Doncaster Police Station.

    At 8.30am., that same morning we were briefed on the car park to the Magistrates
    Court. Duties were in connection with the Liverpool v Nottingham Forrest football
     match being played at Hillsborough, football stadium, Sheffield, that afternoon. I
     was informed I was part of serial 35 under the command of Police Sergeant 2936
     Lindop and the overall command of Inspector Townend. Following this short briefing
     my serial were placed on the Force coach and transported, as part of a convoy, to
     the Hillsborougjh Football stadium.

     On arrival at the stadium we were seated in the North stand where at 10am., we
     were briefed, on block by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield who was in overall
     command of the operation and introduced to the other senior Officers present. The
     Inspectors were then given a separate briefing and at 11am., they then briefed
     us as serials. A packed meal was provided and taken at this stage, we then left
     the stadium and made our way as a serial along Penistone Road North, to its junction
     with Claywheels Lane, Sheffield.

^    At this point we split into pairs and my partner was Folice Constable 106 GOSS. Me
     were positioned at the junction of Claywheels Lane and the slip road which leads
     from Niagara, v/ithin minuits Liverpool coaches began to arrive under escort. Myself
     and P.C. Goss stopped every coach which came onto Claywheels Lane. Due to the large
     numbers arriving we split up so as to ensure each driver and his passengers were
     spoken to. The drivers were told to drive down Claywheels Lane until they were
     stopped by a Traffic Warden. They would then be turned round and would drive back
     up Claywheels Lane where they would be parked behind the last bus. The passengers
     were all informed to remain on the coach until it had been par.-ced up; no supporters
     would be admitted to the ground without a ticket; any supporter seen taking alcohol
     to the match would be arrested and that no large banners would be allowed into the
     stadium. After the 5 or 6 buses had passed our position, and the passengers had
     alighted I began to notice they were being approached by other supporters, on foot
     who were asking, " ANY SPARES ".
                                                                                             2. ST
\                              -    2   -




    From this I assumed they were enquiring about spare tickets. As more buses arrived
    the number looking for ’spares' grew to about 100. At this point I began advising
    the bus passengers to keep their tickets in their pockets until they reached the
    ground so as not to take the risk of loosing then of having them stolen.
    The buses contained a wide range of supporters of both sexes and all ages. They
    were generally well behaved and many were singing as they walked past us. A few
    were carrying cans of beer / lager but when spoken to they returned these cans to
    their buses. The majority had been drinking but I did not see any at this stage who
    were drunk. Many of the supporters were in a talkative mood and intimated they were
    going to catch a bus up Halifax Road to a public House they had visited the previous
    year. By I.A^pa., I would estimate in excess of 50 coaches had been parked up and
    we were informed by Inspector Tovmend that the Road was full. Coaches were then esc
    escorted up Halifax Road. Together with P.C. Goss I moved to the junction of
    Penis tone Road North and Claywheels Lane. I noticed many of the fans were walking
    down the road carrying cans of lager / beer. We formed a split cordon across the
    pavement and no supporter was allowed to pass carrying any form of alcoholic drink.
    The majority of fans drank the cans before going on their way. From this point the
    numbers walking down to the ground gradually increased and the average age began
    to fall. The family element disappeared and the majority were male youths. Nearly
    all were carrying cans of beer / lager but they were still stopped from passing.
    Many of the fans passing us were now somewhat the worse for drink but they were
    still fairly mild mannered. When stopped a few became egressive and abusive but
    when advised they calmed down but very few left thier drink, all would sit or stand
    in front of us and drink the can dry.
    The crowds continued to pass our position, which was some 5 rainuits from the ground
    until after 3 o'clock. Due to the number and thier lateness it was obvious they
    would miss the start of the match unless it was delayed. As the start of the match
    drew closer the fans attending appeared to get drunker.

    About 5.05pm., we reformed on Claywheels Lane in order to go for a meal at the
    Traffic Post. The large number of fans had dwindled but there were still a few
    still walking down Penistone Road North, towards the ground. The people looking
    for spares had disappeared.

    At this point   P.3   .Lindop   informed me that assistance was being asked for at the
    Leppings Lane   end of the ground. Most of our serial had gone into theGate Public H
    House to eject some noisy fans but together with those Officers present I made
    my way to Leppings Lane.

    As we reached   Leppings Lane an Inspector was lining all available meninto units.
    Together with   P.S. Lindop I joined one of these units as Inspector Townend was not

    present at this stage and the assistance required appeared to be very ur jent. I did
                            -   3   -




    not have a radio and I had no idea what was happening inside the ground. About 3.15pm.,
    we were marched into the ground via Leppings Lane and turnstiles 1 - 16. *.’e went
    through the large blue concertina exit gate and as we walked across the open ground towari
    the tunnel which leads under the middle of the 'Jest Stand large numbers of Liverpool
    supporters were hurling abuse at us. These fans were the most violent and abusive I
    have ever seen. They were kicking, punching and spitting at us. We were hopelessly
    outnumbered. I still did not have any idea what was happening inside the ground and
    at this point I was both afraid of what was happening and not knowing what was
    going to happen. I was relieved to reach the darkness of the tunnel where the numbers
    of Liverpool supporter were not as great. Up until   this pointI had assumed that the
    assistance required was due to fighting inside the   ground but   at this point I saw
    other Officers, and supporters carrying what appeared to be unconscious fans through
    the tunnel we were walking down. As we neared the end of the tunnel and the terreaces
^   I could see fans who were involved in minor scuffles among themselves but as we approachei
    they turned their aggression towards us. I can still remember the taunts of, "YOU*33
    TO FUCICEKG IAT-; NOV/ YOU BASTARDS   " FUCKING MURDERING BASTARDS ’’ , and " WHERE THE
    FUCK WERE YOU ’."-EH YOU WERE NEEDED ". At this point I still did not have any idea what
    had happened* but I cannot recall ever having seen a more violent crowd and I was still
    very frightened.

    As we came out onto the terraces, and paused in an attempt toassertain what was happenim
    I saw the body of a man lying on the ground of the   terraces, near to the wall at the back
    of the terraces where the main seating begins. I could see other supporters walking over
    the      body. I immediately made my way to where the man was, which was only about 10
    to 15 feet away, where I attempted to make a clearing in order to protect the man. He
    was about 5' 10’’ tall, heavy build with a beer belly, white, brown hair, and he was
^   wearing jeans which were unbuttoned at the waist where I could see he was wearing
    boxer shorts. The mans complexion was pale, almost blue. I knelt beside him where I
    discovered he was not breathing and he had no pulse. I rolled him onto his back and
    punched him in the chest, but he still did not have a pulse. I began to perform mouth
    to mouth resuscitation but as I did other fans were still clambering over both me and
    the man. I could feel people kicking me in the back. Around me I noticed there were other
    bodies. I looked for other Officers to assist me but I had become separated from the
    others and I could not see them. I again attempted to form a clearing but it was
    impossible, ./hen I requested assistance from other fans they just became abusive. I
    took hold of the man, under his armpits and attempted to drag him out of the way. At
    this I was joined by 3 Liverpool fans who helped me to carry the nans body out through
    the tunnel in the West Stand. When we came out into the open land I could see other bodie
    lying there being attended to by other Officers. I remembered seeing an ambulance just
    outside the ground, near to Leppings Lane, so we carried the man out through the blue
    gate.
I spoke to the ambulance man who was sitting in the front and he told me " Every
available ambulance is on its way ", I told him this man was blue and was not
breathing but he pointed to the rear of the ambulance, Kis colleague was working on
one body and there were at least 6 others in a similar state, I again felt for a pulse
on the man I had carried but to no avail, I decided I could help him no more and
returned to the terraces. There I assisted to lift 3 more bodies out of the stand
and onto the pitch. A search of the floor of the terraces was then made but no more
badly injured were located. The remainder of the crowd were still very hostile and
rather than stand about doing nothing I climbed onto the pitch to see if I could
assist those Officers performing mouth to mouth. Most of the bodies on the pitch
showed no signs of life. They were not breathing and had no pulse. On Officer said
he had found a nan breathing and we placed him in the recovery position. That Officer
ensured the nans air sapply remained open whilst I monitered his pulse.

At this point Liverpool supporters began placing bodies on advertising boards and
carrying the bodies towards the corner of the North Stand and the Spion Kop. V/e kept
the injured man under supervision, on the pitch until a proper stretcher arrived
and the other Officer accompanied the man off the pitch to ensure he received medical ati
attention and was not left as dead, '.’e were with this man at least 15 minuits before he i
was carried from the pitch. During this time I was constantly surveying the surrounds
and watching other Officers attempts to revive bodies. I saw Officers attempting to
revive the dead and moving on to another body when they failed. Other Officers would
then attempt to revive the same bodies. Eventually the fire service arrived with
breathing a^aparatus but they were unable to revive the bodies. I would describe the
injured man as being about ^+0 years of age, thin build, brown curly hair, glasses
and wearing jeans and a leather type jacket. ,.s other Officers arrived on the pitch
they appeared to be just standing about but as the bodies disappeared on the pitch
there was little they could do. This seemed to aggravate the Liverpool supporters
even more. They made a surge towards the Nottingham supporters on the Spion Kop when
they began to chant and a cordon was formed across the centre of the pitch.

Uhen no more injured remained I joined this cordon. Me were constantly bombarded by abuse
from the Liverpool supporters who kept showing me full tickets saying everyone had
been let in on mass and no tickets had been taken. They also stated a large number
without tickets had also been allowed in. It was at this point I began to realise what hi
had happened inside the ground. I did not have a radio but Sergeant Lindop informed
us what v:as being passed by now. 'There were no announcements over the tannoy. About
^.I5pm., it was announced over the tannoy that the game had been abandoned. We left
the pitch by the corner of the Spion Kop and the North Stand. As we did the Nottingham
supporters applauded us as at the same tine the Liverpool fans booed and jeered.

The serial by now was almost back as a unit although I noticed P.C. GOSS was missing.
V.'e made our way back to Claywheels lane, along Penistone Poad North. Some 50 yards fron t,
the stadium I noticed the pavement outside an 'off licence strewn with empty bottles
and cans.

Once at the junction of Claywheels Lane and Niagara we stopped and stood beside a wall.
As the Liverpool Fans passed by us they were shouting abuse and some were restrained
by their fellow supporters. All attempts to be civil towards them were met with
abuse. when an emergency number wa?: announced myself and P.C. 323^ COBB visited
every coach parked on Claywheels Lane andinformed the drivers of the coaches of this
number. V.?e still were constantly being threatened and abuse was being shouted in our
direction. Once all of the Coach drivers had been informed of the number we began to
talk with what few Liverpool supporters would speak. This number grew and eventually
the majority calmed down. Some were even taken to the Traffic garage to use the
telephone / toilet. Gradually the buses began to disperse except for those who had
passengers missing. Many of the Liverpool Supporters stated that the Liverpool
Chairman had announced on the radio that the Liverpool fans had broken down a gate
at the stadium. They strongly denied this stating that the gate had been opened.
Many were fearfull of what they described as a 'cover up'.

As a result of what   these supporters had said, and as a result of my own feelings
I returned to the Traffic garage \tfhere I completed a full pocket book entry. Hot all
of that is contained in this report but the majority is included.

I took no further part in the proceedings and at 7 pm., that evening I was returned to
Doncaster D . H . a l o n g with other Officers where we went off duty at 8 pm.

Prior to being stationed at Doncaster I worked 'D' Division, Sheffield for almost 6 years
I have worked at many matches at Hillsborough including F.A. Cup semi-finals and I
have a good knowledge of the ground and surrounding area. In previous matches I have
never seen so many supporters On Halifax Soad so close to the start of the match.
Normally by 2.'-5pm., this approach to the ground is quiet appart from a few stragglers.
