                              '■
   Tm Police Constaole 1c?9 K. Hogan                                       \
                                                                                    4>/-7S'
      Armthorpe, A2 Sub Division
      South Yorkshire Police                                         29 June 1989

              Semi Final Incident At Hillsborough. Football Ground Sheffield



  I report that on Saturday 15 April 1989 I reported on duty at Armthorpe
  Police station near Doncaster for duty at Hillsborough Football ground Sheffield
  for the F.A. semi cup final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. I went to
  Doncaster main Police station from there I was conveyed with other officers by
  bus to Sheffield Wednesday Football ground at Hillsborough . There in the main
  stand with all the other officers I was briefed as to my duties and assigned to
  serial k-5 in charge was P.S. 960 Murrey and informed I was to go Tankersey roundabout
  to monitor and search football supporters busses and mini busses for alchol and
  weapons.

  At 11am that date I commenced duties at Tankersey and together with the officers
  on this serial commenced to search busses and mini busses for alchol and weapons.
  A quantity of cans of beer was found' by myself and other officers mainly from
  the mini busses and vans carrying Liverpool supporters to the ground. These Cans of
  beer were confiscated from the supporters some of whom were already under the influence
  of alchol and resented the fact that their beer -was being taken from them causing
  them to become aggresive. On some of the larger supporters busses which were generally
  better organised with less alchol evident either having been consumed or found
  on the bus, however there were several supporters on these busses who were not in
  possession of tickets and stated that there brother/fathers/friends had their tickets
  and were on another bus or were being met at the ground.

  At approximately 2.^0Pm myself and the other officers on my serial concluded duty at
  Tankersey and commenced to go to Clay Wheels Lane Poad Traffic garage for a meal
  break. However upon reaching Clay Wheels Lane depot we were ordered to go to the
  Football Ground where a disturbance was talcing place, upon receiving this order
  we all proceeded to go to the ground.

  Upon reaching the ground at The Leppings Lane end we were ordered by an inspector
  already at the scene to form a line with other officers to prevent football supporters
  from getting in to the ground. After a short period of time the supporters who had
  been trying to gain entry began to disperse and we were directed into the entrance
  area, of the ground at Leppings Lane where supporters had started to come out of the
  stadium.

^^At this time I saw that some of the supporters were injured and were being assisted
^Pby other Police officers and supporters from the stadium and went to assist a supporter
  who was having trouble breathing and got him to an area at the rear of the Leppings
  Lane where other persons were being assisted. . He started to breathe more easily
  and complained of a sore ankle I gave him my tunic to keep him warm to await an amoulance
  at this time I saw that some of the persons in this ares, were deceased. I went
  back into the area at the exit of the Leppings Lane terraces and assisted to get some
  other supporters out into the area which had been set aside as an aid area on*of
  whom appeared to be struggling to breathe but after being brought out of the area,
  which was by this time packed with people leaving the stadium, he came to quite
  quickly and was able make his own way home. During this time supporters leaving
  the stadium were becoming very abusive towards Police officers in this area and
  the whole area became very tense.

  While I was in the aid area at the wall at the rear of Leppings Lane I was ordered by
  ah Inspector (identity unknown) to take charge of one of the deceased, as a result of
  this order I commenced sudden/Jprocedure on a man who"I now know to have been David
  John BilCSON 22 years b. 20.11.66 a sales representative of                             I
  Warrington. The deceased was conveyed to the stadium's gymnasium wnicli was oeing
  used as a temporary mortuary and remained there with the deceased until ne was idenuixied
  by his father at 2.05 Am on Sunday 15 April 19^9* I then escorxed tne deceaseu to
                                                                               «o< i~f'{

        Semi Final Incident        At Hillsborough Football Ground Sheffield      Sheet 2


the Medico Legal centre at Sheffield where I handed over the body of the deceased end
                                                   *


his property to the staff at that centre.      I then left the centre end returned   home
retiring from duty et        am that date.




              P . c . 1629
