                       Sheffield Archives Ref: f o u f a / l f j y j                                MIR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                  Date and time raised                 iA/gl                    Number
                                                                           ..   iceng-
Title _______
                       JjJhJ                                                              &               fa            f

(Include source and any docum ent number if relevant)

Receiver's instructions —urgent action — Yes/^6              /Kr*y                        si   //        'Y ^
            tf   flJUZj£?Cu*1         yVv                                                                                         Receiver


                       NaJI&Sbu           r t b t f u , rfc O             -K u *s tz f f a
     ----- '    —             jf f
Document registered/indexed as^indicated
                                                                                                                                     Indexer


No(s) of actions raised                    *                                                                                ^?36
Statement reader's instructions        JoOA, #l/«.                                       *M aaJ u*aH 6 *
                                                                                                                            Statement Reader

                                                                          V                                                  S lX fo
                                                                                                                                     Indexer
Indexed as indicated    {^/JuzJl             b tU 6 b ,h l^ 6 ^        bf% ^S, Dli(-,<P\ .
No(s) of actions raised                 c*/v I S S S r h ^                                                                    9ss£„
Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                        O/M           SIO
                                                                                               1       ,uguil^i«Wtoe*
                                                                                                                            <t)
                                                                                                   Pi! P
                                                                                                   liLL                     (6 0 1
                                                                                                                                     Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                               Wallasey
                                               Merseyside
                                               17th April 1989


Dear Sir/Madam,
                    The Hillsborough Disaster : 15th April 1989

Please find enclosed four accounts by members of my family                     each
independantly made on Sunday 16th April while the memory was fresh.
We...'hope this evidence may be of some help so such a disaster will never
happen again.


Yours faithfully,




(tfufy / u j r io '■                                        ■


                                 jit.-                      ^                         fa™ *™ ■

                             u                          -


                             f{aM
                             i               {j U £ FA •
                            tln v i a w k   < j L ^ f ^ l 'P r ttk M   ^        ■


                           sfC $ejL                                        ■
F A Cup^Final Hillsborough 15 April 1989



Arrived at 14.45 pm at Entrance B.
Large crowd milling around - noisy but not menacing.
No real crowd movement ; nobody appeared to be going 1n.
Police announced side gates opened.
Crowd walked through at fast pace but not running.
No tickets
     ^>
           asked for or Inspected.
Funnelled through tunnel onto packed terrace.
My wife and I managed to get to the pitch side of a barrier but our two
children (16 and 14} became separated.
Game kicked offJS- Passive surging of crowd, much discomfort but no sign of
trouble only obvious Jremendous overcrowding.
Noticed people trying to climb over barrier to pitch but police lined up on
pitch and tried to push fans back (verbally and physically).
Game then stopped by police due to number of fans on pitch.
I was still unaware of seriousness of problem except people were trying to
push back from front and much shouting.
Fans being hoisted up to terrace above.
Fans then began to disperse more quickly as small door opened onto pitch
(not aware of this at that moment although clearly fans were leaving on to
pitch through this opening).
Approximately now 15.15 pm.
Horror of incident now emerging - a mass grave was appearing some 2 metres
in front.
People dying 1n front of us - ashen white and beginning to turn blue.
Fans giving first aid - kiss of life, chest thumping.
Police and first alders now getting to dead/1njured and starting to
help/move.
Elder son located us and was O.K. and then saw younger sonclingingto side
railings obviously O.K. but could not get back to usandended     upon pitch
from righthand area.
People stunned with disbelief and began to filter out through entrance.
There is no doubt in my mind the situation was completely out of control
from the time of opening the side gates.
Problem caused by too many people in too small a space.
No communications.
Police on pitch watching had no idea what was happening and when they
realised did not appear to know what to do.
Had front barrier been quickly taken down (ie wire cutters) then would have
been no disaster.
The solution however was so so simple :
1”      Should NOT have opened gates
2       Should have delayed kick-off
3       Should have kepfthe crowd, both outside and inside informed of
        the        for the delay and there would have been no animosity
        or injury.
1    Due to severe traffic hold-ups at Stockport in particular we
     arrived about three-quarter of an hour laterthan we had planned.
     Probably many more people were late for the same reason.
2    We made our way to Leppings Lane and Gate B, as stated on the
     tickets.
3    Two lads asked 1f we had any spare tickets as we approached
     Leppings Lane end itself. When we turned the corner we were
     confronted by a large crowd being held back by police on horses.
     By now it was 2.50 pm.
4    Some of the fans were eager to get in for the kick-off and there
     were some challenges to the police but nothing serious - wanting to
     know why we weren't being let through. One policeman said 'You're
     not going anywhere, so there's no point in pushing forward' and
     while a few still tried to get through most of the crowd was
     standing patiently back from the horses across the road.
5    About 2.55 pm a policeman said 'Right lads they're opening the side
     gate|jYG# can go through there'.
6    We went through, but at that point the surge from outside was not
     so great. I, for instance, was holding our 4 tickets, expecting to
     give them in before going into the stadium. My elder son told me
     to put them away in case they were snatched and, without being
     jostled, I had time to stand and put them in my younger son's
     jacket pocket and secure it.
7    We then entered a dark tunnel and it was while we were going
     through there that pressure from behind, then from all sides,
     started to build up.
8    I was frightened but anticipated the crush would ease when we got
     on the terraces, but when we got into the fresh air, we came up
     against another block of people and the crush was intense - swaying
     in every direction.
9    I clung on to my husband, but we were separated from our sons. I
     fell, but was hauled up and we found ourselves with our bodies to a
     barrier which was behind us.
10   Meanwhile the game kicked off, and supporters still coming in, made
     the crush even worse.     They could not see what was happening in
     front - only that the match had started and they were caught up at
     once in the furore of the game.
11   We just clung on to the barrier behind in desperation. Some people
      began to climb over the 'cage' fence and it 'looked' as if they
     were invading the pitch, but they were only escaping.
                   continued/...



12      Then the game was stopped. The police came to the 'cage' railings
        as they would to suppress a rioting crowd - in a straight line
        yelling to everyone to get back but we could not as barriers
        parallel to the pitch prevented it. Some supporters were dragged
        up to the seating area above, so as to leave more room below in our
        area.
13      Then the police opened the narrow gate through on to the pitch -
        only one gate - 3ft wide atmost.
14 >    Gradually the crush in front of us began to thin to reveal many
  *•'   dead and dying people - many on top of each other up to about 5ft
        back from the 'cage1 railings and some furtherback just in front of
        us.
15      My elder son found his way back to us but had lost      our younger
        son, ||ndsitfas panic stricken.
16      My husbaffd was just going forward to search for him among the
        people on the ground, when         spotted him climbing the 'cage'
        fence and yelled to him to get over on to the pitch.
17      We saw him do so and knew he would be safe.
18      There were many people lying on the terraces in front of us - many
        a purplish blue colour and obviously dead or dying.
19      Friends were trying to revive some people but there was very little
        room to stretch people out.
20      We tried to comfort two lads who had 'come round' without help but
        were injured and very shocked.
21      After what seemed a long while the police came through and began
        checking the people on the ground on the terraces, but it was too
         late for many.
22      Ambulances started to arrive actually on the pitch, by which time
        many of the victims were on the pitch receiving help.
23      We left as soon as we could find a way out, to relieve the
        congestion.
                    continued/...
General comments
I feel this was an avoidable accident.

1       Allocation of tickets inadequate
2       Liverpool fans housed in smallest section of stadium
3       Fans could not move across to less cramped terraces due tobarriers
         at right angles to pitch preventing easy access. Had we gone
         through the turnstiles however, we would not all have been
         channelled into that central section but more would have gone to
         the less congested areas.
    »    No organised and audible communication with crowd outside wanting
         to get in to see the kick-off. They wefe just being yelled at to
         stay back by mounted police.
I asked a policeman if kick-off had been delayed as it seemed a sensible
idea. He said not as yet. One policeman said the large crowd outside was
the fans' f^yltnfor coming late : unavoidable in some cases as explained :
but fault wa#‘simply too many people who were inefficiently controlled.
Some of the crowd were getting anxious to get in but if they had been
properly informed of the overcrowding already on the terraces, the majority
would have waited especially if kick-off had been delayed, and gone through
the turnstiles and been channelled into their allocated areas.      I query
whether communication was adequate with police inside and outside the
ground since there was already a bad crush inside before the gate was
opened as was evidenced when we were finally allowed in.
As it was the police crowd control went from firstly holding everyone back
to quite suddenly opening that large side gate to allow all and sundry in.
No tickets were checked. Who can blame non-ticket holders for going in -
if any did?    It was a perfect opportunity. Officials had no idea of the
actual numbers on the terraces - as a result.
Equally, it seemed the police were slow to react to prevent even more
coming through from outside, when the real disaster was under way.

In addition, communication of events in the stadium were poor.      At one
pont opposing fans were jeering the Liverpool supporters on the pitch -
unaware of the problem - they thought it was a pitch invasion - there
should be a national/international warning 'siren' when a life threatening
situation has developed - ordinary public address is a waste of time - it
can't be heard in all the noise, but perhaps would be, if used in
conjunction with siren.
Hopefully this would prevent other unnecessary incidents developing out of
frustration which demand even more police resources, which are required
elsewhere.
                             70&\k>'
              (Aged 16)

There was a huge crowd outside the Leppings Lane entrance at 2.55 pm. The
police had formed a wall of two horses In front of the gates, preventing
the entry of arriving fans to the already congested turnstiles.           The
police assured us that there was nobody actually getting Into the ground at
this end. The horses moved apart creating a gap and we were Instructed to
move to a side gate which had been opened to allow fans Into the ground.
Myself and three other members of my family passed 1n the direction
instructed and passed through the gates. There were no groundsmen around
and all four of us passed through without our tickets being taken.         We
passed through a tunnel which overspilled Into the Leppings Lane section
•B1 segment.     We were packed in like sardines.    I lost both my parents
and grimly held on to my younger brother who was finding 1t very difficult
to breathe 1n the crush. Nobody watched the game. We were more concerned
about keeping our feet firmly fixed on the ground.        A girl was getting
badTy crushed and I helped pass her above the heads of fans towards the
narrow gate which had been opened by the police.        By now people were
struggling to climb over the railings and get onto the pitch. The police
were telling us to move back but we couldn't, because people were still
coming 1n from behind. People were falling down all over the place, many
were trodden^on* People were being passed to the people in the seating
area above arm behind and slowly space was forming 1n front of us. By now
my brother had disappeared and I considered searching through the blue
corpses which were piled three persons high in front of me.    I spotted him
on the railing, climbing over onto the pitch after he had climbed out of
section 'B ' Into the less densely packed area to the right of the goal.
Fans were weeping everywhere and we all comforted each other.      I found my
parents and escorted them out of the ground via the tunnel through which we
entered. My brother made his way off the pitch and we eventually met him
outside the ground.




              (aged 16)
             (aged 14) ^

Outside the ground there was a great deal of congestion but nothing slnster
as everybody could simply move back onto the road. The police on horses
created a line separating those going for the turnstiles and those coning
late. People were asking for the K.O. to be delayed as they weren't going
to get 1n on time.    Suddenly the line of mounted police split and one of
the policemen said "Go to the right, a gate has been opened".
As we channelled through the gate, there wasn't any congestion until we
actually got Into section 'B '. Once 1n the section I just couldnd't move
and, as people were still coming 1n from behind there was no way back.
With the constant supply of people I was gradually carried towards the
front of the section and, luckily, to the side where I managed to climb
over the railings.
Ttie section into which I climbed was at least half empty and, as a result,
people were able to lay the injured down.
Finally, I climbed over the large railing stopping people getting onto the
pitch, from where I managed to spot my family still in the 1B 1 enclosure,
which was pglfffiing to clear, revealing the mass of bodies towards the
front of the enclosure.




             aged 14)
