n * :


   V
                                                                                                                 COLIN HAYWOOD

                                                                                                                 Over 21

                                                                                                                  Police Constable 1054

                                                                                                                  South Yorkshire Police




Drtad th*                 31             day of                    May                  10 89

                                                                    8l« n«d ..................
                                                                                                                                                               Pc
<............................................................................................................................................   bains unabl* to raad tha ctatamant balow,

I.                                                                                      of



Datad tha                                day of                                         10



I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, at present attached

to the Community Liaison Department, West Bar Police Station, Sheffield.

On Saturday 15 April 1989, I attended at the Sheffield Wednesday Football

Ground, Hillsborough, where a cup semi-final football match was taking place

between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.

I commenced duty at 9.30 a.m. and was attached to Sergeant McCall's serial.

Along with many other Officers I was briefed by senior Officers regarding

duties on what was expected that day.

On conclusion of the briefing, together with Police Constable 3012 Thomas,

I attended at 'O' Gate which is                                                                 situated at the Herries Road end of the

stadium at the side of The Kop.

My duties were                                   to check persons enteringthe ground through this gate, for

example press,                                  disabled persons and those authorised to enter the stadium.

During these duties I also monitored supporters walking along Herries Road



Sifnad
                            COLIN HAYWOOD



and those queueing to enter The Kop.    On this occasion Nottingham Forest

supporters were allocated this area, whilst Liverpool siqpporters were

given the Leppings Lane end of the stadium.

It was during this time, and together with Police Constable Ihomas, that

we detained two Nottingham Forest supporters,

                           Both these youths were arrested for drunkenness

and were taken to the Charge Room within the ground, and detained.

The necessary reports were completed and together with Police Constable

Thomas, I returned to 'O' Gate.

It would have been about 3.00 p.m. tut I do not recall the exact time.

I was standing inside the stadiun just up frcxn 'O' Gate, when I was

obliged to walk down the ranqp and onto the running .track which encircles

the playing area.   The players were on the pitch and the game had

commenced.

On looking around the stadiun, it was obviously full to capacity and the

atmosphere was electric.

I did not have a personal radio so was unaware of what was taking place

in other areas of the stadium, but from my position I saw a youth walking

down the right hand side of the pitch at the side of the cantilever stand.

I believe it to be called the new South Stand.

Looking towards the Leppings Lane terrace where the Liverpool supporters

were congregating, it appeared that other supporters were attempting to

climb over the steel fencing.     I believed that these supporters were

about to invade the pitch, so I walked up the side of the playing area,

close to the new South Stand and whilst the players were still on the

pitch, I removed the youth I had seen earlier, by pushing him towards the
                               COLIN HAYWOOD



 new South Stand.      I then looked back towards the Leppings Lane terrace

 and saw people being crushed against the steel fencing.      It was mayhem,

 with supporters climbing over others to escape the crush.      On seeing the

 situation, I went to the rear of the goal and joined a nunber of other

 Police Officers.      I could see that a gate leading onto the pitch had

 been opened and a number of supporters had tried to push through the open

 gate and were lying on the floor within the gateway.       Hundreds of other

 supporters inmediately behind were being pushed ontO the people lying on

 the floor.

 It was obvious we could not get them all through the gate, so I climbed

 onto the steel fencing, reached over and started pulling people out of

 the crush round the gate, the idea being to relieve pressure on the gate

 so enabling people to escape more easily.

 I was joined by Chief Inspector Sumner and together we probably lifted

 ten or twelve people clear of the gate.       Other Officers were pulling

 supporters through the gate hole.      Time, at this stage, ceased to exist

 and we continued to pull people out until it was decided to break a hole

 in the fence.      Along with other Officers, I proceeded to rip a hole in

 the fence.      At this stage the crush had ceased and the supporters were

 lifting people who had collapsed up out of the terrace to me and other

 Officers, who in turn passed them to waiting Officers,

 fti looking around, a large nuntoer of people were lying on the grass and

 at this stage I did not comprehend that deaths had occurred.      Not until

 I assisted Inspector Harper in picking up these people and placing them

 in an ambulance did I realise that they had in fact, died.

 Because of the number of injured people, who by this stage were more in



Sign



       UK         C J o Sh
                                COLIN HAYWOOD



need of the ambulance than were the dead, we removed the bodies and

 placed than back on the grass.

 Supporters were ferrying those lying on the grass on 'makeshift' stretchers

 away to the rear of the South Stand.

 Time passed, with Officers and supporters just standing around after the

 removal of the dead and injured, trying to grasp what had taken place.

 After a while, I returned to the Police area, where I was asked to assist

  to convey by Police bus, relatives and witnesses, tP Hanmerton Road

 Police Station.     "                              *

 Due to the amount of traffic, I was only able to make two journeys, and

 on rtty return to Hillsborough, the ground had cleared.

  I was then told to go off duty.




Sipnad . .               ....
