      Chief Superintendent I«owe                                  D&C/JML/SB CSF.96/94

                                                                  Discipline

      The Chief Constable, Mr Richard Wells via
      Assistant Chief Constable, Mr Davies
                                                                  7 June 1994


                   ♦The Cook Report*   -   Thursday 2 Jane 1994

Following the screening of ’The Cook Report* on Thursday 2 June 1994# research has
been carried out at this office to establish whether the programme revealed any new
evidence from the events surrounding the Hillsborough tragedy.

Inspector Phil Woodward and Police Constable Ken Greenway have produced the attached
report and are to be congratulated on producing thorough research in such a short
space of tiae.

Thera are a number of discrepancies in the Cook Report#           the   prograiaae   lacked
objectivity, but isost important it revealed no new evidence.

The issues referred to in the enclosed report are many and at tiroes complex.     My
suggestion is that the report is read carefully and then should the reader wish to
have further clarification on any itea then perhaps a me t i n g can be arranged. In
particular I find Ken Greenway's knowledge of the disaster extrejaely helpful.

Having read the report the question of what to do with the information contained
within it will have to be addressed.    I aa of the opinion that there is sufficient
evidence to contradict the majority of Mr Cook's ‘findings' but whether that would
serve any useful purpose is open to debate.    In particular it will be difficult to
find a suitable forum for refuting the inaccuracies in the Cook Report.

In the TV programme Mrs Williams, mother of Kevin, says that she is to approach the
Attorney General for a fresh enquiry. Clearly that avenue is open to Mrs Williams
and it will be an option to do nothing until communication is received from the
Attorney General, if ever.




Chief Superintendent
Discipline and Complaints
03-JUN-1994   13:49    FROM CHESHIRE POLICE P .R .O .   TO




      ISSUED SY:      MR M2RVYN JONES, CHIEF CONSTABLE, CHESHIRE CONSTABULARY

      TO:                           YORKSHIRE ON SUNDAY NEWSPAPER

     DAT:             3.6.94



      I led an enquiry which I believe to have been very thorough into the
      Hillsborough Disaster, interviewing almost 13,000 people during the
      course of the investigation. All the material was made available to the
      then Lord Justice Taylor, the Coroner and the Director of Public
      Prosecutions.

     Watching the Cook Report yesterday evening, I was not convinced that any
     new evidence was presented which would have changed the outcome of Lord
     Justice Taylor's inquiry or the Coroner's inquest.

      However, clearly the issues raised are of importance to some people, but
      it is for then to pursue these through the appropriate legal channels.
      I do not think a half hour television programme can properly examine the
      issues raised and come z c conclusions objectively. I therefore intend
      to say nothing further on this matter and to await any legal
      developments which may arise.




      36BJL1.PD
Roger Cook says of evidence previously disregarded or altered under duress
and witnesses ignored.

The allegation concerning the disregarding of    evidence refers         to the
ambulance arriving at 3.37 p.m. and not featured at the inquest.         The BBC
video was in fact part of the compilation tape shown to the              inquiry
proceedings.

Pressure on Witnesses by Colleages to Alter Statements

Completely unfounded.

Police Constable Bruder

Documentary evidence in the file from Police Constable Bruder shows that
no pressure, duress or other persuasion was placed upon him - statement
dated 3 May 1990.   The only information the Cook Report have had regarding
this allegation is from Mrs Williams.

Debbie Martin

Pressure was allegedly placed by two West Midlands Police officers to change
her statement.

Debbie Martin waited 4/5 years to make allegation.

Great inconsistencies in the account she gave to      the Cook Report and the
facts as we know them.   From the Cook Report itself Police Constable Bruder
is  timed  giving resuscitation to Kevin Williams      at 3.37 p.m.     Police
Constable Bruder shows he continued resuscitation for between 10-15 minutes
and says it was probably 13 minutes.  That takes the time to about 3.50 p.m.

Debbie Martin asks us to believe that when Police Constable Bruder and the
St Johns Ambulance officers gave up on Kevin Williams, whilst on the pitch,
she, Debbie Martin, carried Kevin Williams with others into the gymnasium.
At the door to the gymnasium police officers were directing stretcher bearers
to different parts of the building and indeed segregating dead bodies from
live casualties.   Kevin Williams was directed into   the area containing dead
bodies.  She there alleges that she carried out mouth to mouth resuscitation
on Kevin Williams so successfully that he opened his eyes and uttered the
word 'mum'.   The Cook Report says this was at 3.^5 p.m.      We are asked to
believe by Debbie Martin that in the space of, to be generous, less than
2 minutes, she carried the body from the pitch, passed the police check
point, into the gymnasium and revived him.

Video  evidence   found  at   this office  and  timed   at   3.50 p.m.  shows
Debbie Martin doing nothing from at least that time onwards.   She is clearly
grossly mistaken, so traumatised that she believes her own actions were
true or quite simply is lying.

Witnesses Ignored or Not Traced

The people referred to are Mr O'Keefe, Mr Hart and       Mr Edwards.   All   three
were traced and interviewed and statements obtained.
Their evidence was of a general nature and when requests were made to make
that evidence more specific, in the case of Mr Hart, he refused. Mr Edwards
and Mr O'Keefe could add nothing of significant value.

The Cook Report says that Kevin Williams was alive at 3.55 p.m.

We have video evidence that this is untrue.

Did not want     a different version from Debbie Martin we wanted the truth
and to refute    that we have a vast array of medical people to say it was
impossible for    him to be alive at that stage. Some say he would have been
dead before he   was taken from the pen.

Police Constable Bruder and Special Constable Martin were before asked                to
qualify certain aspects of their statements and not alter it in any way.

He Died When He Might Have Been Saved

There was no lack of effort to save Kevin Williams on the part of Police
Constable Bruder and the St Johns Ambulance personnel (unknown).       The St
Johns Ambulance personnel advised Police Constable Bruder that Kevin Williams
had 'g o n e '.

3.28 p.m.   -   Still Alive

The people shown on the video,    Mr Hart and Mr O ’Keefe,    both gave statements
to the police.

In the case of Mr O'Keefe, ..... 'there were        so many   bodies   around   and    I
checked some for signs of life but found n o n e '....

In the case of Mr Hart, ..... 'as we lifted him onto the board a policeman
came forward and pulled the lads jumper up and over his face and I realised
then that he was d e a d '.....

On 28 October 1989 Mr Hart was requested to assist for visual evidence                to
be shown for identification and continuity. He declined to assist.

Bruder - The Kiss of Life

Evidence from the Pathologist statement states that bodies which are brain
stem dead continue to twitch   for sometime after the brain    stem has died.
In the words of one Consultant Neurologist, ..... ’they can twitch and very
unnerving it is too'.....

The Neurologist, Mr Gumpert, was called to the mini inquiry on Kevin Williams
and gave evidence to the coroner to this effect.  From the evidence available
Police Constable Bruder was attempting to resuscitate a body that was brain
stem dead but still twitching.
Sir Malcolm Thornton MP

Does the Cook Report have any evidence that the truth was surpressed?

What is meant    by   the   statement    from   Malcolm Thornton         that      the    truth   was
surpressed?

Events After 3.15 p.m. - Not Investigated

A full, thorough, painstaking inquiry            from    when    the   victim      left    hom that
day to the time of the post mortem.

Details are clearly documented and the inquiry most certainly did continue
after 3.15 p.m.   The time of 3.15 p.m. was set by the coroner as to
causation.

Malcolm Thornton says officers were leaned on.       This has been                         refuted.
Thornton is merely repeating what he has been told by Mrs Williams.

N.B.   Ambulance service would not allow their personnel to be interviewed
by the West Midlands Police.  It is not unusual for this to happen.

Don Page

Allegation of surpressing       evidence     from   Cook   refers       to   the    ambulance      on
the BBC video at 3.37 p.m.

That BBC video was shown to the inquiry in the form of a compilation tape.

Don Page says nothing on their statements were ever changed the inference
being that those of Police Constable Bruder and Special Constable Martin
were changed.   They were not.    Further statements were taken to qualify
certain aspects of their original statements and the original statements
were still submitted for information and scrutiny.

Spearitt complaint dealt with separately.




Sheila Coleman

Taylor report provided a full inquiry.          It had no restriction on time.

Mrs Williams says her son died          at   3.55 p.m.     (We   have    conclusive        evidence
that her son died before then).

Dr West says he may not have died if he had been treated earlier enough.
Shiela Coleman - Statements were not           altered.  New         statements       were    taken
to qualify the original statements.             The original         statements       were    still
presented.

Cook again says that Kevin was alive at 3.^5 p.m.

Debbie Martin alleges      that    West   Midlands    Police   accused     her   of    not    being
at Hillsborough.

Statements taken by West Midlands Police from Debbie Martin asks her to
identify  herself  on   video  which  she  does.    Statement was taken on
12 July 1989 and she makes reference to video being shown to her by West
Midlands police officers in which she identifies herself.

We did not   ask   her   to   alter   her   first    statement.      We wanted    her    to   make
a new one.

Mrs Martin   has   no   direct    knowledge   of    the   incident    or   statement     taking.




Cook says other witnesses claim Kevin was alive after he was taken from
the terraces. The inference being its the next people tobe interviewed.

Hart says there was no doubt that he  was alive. In his original statement
he says ...... ’as we lifted him onto the board a policeman came forward
and pulled the lads jumper up and over his face and I realised then that
he was d e a d '.....

Hart - Inconsistencies of evidence and video shows he   was already on a board
though in his statement he states that he was lifted and placed on a board.
In his original statement he says ...... 'there were so many bodies around
and I checked some for signs of life but found none' .....

Cook Report says Bruder       comes across him at 3.35 p.m.

Mrs Williams Allegation       that Bruder Changed a Statement

Bruder made a second statement qualifying his own thoughts originally now
that he had had the opportunity to have first aid lessons and have a greater
understanding of people in the throes of death.    He also says that    he was
not placed under duress and no pressure whatsoever applied.   This particular
application was aired following the application for judicial review.
Allegation that the ambulance at 3.37 p.m. was not shown to the inquest.

That video was shown to the inquest in the form of a compilation tape.

Time of the ambulance confirms that Police Constable Bruder was                     attempting
to revive a corpse at 3.37 p.m. not when Kevin Williams was alive.

Mr Edwards gave   a statement   to   the    police   explaining      why   he    did not      stop
in the stadium.

Mrs Williams asked Bruder what he had put in writing and she said he refused.
He had already put it in writing.

Bruder's statement was summarised to the inquest proceedings.

When interviewing Dr Popper,    Cook       says   ambulance   does    not       appear   in    the
police video. It does.

Dr Slater, Pathologist, was asked at the inquest about bodies expelling
air when dead. This was considered a real possibility with Kevin Williams.

Chief Superintendent   Mike Foster feels that Cook says this is the                           best
evidence. It is not.   It has already been aired in several venues.

Dr West says people   were recoverable after 3.15 p.m.  Agreed.  About 70
people were treated and recovered after that time.     All those who did,
however, were dead before 3.15 p.m. or the cause of their death had taken
place.

Enquiries did continue after 3.15 p.m.        The Lord Justice Taylor inquiry.

Stringer
                'THE COOK REPORT'   -   THURSDAY 2 JUNE 1994


                           POINTS FOR DISCUSSION



CALL FOR NEW INQUIRY                    NO EVIDENCE


EVIDENCE DISREGARDED, ALTERED,          WRONG
IGNORED


WITNESSES NOT TRACED                    WRONG


PRESSURE TO CHANGE STATEMENTS           NO OFFICIAL   COMPLAINT     FROM    DEBBIE
                                        MARTIN

                                        BRUDER    SAYS      STATEMENT        GIVEN
                                        VOLUNTARILY


STATEMENTS CHANGED                      MARTIN - NO   FACTUAL  CHANGE   SHOWS
                                        TRUER REFLECTION OF HER CONDITION

                                        BRUDER - CLARIFICATION OF AMBIGUITY


3-55 P.M. - DEBBIE MARTIN MOUTH         VIDEO SHOW OTHERWISE
TO MOUTH
                                        LYING, MISLEADING      AT   LEAST    BADLY
                                        MISTAKEN


■MOM'                                   BRAIN STEM DEAD

                                        FOUR FRACTURES OF LARYNX

                                        CONFLICT OF OPINION ON POSSIBILITY


AMBULANCE IGNORED AT INQUEST            FEATURED IN COMPILATION VIDEO


SYMAS INTERVIEWED BY SOLICITORS         QUITE NATURAL POSSIBLY CULPABLE
NOT WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
KEVIN WILLIAMS ALIVE                   NO MEDICAL EVIDENCE

                                       BRAIN STEM DEAD

                                       DIFFERENT VERSIONS GIVEN BY WITNESSES

                                       BRUDER GAVE UP




TREATED MAY HAVE SURVIVED              PERTINENT TIME KNOWLEDGE/EXPERTISE


NO INVESTIGATION AFTER 3.15 P.M.       CUT OFF TIME DECIDED        BY   CORONER
                                       FOR INQUEST ONLY

                                       INQUIRY COVERED   EVENTS    BEFORE   AND
                                       AFTER 3.15 P.M.

                                       ANACAPA CHART


FULL INQUIRY NOT CARRIED OUT           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

                                       INQUEST

                                       WEST MIDLANDS POLICE


LESSONS NOT LEARNED                    INQUIRY APPORTIONED BLAME

                                       RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTED


SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE NOT             WOULD HAVE GIVEN POSITIVE RESPONSE
ALLOWED TO TAKE PART


THIRTY MINUTE TELEVISION PROGRAMME -   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - TWO MONTHS

                                       INQUEST - FOUR MONTHS

                                       WEST MIDLANDS POLICE - TWO YEARS
           'THE COOK REPORT*    -   THURSDAY 2 JUNE 1994


                          EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


NO NEW EVIDENCE WHICH WOULD CHANGE THE OUTCOME OF THE LORD JUSTICE
TAYLOR INQUIRY OR CORONER'S INQUEST


NO EVIDENCE DISREGARDED, ALTERED, IGNORED OR WITNESSES NOT TRACED


PRESSURE APPLIED TO CHANGE STATEMENTS

DEBBIE MARTIN               -   NO OFFICIAL COMPLAINT

                                NOTHING   TO  SUBSTANTIATE      ALLEGATION
                                OF PRESSURE BEING APPLIED

STATEMENT IN QUESTION       -   DOES   NOT ALTER ANYTHING FACTUALLY           -pep. I.
                                MERELY SHOWS A TRUER REFLECTION OF
                                HER CONDITION IN TELE GYMNASIUM

                                CORONER DECIDED THAT WHAT SHE HAD                  +
                                TO SAY HAD ALREADY BEEN SATISFACTORILY
                                EXPLAINED

PROGRAMME ALLEGES THAT      -   INCONSISTENCIES IN EVIDENCE
AT 3.55 P.M. DEBBIE
MARTIN CARRYING OUT         -   LYING, ATTEMPTING TO MISLEAD OR AT
MOUTH TO MOUTH ON               LEAST BADLY MISTAKEN
KEVIN WILLIAMS
                            -   VIDEO SHOWS HER FROM 3.50 P.M. TO
                                4.00 P.M. AND AT NO TIME DOES SHE
                                APPEAR TO BE ATTEMPTING TO RESUSCITATE
                                ANYONE

POLICE CONSTABLE BRUDER         GAVE   FURTHER  STATEMENT  WHICH   HE
                                MAINTAINS   WAS SUPPLIED  VOLUNTARILY
                                WITHOUT PRESSURE,   DURESS OR OTHER
                                PERSUASION

                            -   STATEMENTS    READ   IN   SUMMARISED   FORM
                                AT INQUEST


INQUEST

AMBULANCE ARRIVING AT           VIEWS OF THAT AMBULANCE FORMED PART
3.37 P.M. NOT FEATURED          OF THE COMPILATION VIDEO SHOWN AT
AT THE INQUEST                  THE INQUEST
     LIFE AFTER 3.15 P.M.

     NO INVESTIGATION AFTER          CUT OFF TIME DECIDED BY CORONER AS
     3.15 P.M.                       TO CAUSATION

                                     ANACAPA CHART      SHOWS   INVESTIGATION
                                     COVERED EVENTS      BEFORE   AND   AFTER
                                     3.15 P.M.

     KEVIN WILLIAMS ALIVE            MEDICAL EVIDENCE SUGGESTS DEAD BEFORE
     AFTER EXTRACTION FROM PEN       EXTRACTION FROM PEN WHICH CONFLICTS
                                     WITH SOME LESSER QUALIFIED PEOPLE

     IF CERTAIN PROCEDURES           AT PERTINENT TIME WHO WOULD HAVE THE
     SUCH AS EMERGENCY               KNOWLEDGE AND EXPERTISE TO CARRY OUT
     TRACHEOTOMY AND CRICO-          THESE PROCEDURES
     THYRIODOTOMY CARRIED OUT
     EARLY ENOUGH KEVIN MAY          MEDICAL EVIDENCE SUGGESTS KEVIN ALREADY
     NOT HAVE DIED                   BRAIN STEM DEAD


     SYMAS

     WOULD NOT ALLOW             -   STATEMENTS MADE TO SYMAS SOLICITORS
     PERSONNEL TO BE                 QUITE NATURAL AS POSSIBLY CULPABLE
     INTERVIEWED BY WEST
     MIDLANDS POLICE
     INFERENCE OF SKULL
     DUGGERY


     WITNESSES NOT TRACED

C.   STEPHEN HART      )             BOTH   WERE   TRACED   AND    STATEMENTS
                                     OBTAINED.                                  A fP   )Q
     ANTHONY O'KEEFE )
                                     EVIDENCE GIVEN ON PROGRAMME CONTRADICTS
                                     THEIR STATEMENTS WHICH INDICATED KEVIN
                                     WAS DEAD PRIOR TO INVOLVEMENT WITH
                                     POLICE CONSTABLE BRUDER

     ANTHONY EDWARDS                 TRACED BUT NOTHING NEW IN HIS EVIDENCE


     ALLEGATIONS NO FULL ENQUIRY

     NO FULL ENQUIRY AND             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR CONDUCTED THOROUGH
     LESSONS NOT LEARNED             INVESTIGATION WHICH APPORTIONED BLAME
                                     AND HIS RECOMMENDATIONS IN RELATION
                                     TO    ALL   SEATER    STADIUMS,   GROUND
                                     IMPROVEMENTS AND SAFETY ASPECTS HAVE
                                     BEEN IMPLEMENTED




                                                                                       S':
PROGRAMME MAKERS DID HOT ALLOW SOOTH YORKSHIRE POLICE TO TAKE PART
HAD THEY BEEN INVOLVED THEN THEY WOULD HAVE BEEN ABLE TO RESPOND
POSITIVELY TO ALLEGATIONS


THIRTY MINUTE            - LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR INQUIRY AND INQUEST
TRT.RVISION PROGRAMME      LASTED SIX MONTHS.    FULL INVESTIGATION
                           LASTED MANY, MANY MONTHS
                    'The Cook Report*   -   Thursday 2 Jane 1994


Introduction

    At the request of the Chief Constable an investigation has been conducted
    into 'The Cook Report* shown on national television on Thursday 2 June 1994
    relating to the Hillsborough disaster on 15 April 1989 and in particular
    one victi®, Kevin Williams.

    The investigation focused specifically on the alleged 'bullying* of
    ex-Special Constable Debbie Martin; the suggestion that an ambulance which
    was featured in the programme was not included in the evidence given at
    the inquest; and, finally at the suggestion that some of the 95 people who
    died were still alive after the 3.15 p.i.    'cut off* time decided by the
    coroner at the inquests.

    Outlined below are the results of the research which not only addresses
    the above but also many other aspects included in 'The Cook Report*.

'Bullying* of Ex-Special Constable Debbie Martin

    No official complaint has ever been Bade by Debbie Martin or anyone on her
    behalf in relation to the allegations of pressure being put on her to change
    her statement.

    Brief reference was made on this point at the notice of application for
    leave to apply for judicial review held on 5 Hovember 1993. A copy of the
    relevant part of that document is shown at Appendix 1, in particular
    Page 29 Item 21.

    A further reference is made in the judgement of the judicial review, in
    particular Page 24 Item D and B and a copy of this document is also shown
    at Appendix 1.

    At Page 252D, the Coroner said:

    'We have already mentioned the evidence of Special Constable Martin who
    said about the lad speaking.     In no way do I want to run poor Special
    Constable Martin down because she had a very hard day but it is right she
    was obviously from her statement very distressed.

    A.   I also wouldn't want to criticise WPC Martin in any way but I have
    interviewed her twice, sir, and she was particularly upset as indeed many
    people were but it affected her particularly badly the events of the day*.

    The statement in question, the final one made by Debbie Martin, does not
    change anything factual to what had been said previously but merely includes
    her feelings and confused state of mind.

    This statement shows a truer reflection of her condition whilst she was
    present in the gymnasium and this can be corroborated by the video reference
    VRM/2.

    In 'The Cook Report* Debbie accused the police officers who visited her,
    to take her fourth and final statement, and saying that they did not believe
    she had in fact been at Hillsborough. This beggars belief. In a previous
    statement made by Debbie Martin on 12 July 1989* Debbie makes reference
    to a video shown to her by West Midlands Police officers in which she
    identifies herself. West Midlands officers would hardly aicfeuse Debbie of
    not being at Hillsborough when they had clearly seen her on a video
    recording.
     Copies of all statements made by Special Constable Debbie Martin are also
     shown at Appendix 1.

The Inquest

     It is said in the programme that the inquest was never shown the arrival
     of an ambulance at 3.37 p.m. when Police Constable Bruder was assisting
     in giving mouth to mouth resuscitation to Kevin Williams.

     This aspect is one of the inaccuracies of the programme as the arrival of
     the ambulance was shown to the inquest in the form of the compilation video
     prepared by the Nest Midlands Police.

     The ambulance is also featured     in two other videos reference MAP3 and MAP7
     which is footage obtained from     the BBC and showed different camera angles.
     The latter is incorporated in     the compilation video prepared for the Lord
     Justice Taylor enquiry and also   used at the inquests.

     Transcripts of the inquest dated 7 December 1990 and 14 December 1990
     reference to the compilation video being shown at the inquest.

     The relevant parts of the transcripts are shown at Appendix 2.

     The ambulance appeared to be the one referred to by Police Constable Bruder
     at about 3.37 p.m. which did not stop despite people banging on the side
     of it.   The ambulance driver, Tony Edwards, said in his statement he saw
     people trying to save friends but his instructions from the senior ambulance
     officer on scene, Mr Hopkins '...... there were casualties at the far onfl
     of the ground and he needed us on the pitch and that we were not to stop
     for anyone until we got to the far end of the ground.        He told as to pat
     our two tones on and go through. We did as we were t o l d ..... •.

     Edwards is unable to identify any individual who banged on his ambulance.

     The statement of Tony Edwards is shown at Appendix 3.

Life After 3.15 p.m.

     This was the subject of much controversy and debate from the outset of the
     inquests. The 3.15 p.m. cut off point was decided by the coroner. Dr Popper.
     This was for inquest purposes only. A full investigation covering events
     before and after 3.15 p.*.    was conducted by the West Midlands Police for
     the Lord Justice Taylor enquiry.

    In the case of all 95 inquests the person carrying out the post mortem gave
    evidence as to the injuries sustained by the victims, the cause of death
    and the time scale of their deaths, which would have been fairly quick.

    In the case of Kevin Williams, Dr Slater who carried out the post
    on him said Kevin had sustained four fractures to his larynx which would
    have made speech virtually impossible.
     The coroner called an expert witness. Dr Gumpert, a Consultant Neurologist,
     who said it was clear to him that in Kevin's case he was probably dead before
     he was extracted from the area where he had been standing.     He went on to
     say that after people are brain stem dead '..... they can twitch and very
     unnerving it is too..... '. This is due to a spinal reflex which is thought
     to occur in anoxia - lack of oxygen - in that the brain stea died first.

     A transcript of evidence of Dr slater and Dr Gumpert are shown at Appendix 4.

     Police Constable Bruder in his statement shown at Appendix 5 said he assisted
     a St Johns Ambulance officer to give mouth to mouth resuscitation to
     Kevin Williams. He continued to do this until advised by one of the St Johns
     Ambulance officers that he, Kevin, was 'gone*.       Police Constable Bruder
     then left the stadium.    Summaries of both statements supplied by Police
     Constable Bruder were read out at the inquest of Kevin Williams on
     Friday 4 May 1990. See Appendix 4.

     Ex-Special Constable Martin said that she carried Kevin Williams into the
     gym where she noticed apparent signs of life and went on to say she gave
     Kevin mouth to mouth resuscitation and that Kevin uttered the word 'mom* •

     There are four witnesses# three of whom gave statements, who actually dealt
     with Kevin Williams and who were satisfied that when they had finished their
     dealings with him he was in fact dead.     This was prior to Debbie Martin's
     involvement with Kevin.   There are also two medical witnesses who suggest
     that Kevin was dead prior to his extraction from the pen.        It begs the
     question when all these people had given up on Kevin, how could Debbie Martin
     say she saw signs of life in him? This presumably is borne more out of
     optimism than reality.

     The Cook Report placed a lot of emphasis on time being a critical factor
     in the rescue of Kevin Williams.   He stated that Debbie was giving mouth
     to mouth resuscitation on Kevin at 3.55 p.m.    However, from the evidence
     outlined above, they are either lying or attempting to mislead or at least
     are badly mistaken.

     From the video, reference VRM2, she is seen      from 3.50 p.m. to 4.00 p.m.
     in the gymnasium and at no time seen to          be performing any fora of
     resuscitation on anyone.    This, together with the transcripts of evidence
     by Dr Slater and Dr Gumpert, the statements of Police Constable Bruder,
     Mr O'Keefe and Mr Hart and the information froi               totally negate
     her claims to the condition of Kevin.

     The information froa               was received in a telephone call         to
     Headquarters Operations Room on 3 June 1994 and also shown at Appendix 4.

Additional Information

     The Cook Report highlighted other inaccuracies contained in the programme
     as below.

     In his introduction Cook said evidence was disregarded, ignored and witnesses
     were not traced. These allegations can be refuted.
Sir Malcolm Thornton MP, alleged in the programme that events after 3.15 p.a.
were not fully inquired into. This is incorrect as the West Midlands Police
enquiry covered all aspects including events before and after 3.15 p.a.

ANACAPA charts were produced for all 95 victims showing their movements
from the moment they set off that morning to the post mortem. To give an
example of this a copy of the ANACAPA chart for Kevin Williams is shown
at Appendix 6.

Allegations were made that police officers were leaned on by their colleagues
to change their statements. Mrs Williams said that Police Constable Bruder
told her that the West Midlands Police had approached him with a brief to
change his statement.   However, this is refuted by Police Constable Bruder
himself in a telephone conversation with Chief Superintendent Greene of
the West Midlands Police when he says that he made his statement entirely
voluntarily and without any pressure, duress or other persuasion.

A report from Chief Superintendent Greene pointed out that a solicitor,
on behalf of the relatives, had interviewed Police Constable Bruder and
suggested the possibility that his further statement could have been
furnished as a result of cajolery or other improper actions by the West
Midlands Police.   Police Constable Bruder maintained that he made it clear
to the solicitor that this was not the case.

A copy of the report from Chief Superintendent Greene and a copy of the
relevant part of the notice of application for leave to apply for judicial
review held on 5 November 1993 are shown at Appendix 7.

The programme pointed out that the ambulance service did not allow their
personnel to be interviewed by the West Midlands Police.       The inference
was that there may have been seme skull duggery if they had done so.

Don Page, the former head of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
Service (SYMAS) did say in the programme that their own solicitors took
statements from their personnel and furnished the West Midlands Police with
copies of those statements.

This is quite understandable as SYMAS, as one of the emergency services,
could be held culpable for their actions on the day.

Chief Superintendent Mike Foster, who was one of the senior investigating
officers from the West Midlands Police was interviewed by Cook and only
a short excerpt of that interview was shown on the programme.         Chief
Superintendent Foster has possession of a copy of the full interview and
he said that Cook put it to him that the reason why SYMAS personnel did
not make statements directly to the West Midlands Police may have been
because of the West Midlands Serious Crime Squad affair. Mr Foster pointed
out to Cook that the Serious Crime Squad affair did not become public until
August 1989, some four months after the Hillsborough disaster.

There was then a difference of opinion amongst the medical profession as
to the possible survival of Kevin Williams and the alleged uttering of the
word 'mom'.
Dr Iain West, a Forensic Pathologist at Guys Hospital said that if certain
procedures had been carried out to Kevin after he had been extracted from
the pen then it is possible that he may not have suffered from the fatal
asphyxia which led to his death.

The procedures he referred to are emergency tracheotomy, which is a
relatively major procedure and crico-thyriodotomy, is a simpler procedure
which involved the passage of a tube through the membrane between the thyroid
and cricoid cartlidges.

The question is therefore who at the pertinent time had the knowledge and
expertise to carry out such procedures and in any case if an emergency
tracheotomy was carried out on Kevin it would have been to no avail as he
was already brain stem dead.

A copy of the report of Dr West is shown at Appendix 8.

Two men appeared on the programme who identified themselves as carrying
the advertising board upon which the body of Kevin Williams was placed.

The inference given was that these two men had not been traced when in fact
they had been and statements obtained from them.

One of the men, Stephen Hart, said that he knew that Kevin was alive but
unconscious at the time. This is in contradiction to the statement he gave
to the West Midlands Police as he said in that statement that when Kevin
was lifted onto the advertising board a policeman came forward and pulled
Kevin's jumper over his face and he realised that he was dead.

An action was raised by the West Midlands Police for visual evidence to
be shown to Hart for identification and continuity. Hart declined to assist
in that action.

A copy of the statement given by Stephen Hart and the action are shown at
Appendix 9.

The second man, Anthony O'Keefe, an off duty fire fighter, said in the
programme that he thought that Kevin was alive, however, in original notes
prepared by O'Keefe on 29 April 1989, he stated that it appeared to him
that all the casualties were in fact dead and had been for some time. He
was then asked by a Doctor to point out anyone he knew that had signs of
life but in his opinion there were none.

A copy of his original notes and statement are shown at Appendix 10.

Both Hart and O'Keefe say in their original statements that for all intents
and purposes, Kevin Williams was dead prior to him being carried across
the football pitch and prior to the involvement of Police Constable Bruder.

A number of other people were featured in the programme, namely Mrs Stringer,
Ms Routledge, Mr Spearitt and Mr Glover.     It is felt their contribution
in the programme was merely for effect.
     The judgement of the judicial hearing held on 5 November 1993 shows at
     pages 29 and 30 in relation to new evidence of Kevin possibly being alive
     after 3.15 p.m., '..... I find it of far too tenuous a nature to justify
     a new inquest ......'.    The relevant part of that judgement is shown at
     Appendix 1.

     Allegations that there was not a complete enquiry or that lessons were not
     learned is incorrect.     The Taylor report apportioned blame and his
     reommendations with regard to all seater stadiums, ground improvements
     including safety aspects have all been implemented shows that lessons have
     been learned.

Conclusion

    After a considerable amount of research it appears that the 'Cook Report*
    is seriously flawed in many aspects.    Contained within are a great number
    of inaccuracies and contradictions of what was said in the programme by
    some people and statements originally given to the West Midlands Police
    for the Lord Justice Taylor enquiry and the subsequent inquest.

    The results of the research show that no new evidence has come to light
    to warrant any further investigation and a thorough inquiry was carried
    out into the Hillsborough tragedy by the West Midlands Police.
                                     APPENDICES


1.   Copies of statements of Debra Jane Martin and relevant parts of the
      notice of application for leave to apply for judicial review held on
      5 November 1993

2.   Copies of transcript of inquests 7 December 1990 and 14 December     1990
      and its judgement

3.   Copies of statements of Anthony James Edwards

4.   Copies of transcript of inquest of Kevin Daniel Williams and information
      from

5.   Copies of statements of Derek William Bruder

6.   Copy of ANACAPA chart of Kevin Daniel Williams

7.   Copies of a report of Detective Chief Superintendent D G TGreene,
      West Midlands Police and the relevant part of the notice of application
      for leave to apply for judicial review held on 5 November 1993

8.   Copy of report of Dr Iain West

9.   Copies of statement and action of Stephen Peter Hart

10. Copies of original notes and statement of Anthony Joseph O'Keefe



                                      VIDEOS


'The Cook Report'   -   Thursday 2 June 1994

Views Inside Gymnasium   -   REF VRM 2

Views of Ambulance from South Stand       -    Ref MAP 3

Views of Ambulance from West Stand    -       Ref MAP 7

Compilation Video Produced by West Midlands Police
                        IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE



Applicant’s Reference       Notice of Application for       Crown Office Reference
Number                      Leave to Apply for              Number
                            Judicial Review
           This form must be read together with Notes for Guidance
                      Obtainable from the Crown Office
                        To the Master of the Crown Office
                              Royal Courts of Justice
                                     Strand
                               London WC2A 2LL
Name, Address and Description     (1)         Sandra Stringer & Donna Carlile, the
of Applicants                                 mother and sister of Paul Carlile,
                                              deceased.

                                  (2)         John & Theresa Glover, the father
                                               and mother of Ian Glover, deceased.

                                  (3)         Joan Sinclair, the sister of Michael
                                               Kelly, deceased.

                                  (4)         Leslie & Doreen Jones, the father and
                                              mother of Richard Jones, deceased.

                                  (5)         Peter & Joan Tootle, the father and
                                              mother of Peter Tootle, deceased.

                                  (6)         James Stephen & Anne Williams, the
                                               father and mother of Kevin Williams,
                                               deceased.
Judgment, Order, Decision or      (1)         Various decisions of Her Majesty’s
Other Proceedings in Respect                  Coroner for Sow*. Yorkshire in the
of Which Relief is Sought.                    course of the inquest held between
                                              the 18th day of April 1989 and the
                                              28th day of March 1991 into the
                                              deaths of the deceased hereinbefore
                                              mentioned and others at the
                                              Hillsborough Stadium on 15th April
                                               1989.

                                  (2)         Conclusion or verdict recorded by the
                                              Coroner’s jury at the end of the said
                                              inquest that these were cases of
                                              "Accidental Death".


                                        ■1-
 Kevin Williams* Mini-Inquest



 At Kevin Williams’ mini-inquest on 2nd May Dr. Slater, the pathologist, gave

evidence that death was due to asphyxia and that his injuries were likely to

have resulted in unconsciousness within seconds and in death within three to

five minutes (page 3B-E). However, evidence was then read out, in the

course of the summary, from two police officers which suggested that he might

still have been alive for some considerable time after he sustained his original

injuries and capable of being saved. The evidence took the following form:



(i)     There was first a statement from a PC Bruder which was referred to

        in the summary in which he stated that he had come upon Kevin

        Williams lying on the ground of the pitch having convulsions (the

        rest of his statement in which he referred to Kevin Williams’

        vomiting and to him having a pulse was not read out at this hearing

       though this clearly provided further evidence that he was still alive).

       Clearly this evidence suggested that Kevin Williams was still alive

       and moving a considerable time after his original injuries and even

       after being moved onto the pitch. This raised the question of
    whether he could have been resuscitated though PC Bruder stated

    that his own attempts at resuscitation eventually failed and that
    Kevin Williams went grey.



   However, a further statem ent was then referred to from a Special

   Constable Deborah M artin who had made a statement to the effect

   that Kevin Williams was alive and had been briefly resuscitated as

  late as about 4pm. In the original, statement she made which was

  not read out at the inquest but merely referred to, she said:



  "He stopped breathing so I gave him the kiss of life, and heart

 massage and a doctor also helped. He started breathing and opened

 his eyes, his only word was "Mom" and then he died".



 TOs statement was referred to with some scepticism (page 6F of

 transcript and page 7D-E). But clearly it once again raises the

possibility of survival long after 3.15pm (as late as 4pm) and the

question of whether death might haw been prevented by more

timely medical intervention. The Coroner was sufficiently concerned

about this evidence to call further evidence on the matter on 4th

May at a resumed mini-inquest into the death of Kevin Williams.
^           Kevin Williams (the resumed m in i- in ^ ,,^




            When the mini-inquest was resumed on 4th May the Coroner called further

            evidence which was undoubtedly intended to discredit the suggestion that

            Kevin Williams had survived for some considerable t o e after sustaining his

           CmSh iniUrie$ and *°               “ e family by qualifying and undermining the
           testimony of PC Bruder and Special Constable Martin. The further evidence
           took the following forror



           (0
                   An Inspector Robert Sawers was called who stated that he had re-

                   interviewed PC Bruder on 3rd May and that, in the Ugh, 0f the

                   further questions put ,0 him, PC Bruder now accepted that his

                  description of the deceased as ‘having convulsions’ should be altered

                  and the ‘movement’ was best described as a ‘twitch' (6C). He also

                  reported that PC Brader had now qualified his claim to have "felt

                 a Slight pulse- and that he now accepted tin,, -whatever he felt there

                 he cannot be categoric it was a pulse- (page 6G). He further reports

                 •hat PC Bruden now accepted that he had not witnessed Kevin
                 Williams being sick (page 7b).



    (ii)
                Dr. David Slater, the pathologist, was',hen recalled. His evidence

                was that Kevin WilUams’ death was caused by a Vety very severe

                case of asphyxia- and t o there "was four fractures to the voice box".

                In his view unconsciousness would have resulted from the cmsh



                                       -28-
                        mjuries within seconds and irrecoverable brain damage death would

                        have occurred within three to six minutes thereafter but whole body

                        death may no. have resulted until sometime thereafter (pagers ,0-

                        12). This might explain the apparent twitches some considerable

                       “me aftW he h3d bee" “ * ■ from the terraces. But he was sure
                       <ha, Kevin WilUams had died before Special Constab.e M artin
                      arrived on the scene.



         (iii)
                      In addition, a Dr. Em en Cumpen was called to eijtfain fu h b en h c
f                                                                                  rra rd


                                  «™»™l..lnd,„                                     ^

                    area where he was standing, when he lost consciousness.



                                                              luest



        U SeqUen' mVeStlgati0nS have rev^ ,ed that “ " M          e pressure was put
      O" Ooti, Special C o n so le Martin and PC Bnrder to retract or q u a % ti,eir

      evidence as ,o the signs of Ufe they described in Kevin WilUams. ^
                                                                                   are


      erewith. But the manner in which the very significant evidence of these two

     witnesses was presented to the mini-inquest was highly unsatisfactory. Clearly

    *e W         and the family should have had the benefit of hearing ora, evidence

    —       than somewhat mis.eading second-hand accounts of their original

    statements and of the qualifications they had subsequently been persuaded to



                                      -29-
make to their original evidence. And clearly the edited version of their

evidence actually presented was, a. the vety least, no. a complete picture of
their eye-witness accounts.
    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE             No: CO-1009-92
    QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
    (DIVISIONAL COURT)
                                      Royal Courts of Justice
                                      Strand
                                      London WC2

                                      Friday, 5th November 1993

B                               B e f o r e   :

                          LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN

                                    and

                           MR JUSTICE TURNER




        REGINA V HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                     EX PARTE STRINGER AND OTHERS

D


    MR A JONES QC and MR E FITZGERALD (instructed by Malcolm J
    Gregg & Co., Century Buildings, 31 North Street, Liverpool
    L2 6RG) appeared on behalf of the Applicants.

    MR T COGHLAN QC and MR P PREECE (instructed by Mark Webster.
    City Solicitor and Head of Administration, Sheffield City
    Council, Town Hall, Sheffield, SI 2HH) appeared on behalf of
    the Respondent.

    MR M KALLIPETIS QC (instructed by Dibb Lupton Broomhead,
    Fountain Precinct, Balm Green, Sheffield SI 1RZ) appeared on
    behalf of the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service.


          (Computer Aided Transcript of the Stenograph Notes of
         John Larking, Chancery House, Chancery Lane, London WC2
                       Telephone No: 071 404 7464
                 Official Shorthand Writers to the Court)


                             J U D G M E N T
                        (As approved by the Court)



                            1
     I deal next with Kevin Williams.   In his case the

pathologist was Dr Slater and I take up his evidence on page

248B of the applicant's bundle:


                        21
             "My examination of Kevin showed that the main
             finding was that of asphyxia. This opinion was
             formed through the extensive blueness on the face
             and upper part of the chest. In addition there
             were small haemorrhages in both the face and
             internal organs, including the brain, heart and
             lungs        This had also resulted in four
             fractures to the small bones in the actual voice
             box...... the compression of the neck or chest has
             occurred here and unconsciousness occurs very
             rapidly, certainly within a few seconds, and there
B            is one reported case of it occurring apparently
             instantaneously. Following unconsciousness then
             there is no discomfort and no pain. Death then
             occurs after approximately three to five
             minutes.11


    At G:

             Q. Now the reason why I asked you was this, and I
             want to put this to you because I would like to
             get your view on it, one Officer will be dealing
             with the value of this evidence in a moment but
             she [a Woman Special Constable called Debra
             Martin] says that at a point when this lad was in
D            the gymnasium, in other words he had already been
             moved across the pitch, she says she helped him
             into the gym from the pitch, presumably she
             carried him.  He had stopped breathing. She gave
             him the kiss of life, did some heart massage, he
             opened his eyes, said a word and died. Now in the
             light of your pathological findings, is that in
             fact a possibility, do you think?"


    In answer the doctor made several comments, among them

    these:

             "     this was certainly the most severe case of
             traumatic asphyxia that I actually dealt with.



             This case was highly unusual in that in fact it
             had four fractures to the larynx. It was by far
             the most severe case of voice box fractures. Not
             only does this indicate the severity of the
             traumatic asphyxia at the time but it also in fact
             makes it virtually impossible for the person to
             have spoken by virtue of the fact that there were
             fractures to the voice box, sir. So all I can
             say, sir, that scientifically and medically I find

                           22
H
          that inconceivable that the person could have
          spoken."


Then he referred to cortical coning and said:

          "The coning indicates the severity of the asphyxia
          and again that would have resulted in irreversible
          brain damage which again would totally prohibit
          any form of communication.

          Q. I have thought about this comment as well, of
          course, and there are several explanations (l)
          that it didn't occur and that the observer is
          mistaken but another possibility that has occurred
          to me and I want to put it to you and please
          disagree if it is not either right or you don't
          accept it; it is possible, is it not, that if a
          person having died is moved air or stomach
          contents might be expelled and might make a sound
          as it escapes, so to speak. Is that a
          possibility?

          A. It is an interesting comment, sir, because it
          is a possibility that I considered also myself and
          that is certainly an explanation for the noise
          which could have been made which may have mimicked
          the word 'mum' but it would not explain the
          opening of the eyes, sir."

He added to the Coroner:

          "But it would explain the noise."

Then Mr Fraser said:

          "No questions, sir, but thank you very much,
          Dr Slater, for that sympathetic and detailed
          explanation."

     Then a Police Sergeant Killoch was called by the

Coroner to give the summary in this case.     Among other

things he said this:

         "Derek William Bruder, an off-duty Police
         Constable from the Merseyside Police who was a
         spectator at the match, recalls seeing a person
         lying on the pitch near the Spion Kop/North Stand
         of the ground. The person was having
         convulsions. Mr Bruder went on the pitch and gave
         mouth to mouth resuscitation aided by a St John's
         Ambulanceman who carried out cardiac massage.
          Mr Bruder recalls that a friend of the casualty
          was with him on the pitch. Resuscitation was
          continued and they were joined by a St John's
          Ambulancewoman who took over from Mr Bruder.
          After a short time the St John's Ambulancemen said
          that the casualty was dead. Mr Bruder then left
          the scene.

          Neither of the St John's Ambulance personnel or
          the friend of the casualty had been identified.
          The person Mr Bruder tried to resuscitate is now
          known to be Kevin.

          Special Constable Debra Martin went on the pitch
          to assist and she helped to carry several deceased
          persons and many injured persons to the
          gymnasium. She assisted to carry one youth who
          she now knows to be Kevin into the gymnasium where
          she remained with him.

          At 16.06 hours Dr Curpen examined Kevin in the
          gymnasium which had been established as a
          temporary mortuary. Dr Curpen certified life
          extinct."


At page 252D, the Coroner said:

          "We have already mentioned the evidence of
          Special Constable Martin who said about the lad
          speaking. In no way do I want to run poor Special
          Constable Martin down because she had a very hard
          day but it is right she was obviously from her
          statement very distressed.

          A. I also wouldn't want to criticise WPC Martin
          in any way but I have interviewed her twice, sir,
          and she was particularly upset as indeed many
          people were but it affected her particularly badly
          the events of the day."


     At page 253, Dr Slater was recalled by the Coroner and

asked about Mr Bruder's account of the man lying on the

floor having convulsions.    He said:

          "Unfortunately when people have not got enough
          oxygen in the brain, as I said in my earlier
          evidence, which is really what the word 'asphyxia'
          means, individuals can in fact have fits."



                        24

                                                           4
Later he said:

             "For somebody to have convulsions, this would
             imply that the amount of asphyxia is such that
             there must be virtually irreversible brain damage
             present and again this would fully support the
             concept that the evidence of opening eyes and
             speaking is not really conceivable, sir.

             THE CORONER:   Does that help, Mr Fraser?

             MR FRASER: I am sure it does, Dr Slater. It is
             difficult to find the phrase to sum the situation
             up.    Kevin at that stage was beyond help. He was
             as good as dead?

             A.    Yes, thatis right, absolutely.

             Q.    And would feel nothing and know nothing?

             A.   Absolutely.    He would know nothing."

     A stage came, on 4th May 1990, when the Coroner

recalled Sergeant Killoch and the sergeant dealt with

Mr Bruder's account of the person having convulsions, going

on to say:

             "I then took his pulse in his neck.     I could feel
             a slight pulse."


     Then Inspector Sawers was called to give an account,

beginning at page 264, about what contact he had since had

with Mr Bruder:

             "He goes on to say as a result of feeling
             depressed about the incident he applied of his own
             volition for further first-aid training within
             Merseyside Police."


At page 265B:

             "He has given very careful consideration, sir, to
             the expression he used of having convulsions and
             in the light of his further training and what he
             now knows and thinks about the incident was that
             •convulsions' was not the word that was
             applicable to these circumstances. He refers

                            25
               specifically to having seen epileptic fits and
               says that what he originally described as a
               convulsion was not anything like an epileptic
               fit. He goes on to say later, sir, that if there
               was a part of the body that he saw move it was his
               head and that the word that he best thinks
               describes this movement is that of a twitch."

    At D:

               "On reflection, sir, he feels he would be much
B              more skilful if he were required to perform this
               action again and he cannot discount the
               possibility that he did not feel immediately in
               the right place for the carotid artery."

    At G:

               "     he cannot be categoric it was a pulse. He
               feels he may well be mistaken in that matter,
               sir."

    At 266B:

               "In his original statement he referred to vomiting
               and thinking that Kevin had been sick. He has
D              given this matter some further thought and he is
               absolutely satisfied that Kevin was not sick. He
               did not see Kevin vomiting and he did not see
               vomit on the ground or on his clothing."


    At C:

               "     he does have a clear impression in his mind,
               sir, of a fluid of some sort in the mouth, but he
               cannot discount that that could be spittle or
               phlegm of some sort."


    Then at page 267E:

               "It was at this point, sir, that after
               approximately two minutes of the involvement of
               the woman St Johnfs Ambulance Officer that the
               male St John's Ambulance Officer stood up and said
               'He's gone'. He referred to the expression being
               completely grey and would seek to reaffirm that
               choice of words as his description of Kevin at
               that particular moment in time. He says, sir,
               and I quote:

               'There is absolutely no doubt in ray mind, both now
               and with the benefit of further training, that

                             26
H
             then at the moment the youth I had tried to save
             was dead, certainly dead, and beyond any further
             help.  I and St John's Ambulance personnel would
             not have stopped if there had been any glimmer of
             hope at all. There was none.'"

        Then Mr Fraser was given the opportunity of asking

questions but said he had none, but he added this, that

Mr and Mrs Williams "are appreciative both of the efforts

the officer has made and of his visit and they have no

questions.     They have decided not to came today, sir."

        Dr Slater was again recalled and stuck to his original

position.     I do not think it would assist to go through his
evidence.

        The Coroner was not content to leave it there.   He

called Dr Gumpert, a consulting clinical neuro physiologist

and consulting neurologist.     He spoke of the brain stem and
said:

             "Once this part of the brain is dead, and that
             death occurs, as you heard from Dr Slater, in
             between four and six minutes after deprivation of
             oxygen, then the person is going to die."


At page 279D he said:

             "It seems clear to me, sir, in this case that poor
             Kevin was probably dead before he got out of the
             area in which he was standing. I would agree with
             Dr Slater.  I would think consciousness was lost
             probably within ten seconds.■
At F:

             "     after people are brain stem dead, they can
             twitch."


Page 276A:

             "     feeling the carotid pulse is quite difficult
             in somebody who has got a low blood pressure, as
             would have been here."

     At page 313 in the bundle is to be found a statement by

Debra Martin made on 17th March 1990.     I should read a few

extracts from this.     She said, on the first page:

             nMy recollection of the events of that day are
             vague and confused. As a result of the disaster I
             was prescribed medication by my Doctor to assist
             me to sleep.  I was really upset by the whole
             incident and was on medication for about a week.
             The result being that I was in state of what I can
             only describe as a state of semi-consciousness. I
             felt like a 'Zombie.'"


She went on say that she can recall carrying a youth who she

now knows to be Kevin Williams from the pitch to the

gymnasium.    At the top of page 315:

             "I didn't want to believe the boy was dead.  I
             didn't know if he was dead or not but I decided
             that I had got to attempt to revive him. I
             started to give him mouth-to-mouth but someone, I
             don't know who, touched me on the shoulder and
             told me he was dead. By this time my head had
             gone, I wasn't aware of what I was doing or what
             was really happening.



                  under the circumstances I cannot be positive
             that the details are accurate. I have been quite
             badly affected by the whole incident and I am
             trying to erase it from my memory."

     It is to be noted that when a specific piece of

evidence, or pieces of evidence, arose which might suggest

that one of the deceased might have been alive after

3.15 pm, the Coroner showed flexibility by going into it.

     We were told that some while after, Mrs Williams, the

deceased's mother, made contact with Police Constable Bruder

and Woman Police Constable Martin, and they alleged that
they had been pressurised into changing their stories and

that they now stuck by their original versions.         Where does

the truth lie?     I see -no fault in the Coroner in this

matter.     He made full inquiry.   He was not asked by the

applicant’s representative to do more.      There was

overwhelming medical evidence that the deceased was in fact

dead by 3.15 pm.     In my judgment it would not be right to

quash the verdicts and order a new inquest on the strength

of these allegations made against the investigating police

officers.
     Before leaving this deceased, however, it would be

convenient to deal with a further point made by Mr Jones

which concerns this deceased.       This Court agreed to look de

bene esse at a letter written to the relative1s solicitors

by a pathologist, Dr West.       It is dated 29th October 1993.

At their request he had looked at the post mortem reports

and photographs.     This was the first time he had seen them,

some four and a half years after the deaths.       He had not

been present at the post mortems or seen the bodies.        No

request had been made to the Coroner either at the mini or

main inquest to call him.       On the strength of a sight of the

reports and photographs, he doubts Dr Clark's diagnosis.          He

thinks there was substantial damage to the neck, possibly

caused by being crushed under people's feet.       This type of

injury, he says, is amenable to an emergency tracheotomy and

there was a realistic possibility that this young man was

still alive after 3.15 pm, though unlikely to have spoken


                           29
the word 'Mum' if he had suffered convulsions.

     As I have indicated, no question arises of the Coroner

having refused to hear this witness.        He is in no way at

fault in this respect.     If the Attorney General's fiat had

been given, the discovery of new facts or evidence could,

under section 13(1) of the 1988 Act, have been held to make

it necessary or desirable in the interests of justice that a

new inquest be held.     I have grave doubts, however, whether

there is any power to look at fresh evidence of this nature

and in these circumstances in an application for judicial

review.   But, in any event, I find it of far too tenuous a

nature to justify ordering a new inquest.       I note that in R

v the Coroner for Inner North London, ex parte Linnane 155

JP 343, where the Coroner was held to have been wrong to

have refused the applicant's request to call a particular

doctor, the Divisional Court refused to order a new inquest,

or even to quash the verdict of the one that had occurred,

on the ground that it was 21 months since it had occurred

and the resolution of complex medical issues was not so

important as to overcome the other considerations against
holding a new inquest.

    As to Ian Glover, in the Coroner's documents volume 1

at page 249 is to be found the evidence of Professor Usher,

the pathologist in this case.    He said:

          "I give the cause of death as traumatic asphyxia.
          That means he died because his chest wall was
          compressed so it could not move in and out. When
          that happens you are not able to breathe properly
          and you die really in that way. Mercifully,
          anyone caught in that position once the chest

                          30
                                                                            STATION

NAME:           DEBRA JANE
                MARTIN

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 25

OCCUPATION:     POL SC221


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I knew
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 080589                                                D J MARTIN (SIGNED)



           I an Debra Jane MARTIN and I live at the above address.   I am

           single. My occupation is a dental nurse, I am also a Special Police

        Constable number 221 based at WDODSEATS (E2 Sub-division) of South

           Yorkshire Police.

        On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I paraded for duty at 9.00am

           (0900) at HILLSBORCUGH Football stadium where there was a briefing for

           all officers involved in the semi-final between LIVERPOOL and

           NOTTINGHAM FOREST.   The briefing was at 9.45am (0945).

        At 10.20am (1020) I returned to the gym at the football ground for a

           separate briefing for special constables.

        At 10.35am (1035) I left HILLSBOROUGH stadium to patrol HERRIES ROAD

           SOUIH to stop the parking of cars by fans on the hard shoulders.      I

        did this with S.C.               Vfe continued to patrol HERRIES ROAD

           SOUIH, which is a very long road, until about l.lOpn (1310) that

           aftamoon.   At this time we had orders to go to PENISTCNE RD to cover

           traffic outside the main entrance gates for the NOTES FOREST fans.

        At this point I saw about 6 ticket touts.      I saw them selling tickets

           and money changing hands.   I also saw numerous fans both Liverpool
MAPnN                 DEBRA JANE

fans and Notts Forest, who were obviously drunk, although at this

stage they ware behaving reasonably.

At about 2.45pm (1445) I started to mate my way to the IEPPINGS LANE

entrance, as I passed what I think is the main entrance to the SPICN

KOP, the turnstiles were shut down.

At about 2.50pm (1450) there was trouble at these turnstiles when the

Notts Forest fans, realising they were being locked out, were trying

any way they could to get in, this included paying money to the

turnstiles stewards and trying to buy tickets frun the touts.     The

cro«*i became very abusive and angry and I had to assist in the

removed of fans frcm the ground.   I was on the road side and the

police inside were passing fans back out over the turnstiles and

there was a very large number of fans trying to get in still, so much

that mounted officers and their horses were being pushed up against

the wall.   The next thing I know is a large blue gate was opened and

a large majority of the crowd pushed their way into the ground.     I

found myself being carried along with the crowd unable to resist. A

mounted officer grabbed my collar but had to let go, because he would

have been pulled fran his horse.   I got pushed to the floor, but I

managed to get back to my feet by pulling myself up a man's back.       I

then remember opening my eyes and finding myself inside the ground,

at the bottom of the Spion Kop and the gates had been shut behind

me.   I asked the steward on the gate to let me out, but at first he

refused, it was only when a mounted officer, the same one whs had

triad to help me a few moments earlier, put his horse up against the

gate, he opened it a short way and let me out.

Onca outside I found myself surrounded by drunken fans, screaming

abuse, and the area covered by police. An officer used my radio to

try and call for back up tut to no avail because the channel was
 MAPTIN                DEBRA JANE                                           3


 full of static. My radio was handed back to me and I ran to the

 Lepoings Lane end of the ground.     Ambulances and police cars were

 rushing to that end of the ground.    When I got to the Leppings Lane

 end of the ground I saw a vast crowd outside the turnstiles trying

 to jet in, it mist have been about four times larger than the crowd

 I laft at the other end, so that wuld mean the crowd at the Spion

 Kop end numbered about 1000 plus and I would estimate about 4000

outside Leppings Lane end.

 I can't really remember hew, but somehow I got inside the ground,

through the large blue gate which was open, and I ended up on the

pitch.    I did not go through the tunnel.

Onea on the pitch I saw a lot of people who were obviously injured

and I can remember a man coming up to me shouting, "THERE'S TWO LEAD

YOU BASTARD".   I then saw people who appeared to be dead.     People

war a screaming and shouting and ambulances were driving onto the pitch.

I assisted other police officers with dead and injured people and

helped to take them on stretchers to the gym, and I can remember

seeing officers frtm E2 (WDODSEATS) everywhere.

I took about 6 dead to the gym, as well as many injured and whilst I

was trying to revive a young boy I remember something hitting me on

the back of my head, but I didn't really notice until much later when

I found a large swelling.    I could see many bodies being put on the

pitch, same of them appeared to be dying.     I lost count of the nuntoer

of bodies I helped carry into the gym.

I halped carry a young boy into the gym from the pitch nearby.     He

stopped breathing so I gave him the kiss of life, and heart massage

and a doctor also helped.    He started breathing and opened his eyes,

his only word was "lOT and then he died.

At 4.06pm (1606) Dr CURPEN certified death and I stayed with him.       I
 MAFnN                DEBRA JANE


 would describe him as white male, 5'6-5'7, 14-15 yrs, slim build and

 brc^n hair, with a cut under his chin.    He had slightly crooked

 teeth, there were no other marks on the body.    He was wearing a white

 shirt, green sweat shirt, beige trousers, white socks, white Reeboks

and green and white boxer shorts.    He had a gold metal chain with a

gold horn, a bus ticket, a train ticket and an entrance ticket.       He

had no identification or money.     I later found out the number given
to this boy was 51.

I stayed with the body and at 5.20am (0520) Sunday 16 April

(160489) an ambulance arrived and I went with the body together with

DC PCNT and GRIFFITHS to the Medico Legal Centre, WATER LANE,

Sheffield.   I stayed with the body until he was stripped and details

taken fran me.   I finally went off duty at 6.30 (0630) cm Sunday
16 April 1989 (160489).

At about 6.30pm (1830) Monday 8 May 1989 (080589) I saw PC's MORGAN

and G0CWIN fran West Midlands Police at my hone.    PC ? showed to me a

partially completed report of death form that I identified as being

the form I filled in Whilst in charge of the body, details of name

and other personal details are missing because there had been no

identification made by the time I went heme. All I can say is this

form relates to body 51.   I new knew this is Kevin David WILLIAMS,

b. 27.5.73 (27051973) of                               Merseyside.
        MARTIN            DEBRA JANE


                                         D J MARTIN SIGNED
STATEMENT T^KEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   080589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SI3JATURE:
                                                                       STATION
NAME:         DEBRA JANE
              MARTIN
ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 25

OCCUPATION:   DENTAL NURSE


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 120789                                            D J MARTIN (SIGNED)



        Further to my previous statement dated 8th May 1989 (080589), on 12th

        July 1989 (120789) I was shewn a video tape Reference Nixnber (VRM/2)

        Exhibit (      ) buy PS/PS      and KILLOCH of the West Midlands

        Police.

        At tape reference number 0249 and 0305 (Real Time) I can identify

        myself on the video located in the centre right of the picture.

        At this point I was engaged with the deceased Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS

        (NA51).

        Although the camera shews a clear shot of myself you cannot see the

        deceased who is out of camera shot. At this stage the body would be

        at my feet and to the right of the screen as you look at it.
        MAFHN               DEBRA JANE


                                            D J MARTIN SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         • DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     J KILLOCH PS 6818
                                                                       STATION
 NAME:          DEBRA JANE
                MARTIN
 ADDRESS:


 AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 25

 OCCUPATION:    POL SC221      DENIAL NURSE


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 050989                                             D J MARTIN (SIGNED)



         Further to my statement dated 8th May 1989 (080589), I would like to

         add that today I have been shewn photographs by WPC       [and WPC

                of the West Midlands Police, relating to the Hillsborough
         Inquiry.

         In the photographs Ref No TT1/28, TT1/31, TT1/32, TT1/30, DHL/4,

         TH/29, I am able to identify the person receiving first aid as the

         deceased Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS (body 51) whan I refer to in my
         original statement.



         D J MARTIN SC 221 (Sgd)

                                                            D J MARTIN SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

            TIME:            DATE:    050989

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE
                                                                      STATION

NAME:         DEBRA JANE
              MARTIN

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:   DENIAL NURSE POL SC221


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 170390                                             D J MARTIN (SIGNED)



        Further to my previous statements I would like to add the following,

        On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I worked in the capacity of

        Special Constable at the F.A. Semi-Final football natch between

        Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest F.C. which was being played at

        the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield.

        My recollection of the events of that day are vague and confused.

        As a result of the disaster I was prescribed medication by my Doctor




                                                                   I felt like
        a 'Zanbie.'

        As a result of this I feel that my memory, my recollection of that day

        is possibly inaccurate.   I am unsure of what time I arrived at the

        Leppings Lane entrance to the ground or even how I came to be on the

        pitch but I did.

        By time I got onto the pitch it seemed to be mass confusion, there

        were police officers and supporters all over the place.   I could see

        people who appeared to be injured and possibly dead, lying on the
MAPHN                 DEBRA JANE                                          2


pitch.   I was in a state of shock.    I didn't know what to do but my

natural instinct was to help these people in the best way that I could.

I can't describe to you in any detail my exact movements over the next

half an hour or so.   I know that I approached several people lying on

the pitch and assisted if possible.     I did not give any of these

people mouth-to-mouth or heart massage.

I decided that there were enough people dealing with the situation

at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and made my way to the Spion

Kop end of the ground.

I could see that bodies vers being carried fran the Leppings Lane end

to the Spion Kop end of the ground and then being placed on the pitch.

I assisted to carry a number of dead and injured people fran the Spion

Kop end of the pitch, into the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary

had been set up.   I was talking to same of these people, comforting

then and trying to reassure them.     I am unable to describe any of
these people in the detail.

By this time I really was in a state of shock, I couldn't believe what

I was seeing.   I seemed to be on automatic pilot.   My memories are

very confused and distorted.

I can recall carrying a youth who I new know to be, Kevin Daniel

WILLIAMS fran the pitch to the gymnasium. He was the last person that

I assisted in carrying.   I first saw Kevin WILLIAMS lying cm the pitch

near to the goal area at the Spion Kop end of the ground. At that

stage he wasn't on a hoarding or a stretcher.

I raneniber that there were several people around where he was lying.

I can't recall anyone giving him mouth to mouth. With the help of

other people, who I can't recall, Kevin WILLIAMS was placed onto a

hoarding and carried into the gymnasium.    Someone instructed me to

stay with the body.




                                                                              58
MAPriN                DEBRA JANE                                           3

I didn't knew what to do.    I didn't want to believe the boy was dead.

I didn't knew if he was dead or not but I decided that I had got to

attampt to revive him.    I started to give him mouth-to-mouth but

saraone, I don't knew who, touched me on the shoulder and told me he

was dead.    By this time my head had gone, I wasn't aware of what I was

doing or what was really happening.

At 16.06 hours (1606) Doctor CURPEN examined Kevin WILLIAMS and

certified him dead.

I rananber a detective officer, DC Paul M3NFREDI helping me to

carplete the GEN 18 form (sudden death form).

I stayed with the body until the early hours of Sunday 16th April

(160489) when I escorted Kevin WILLIAMS, who at this stage had not

been identified, to the Medico Legal Centre.

I identified the body by the number allocated, which in the case was

Number 51.   I had no further dealings with Kevin WILLIAMS.

This statement is made to the best of my recollection and I believe it

to be the truth. Hcwever, under the circumstances I cannot be

positive that the details are accurate.




I have marked on a plan of the pitch (Reference D.J.M.1) the

approximate location where I first came into contact with the

deceased, Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS.

D J Martin
        MAPTIN              DEBRA    JANE



                                             D J MARTIN SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:     170390
WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:   WPS 7844 APPLETON
OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     JULIE APPLETON
HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT1
                                              15
     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

 VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

           STADIUM DISASTER

        ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                Before

S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, Of, BS, MRCGP
        (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                  At

            The Town Hall,
              Sheffield.
                  On

          7th December, 1990




       TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




 Fro» the Notes of J.L. Harphaa, Ltd.,
      Official Shorthand Writers,
  55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                        INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                  Page
     R. H. SALT Sworn

          By The Coroner                               1
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne             13
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning           14
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King              17
     S. FRY Sworn

          By The Coroner                          18
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne             32
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning           34
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King              37
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole         44
          Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien          45
          Further by The Coroner                  50
          Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King      53
          Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning   55
STATEMENT BY MISS SINCLAIR
                                                  57
VIDEO SHOWN TO JURY
                                                  58
                                                         58




In a sense that is the risk you are taking but I have no
objection at all to you consulting with my Officers, keeping
a watch on the lists, assessing the witnesses as to whether
or not you should be present. We will do whatever we can
by supplying the same information as we have supplied up to
now to you or to your instructing solicitors. I hope that
helps.

      MISS SINCLAIR: Sir, I am very grateful and I would
say again that it is not in the least our wish to delay the
Court by an adjournment and we are planning various means
of keeping an eye on what is going on. Thank you.

      THE CORONER: Is there anything you want to say in
the absence of the jury so that you don't have to wait until
we have finished with the video. If there were I would send
them out and deal with it now?

      MR. MANNING:   Witnesses for Monday, sir?

      MR. JONES: It is intended P.C. Grunhill; Sergeant Smith?
subject to his fitness to return to duty Inspector Hand-Davis•*
Sergeant Thomas and Police Constable Wilson is also warned
as well sir.

      THE CORONER: These are all, I think, mounted Officers
of one sort or another.

                       (Short adjournment)

      THE CORONER: Right, we are going to watch the
compilation tape, as it is known. You will remember it
is split in two. We will watch to the end of the first
section.

            (Compilation video shown to the jury)
      THE CORONER:   Can you just pause there for a minute?
The Jury have asked whether a particular gate is opened
They, have given me a little drawing. In fact it is the"gap
in a wall within the concourse area. It is not in this
picture. That was not actually a gate. There was a gate
there but it was a gap in the wall so you could get
through.

              (Compilation video was resum<>^
                                              2>2-4-1


HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHTPP
             (WEST DISTRICT!




    INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

 VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

           STADIUM DISASTER

        ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                Before

S-L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

        (Her Majesty's Coroner1




                 At

           The Town Hall,
             Sheffield.

                 On

        14th Deceaber, 1990




      TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEKDTNrcg




Fro* the Notes of J.L. Harphaa, Ltd.,
     Official Shorthand Writers,
 55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                Page
     L . PROCTOR Sworn

          By The Coroner                         1
          Cross-Examined by M r . Hale           9
          Cross-Examined by M r . Payne         10
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Coughlin        14
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King            14
          Cross-Examined by M r . Catchpole     18
          Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien        22
          Further by The Coroner                27
          Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Hale    29
          Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King    30
          Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne   30
     D.M. SCHOLEY Sworn

          By The Coroner                        32
          Cross-Examined by M r . Payne         38
          Cross-Examined by M r . King          39
          Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien        40
     A. J. TAYLOR Sworn

          By The Coroner                        42
          Cross-Examined   by M r . Payne       49
          Cross-Examined   by Mr. King          50
          Cross-Examined   by Miss Addlemann    51
          Further by The   Coroner              52
VIDEO FILM SHOWN TO JURY                        53
                                                   54



                              A. J. TAYLOR


     Is there anything that you want to say to me
without the Jury being present, because we could do
this now to save you time?

     MR. PAYNE: I do not mind if the Jury are here.   I
would like to just mention the question of exhibits.
You did say earlier that the deadline for the
introduction of further photographs or exhibits would
be at the adjournment of the Court next Wednesday.

     THE CORONER: I think you misunderstood me, Mr.
Payne. What I meant was the deadline - and even then
I put a caveat in - was for nominations for further
witnesses whom you wished me to consider, not
exhibits, because exhibits we might well want to
introduce as we go along. So there is no deadline on
that because we do not know what we might need. What
I was trying to do was get you to compile, if you have
any additional names, those names so that I can
consider them.  I think I did say - I intended to say
- that even if we have past the deadline, if something
crops up and there is a witness who is considered by
any of you as really vital, then I will look at that,
but I do not want to get dozens of them in January
time.

     MR. PAYNE:   Thank you very much.

     THE CORONER: We will go and have coffee then and
we will be back in quarter-of-an-hour. I think that
seems to be quite a good time. I do not think we can
do it in much less time really.

  (After a short adjournment the Jury were shown
              the compilation video)

  (The Inquests were adjourned until 10.30 a.m.
           Monday, l?th December 1990)
                                         S'   1   '

I ANTHONY JAMES EDWARDS will say:



I work as an ambulance man on day work.                    I joined SYMAS in

September 1988.     I started part time and was promoted to day

work on      6th March    1989.       I had       previously      been    in the

ambulance     service    in    1973   in Liverpool         and    had    received

qualified status.        I had done further training which lead to

me   being   admitted     as     a Fellow of          the Ambulance      Service

Institute.       This     is     a qualification          above    the    normal

standard but it is not a paramedics course although it is an

introduction to it.           I left the service in 1982 and went to

Sheffield Polytechnic to do social                    studies.    I worked in

adult education until I rejoined the service.



On Thursday and Friday I worked a shift of 0800 hours to

1630 hours.



On Saturday I was to work from 0900 hours to 1730 hours.                      I

was with                       who is a qualified ambulance man and

was acting as driver.



The first I remember about the Hillsborough incident is when

we were taking a patient to the Northern General Hospital.

We heard control telling a crew from Rotherham to go to the

gym at Hillsborough where they would be met by a station

officer.     I thought that it would be some form of a fight

going on.     Our radio was on the day frequency which I think
     is channel             We stayed on the channel all the way through

     the     day.      We    did         change       to    ERC



6.   It was about 1510 to 1515 hours when we were on our way to

     the     Northern       General    Hospital.       We    arrived   at   Northern

     General about 5 minutes later.                There were various messages

     coming over the radio but I was concentrating on the patient

     in the ambulance.          We took the patient into the hospital and

     it was sometime before 1530 hours when we got back to the

     ambulance and started to clean up.                We then gave the call to

     control that we were clear.               I made the call on channel

     Control    then      told us      to go   to Hillsborough gym entrance

     where we would be met by an ambulance officer.                     We did not

     know which side the gym entrance was on and I was going to

     use the radio to try and find out where the entrance was.

     We went down to the traffic island on Herries Road which is

     about    one   and     a half     miles   away.        Control    then gave    a

     message to all mobiles.             They repeated that it was for all

     mobiles    and     said    that    they   were    to proceed      to   the   gym

     entrance at Hillsborough as they had notification of some

     fatalities.       I think this was around 1530 hours.              We arrived

     at the ground at about 1532 hours.                    There were no problems

     in approaching the ground until we reached the junction of

     Herries    Road,       South and Penis tone       Road.      There were      two

     ambulances in front of us and a police officer was directing

     us to park behind them.              A short time later, probably no

     more than a minute we were moved into the entrance while the
next ambulance was sent to the further gate.                        I saw

       standing outside the first entrance and pointing for us

to go into it.          The police officer shouted to us that if we

went to the second entrance then we would be able to get out

via the first entrance.                        said no and that he wanted us

to go into the first entrance.                   We did so.       We were met by

M r .Hopkins      the        Assistant         Chief     Aabulance       Officer.

Mr.Higgins was also there.                  Higgins      told us       to drive up

behind an ambulance which was already parked and almost at

the same time Hopkins told us to go on to the field.                               At

this    stage     there       were      rows    of   police      with    vans     and

stretchers coming out of the entrance on to the pitch.                             It

was clear that there were dead bodies on at least two of the

stretchers.       I would say the time was about 1535 hours.



We were stopped by a police officer at the entrance to the

corridor to the pitch.               The officer at the front of the

ambulance said that we could not get through.                           Spectators

were shouting at us about a body on a stretcher.                        We stopped

and Hopkins came up to the ambulance and opened the door.                           I

said   that   the      police officer          said that we       could not go

through    and    he    replied      that      he wanted    us    on    the     pitch

immediately.          He said that there were casualties at the far

end of the ground and he needed us on the pitch and that we

were not to stop for anyone until we got to the far end of

the ground.           He told us to put our two tones on and go

through.         We    did    as   we    were     told   and     went    past    the
 policemen.     It was slow progress getting on to the pitch but

 we certainly did not get stuck.                On the pitch we saw five to

 six boards     being      used    as    stretchers      with     bodies    thereon

being carried by fans.             We drove past them while they were

screaming     at    us     to    stop.        The   St.John's     ambulance      was

leaving   the      pitch    as    we came      through    the     entrance.       It

waited until we were out of the way before going off the

pitch.    We were the only ambulance on the pitch by this

stage.    We drove up to the 18 yard box in front of the west

stand.    There were people everywhere.                 My driver was looking

for an officer but we could not find one anywhere.                             There

were fans bashing on the ambulance wanting us to stop and

help their friends.             We were approached by a woman and she

shouted      through       the     window       and     said    that     she    had

resuscitated a casualty.                I got out of the vehicle with a

bag, mask and airways, and went to a body which was lying in

front of the goal in the 18 yard area.                    Someone was giving

mouth to mouth resuscitation.                 I noticed the colour of the

patient and was doubtful whether the patient had in fact

been revived.       All the time there were people shouting at me

for oxygen and all I could remember shouting was "one at a

time."    I   knelt      down     over    a    male    casualty    and     someone

deliberately kicked me in the back and said "what about my

daughter."    I continued to look after the boy on the floor.

I decided that we needed to move him.                     I told the people

around me to pick him up and I shouted to someone to bring a

girl that I had also briefly seen.                    I would say it was now
about 1540 hours.             I looked for my driver and he had driven

over to the other side of the goal towards the corner flag.

We carried the bodies over to the ambulance and I was being

followed by people carrying other bodies.                    When I got to the

ambulance I saw that someone had already opened the back

doors.      I asked a police officer to stay with me to look

after me after I was kicked.                  We put the young boy on the

left hand      side     and    the girl       on the right     hand    side and

someone else put another body on the floor down the middle.

Then someone tried to get another person into the ambulance.

I shouted to the policeman to take the person off and he did

so.



When   I turned       round     again       the ambulance was     packed with

people and so I asked the police to clear the ambulance.

The doors were closed but I could hear people kicking the

back doors and wanting attention.                     In the ambulance there

were     now   three     bodies,        a    nurse,    two   policemen,      two

spectators,     my driver and me.               One of the spectators was

trying    to   revive         the   young     boy.      The nurse     was   from

Nottingham.     She had been a spectator who had volunteered to

help during the chaos on the pitch.                  She was using a bag and

mask correctly.         The other spectator was holding the head of

the girl.      I told                       to get going.           put on the

lights and horns and drove off the pitch.                     1 have no idea

what time it was by now.             I assume that the man on the floor

was dead.      I tended to the girl and showed how to do mouth
      to     mouth   resuscitation         while   the    spectator    did    cardiac

      compressions.          I was very upset by this stage.                 I cannot

      remember anything about getting out of the ground and I do

      not    know    what    time   it was.        I    remember   nothing of     the

      journey up to the Northern General Hospital.



9.    We took the three bodies              into casualty and I assisted the

      doctor for a few minutes.We then loaded trolleys back on

      to the ambulance.         I asked the spectator nurse to come back

      with us and she agreed.          I cannot remember any instructions

      as to what we were to do next.                   We drove back down to the

      ground and I could hear conversations on the radio to do

      with Hillsborough but I was not really taking them in.



10.   There were no problems in             the approach to the ground, with

      police    cars   everywhere.          This   time     we   went through    the

      second entrance.         There were a couple of ambulances ahead of

      us.     I also saw a West Yorkshire ambulance.                I said to

                that I would report to an officer to see what wanted

      to be done.           I went to an ambulance officer in the yard

      although I do not know his name.                  He said that

      was to stay with his vehicle and that I was to help as much

      as I could.           I went back to the ambulance to tell                  bo

      stay with his vehicle but discovered that he had gone.                       I

      went to the next ambulance and helped myself to a first aid

      box.     Just then a casualty on a trolley was brought up.                  He

      appeared asthmatic and semi-conscious.                     I put hia on the



                                      -4
      second     ambulance.      Then   the   attendant   on   the    second

      ambulance,                  arrived with another casualty.         Once

      they were loaded,       that ambulance set off to the hospital.



11.   I then met another officer whom I did not know.          He told me

      to help some of the casualties out and pointed towards the

      gym.   I did not realise before this that the casualties were

      In the gym.      I went Into the gya and met Station Officer

      Higgins.     He said that I was to assist priorities.           I then

      helped with trolleys and directed arriving ambulance men to

      priority casualties.       Each time I loaded a priority onto a

      trolley I went back to the senior officer In the yard to

      tell him what I had done and asked for more Instructions.

      He would then tell me to go looking for priorities again.



12.   At one stage I offered to be a runner because there appeared

      to be no communication system between the officers at the

      ground as the radios were not working.       Within a short space

      of time we did not need trolleys and were onto the walking

      wounded.     By this time I felt exhausted and explained to

      Station Officer Higgins that I had been kicked.          He told me

      that I had to go to casualty.       I did not want to.         He said

      that there was a vehicle going to Hallamshire Hospital and

      said that I should go with it.



13.   I was at the Hallamshire for about 20 minutes.

      then arrived with some doctors who were needed at casualty.




                                                                           *>
      it was quite by accident that we met up at the Hallamshire.



14.   The control officer on the radio told us to have a drink at

      the Hallamshire.              We did so and we took two transfers to

      King Edward Hospital.                We finished at King Edwards at about

      1900 and then control told us that we were finished.                       We

      went back to the station, cleaned the ambulance and went off
      shift.



15.   I was not aware that there was any Hillsborough plan or of

      the role that the gym was the play in it.               I did not realise

      that     the   gym      was    the    casualty   clearing   centre   or   the

      temporary mortuary until I was told by one of the officers.

      I was aware of the major incident plan prior to this.



Dated the            ~7   ^         day of      Mgij              1989
ANTHONY JANES EDWARDS               ....
                                                                                                                                                                                           WG 412
                                                                                                                                                                                     (Amandad S.S7I
         •LO CK OUT D A T tl                                                                West Midlands Police
    Wimcn NOT A V A IlA S lf
                                                                                   STATEMENT OF WITNESS
'    8    IS   22    29    1 8   15 22 29                               (C.J. Act 1967, 1.9; M.C. Act 1980, «.102; M.C. Rules 1981. r.70l
2    9   16    23    30   2 9    16 23 30
3   10   17    24    31   3 10   17 24 31
«   11   18    25     .   4 11   18 25       N am e...............
5   12   19    26         5 12   19 26
6   13   20    27         6 13   20 27       Age                         (yrs)               Q ate of Birth ..............                                       |-
7   14   21    28         7 14   21 28
                                             Occupation                 .......................................................   C k j^ L v<e r- r ' •
1    8    15   22 29      1 8 15 22 29 [ Home or business address
2    9   16    23 30      2 9 16 23 30j and telephone number
3   10   17    24 31      3 10 17 24 31
4   11   18    25         4 11 18 25
5   12   19    26         5 12 19 26
6   13   20    27         6 13 20 27
7   14   21    28         7 14 21 28


 1 8 15 22 29 1 8 i5 22 » j    ‘f5 tf ® " ^ ' consistin9of     2-       page(s) each* signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
2 9 16 23 30 2 9 16 23 3 o | and bel,ef 8nd 1 m8ke     krK>wi°g th«- if «t •* tendered in evidence. I shall be liable to prosecution if I
3 10 17 24 31 3 io 17 24 311 have wilful,V stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
4 11 18 25    44 11 18 25
                       25  I
5 12 19 26     5 12 19 26
6 13 20 27    6 13 20 27     Dated the
7 14 21 28
                                                           day of                                          1 9 % ^      •
              7 14 21 28
tuna            if   no d a t e s
TOBf AVOWCO                                 Signed                                                                         Signature witnessed by

                                                                                                                           Officer's Name ..

                                                                                                                           Rank . ..             . ..        No.           h .% * -
                                                                                 ^                                                       ^
                                                                                                                                  .V^l.^>"1 .j..\...                      .d U L -              [
                                                                                                         \

                                            •                      ....c^rvv                       ...<5^
                                            .................Q > r: .                         . . ..^xrvW '____<JV . ^                          Jr           .v H f r .
                                            A                                            *s.                                                                 .

                                             Vrv^k.^s..                      r-r                                           ..,c& . .,\       -WTVi ...Vs.rs*-e^>v#v
                                             Il^'WVx. ...€KT<-?\v"J...o<?*.
                                            .O-^VO'N.                     .....1                                    ..0                         ,               ‘3 ; ; ;

                                                      v    .\ .  ... W ^ . ...1
                                                              -----------------------        W     'W     W     \    '   ..
                                                                                                                          • .
                                                                                                                            • V : v ^ - w . ,y. .< T *r\      . . r * * * y . . JI

                                                               ^                                                 .0 .                                       y.Jir>^V.

                                            far?. ..<y\VX^^n ,.CTvx
                                                       .   .W^-ok .. A
                                             ••        • ^ ......... ..jnrvri,^;-^ ...<~^y-.-R-r,-^>.cA- ./Vt» ^
                                             vJUvcSU ...\ ...                                            ...\ ..
                                        l*V c>. . . . ^ r ‘O Y '> £ ^ ? ’^ " V \A . . . . . j& L#<vy0 i ^ . * _ r ' .* ..........................................
                                                           ^-------------------------- . j j .^V-o____________^ !ro^
                                                                                                                         .C-SW>r-ftr^S’
                                                                                                                                      ...\-*>v ...'&VX5-, ..                          .0 ^ 5s
                                                                                                          ..v\rV5». ..                        ..A       o   ..
                                       Signed                                                                       Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                      • •
                                       *Det«t«m applicable.                                                                                                                             1 7 b ^ .
                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                                                  WG 413
                                                                                                                                                            (Amended 9.S7)
                                                           West Midlands Police
                                                 STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                      (C.J. Act 1967, s .9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rul«s 1981, r.70)


 Continuation of statement of
 o r .               VvCft ... ,4r*vv^A~V.'^'r..v                                  ./y ..................................
     ................\            Vr*A^tU                o^v*^r?<v7». . . ^7^? S h . . .
                         \       .svrr>X^                       Va^C                                                     e\^T. ..A ...,^k«»..
 . t y r W V ^ . . . : V©. . .                       ... pw >. . .                                                         . (V V N »*\* . . . . 4 7 5 ^ ..........
 .Of)c*bctM"-XlJC ... .W> .....                                        Vfl>T-. ...tV1?. ..Sb-TlJk'. ...                                                   .....
 .                   f^ rv ^ T .......................................................................................................
 ...... \.                                 ....                         •?-.....                 S. ..                   ...\ ...                                       n
                                   ..M*w.                    .... C*rW5>^-. ..                       ...rVvV ..
                 ....■&*&$?>*». ..j .                                ...V^r. ..1...X-o>r& ...0 .swr*?: ...
 .O^h-... v>_. .9 ^ '<&... C<A-5r*-.
                             . . . . x A . . . ^ . . . ^ ^ . ...r+e&XrT.......................
 ....................\ r v . . . . ^ Vy'rV • • •                                         ....                          . . . <V^». .. 5r*>-<$~».
                         ....            .._    .                        ....     J^TN•?:...                                       yv*.                         («wm

 .W      P T T ^r.   :...    A   ... .                                                                       ...      V r< fW V S ^ 'A A > . . . . .V *      1 .0
                                                                                                                                                             ... .

                                  . . . ^f<9. . V . . o r r ^                    \ __________________________                                  p y . . , ^ 14-<<»>vv_Y\
 .         . .   .Sfe £r. . .             £», .y . a^>. . . .ew .            .                 . . y. .                    .-C-. . .   \<^vc^<-. .*..................




Signed                                                                           Signature witnessed by
           HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                        (WEST DISTRICT)



                INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

             VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                       STADIUM DISASTER

                    ON THE 15TH APRIL% 1989



                   INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                     KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS




                            Before

      DR      L. POPPER. LL.B, B.MED.Sci. BM, BS, MRCGP

                    (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                              At

                   The Medico-Legal Centra
                        Watery Street,
                          She:f ield.

                              On

                          2nd May 1990




                   TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
3*'




             From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
                  Official Shorthand Writers.
              55. Quisen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX         1007
                                        INDEX


DR/ DAVID NEIL SLATER - Called

  Ey THE C O R O N E R ............................................. 2


DETECTIVE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCH                    Called

  Ey THE C O R O N E R ............................................. 5


DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Recalled




                                                                    CD co
 Ey THE CORONER .............................
 Cross-examined by HR. F R A S E R ..............


DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

 Ey THE CORONER . . ...........     ......................... 8
 Cross-Examined by MR. L I M E ............................... 11
 Cross-Examined by HR- CATCHPOLE-.......................... 11




                               -   -   00-   -   00-   -




                                                                  1008
                      2nd May 1990

                              INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS

                             MR. FRASER:    Sir, you will now hear evidence delating
                        to Kevin Daniel Williams.   Kevin's mum and dad are in Court
                        with the social worker from Merseyside who has been
                        assisting them.   The solicitors for Kevin's mum and dad are
                        members of my Gr oup and I therefore appear in the usual
                  B     guise as their agent to the Steering Committee.

                               THE CORONER:    Good moroing, Mr. and Mrs. Williams.
                        .'Before we begin I am going to explain to you the general
                         format of the Inquest because you weren't here a fortnight
                         ago, were you, and even if you were you might have
                         forgotten.   We will start in a moment or two by me reading
                         to you what was said.on 18th April 1989 which is when I
                         opened the Inquest i ~ i this very room.   Then if there are any
                         amendments which need to be made, if we have got some of the
                         facts wrong, we will sort that out.      I will then tell you
                         what the blood alcohol levels were, as measured by
                         Dr. Forrest, and then we will turn to Dr. Slater, who is the
                         Pathologist sitting up there behind you.      He will give us
                         the pathological evidence.     I think I can safely say that
                  D      if, after this Inquest over, you feel you would like to talk
                         to Dr. Slater privately he is quite happy to do that if it
                         would be-of any help to you.     When Dr. Slater has finished
                         the West Midlands Police Officers have prepared a summary
                         for me and he will deal with that and tell rne about it.

                             Then we will hear from Inspector Layton, another West
                        Midlands Police Officer, who will deal with the visual
                        evidence.  He will first of all tell me all about the plans
                        and so on and that is sometimes a bit confusing because
                        there are a lot of references given- but when he has finished
                        talking about it he comes over and shows us on these big
                        plans so that all of us, that is me, you, the Jury and
                        everybody else can follow it.  Then when that is done we
                        conclude and take no further evidence at this, stage.  Is
                        that reasonably clear?  I like to tell you so that you know
                        what to expect.  Otherwise you don't know what is coming.

                             This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened on
                        18th April 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin,
                        Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                             "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                             identifled.to PC 1269 Glave of the South Yorkshire
                             Police as that of Kevin Daniel' Williams by James
                             Stephen Williams, his father.   He was 15 years of age
                             having been born on 27th Mav 1973 at Southport..   He
                             lived at                               Merseyside.    He
                             was a schoolboy by occupation    He died at Hillsborough
                             Football Ground following an incident there on

              H                               W

                                                                                  1009
J.L.Harpham Ltd
                                               DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER



     Saturday, 15th April 1989.  PC Glave caused the body to
     be removed to the Medico Legal Centre and there he
     identified it to Detective Constable Simon ileigold who
     subsequently identified the same body to Dr. Slater.
     It is the family wish that the body should be ,
     cremated."

      I adjourned the Inquest at that point.    I wrote to you
 shortly afterwards and you, Mr. Williams, very kindly signed
 it on 1st Way 1989 and I chec ke d with you the details and
 you confirmed the name, that we h ad got it right, date of
 birth 27.5.73, that is right, isn't it, and the place of
,birth which was Southport wasn't it?    We typed it into the
 wrong spot in your case but you spotted that.

     Dr. Forrest did the alcohol levels for many of the
people who died, including Kevin, and the level in respect
of Kevin was 56 milligrammes per 100 mils.

             DR. DAVID NEIL S LA TER - Called

                      Sv THE C O R O N E R :

Dr. Slater. - A- Sir, my name is Dr. David Neil Slater.   I
am a Consultant Histopathologist and a Fellow of the Royal
College of Pathologists.

     THE CORONER:   Before I go on, Mr. Williams,           you are
true dad of this lad.

     MR. WILLIAMS:    Stepfather.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much.   You are mum, yes.
Mr- Fraser, so that we get the. record right.  Is this an
informal or a proper adoption because obviously the lad
carries the same surname?

     MR. FRASER:   There is no formal adoption but it is a
twelve years plus.

     THE CORONER:    Pardon?

     MR. FRASER:   There has been no formal adoption by
Mr. Williams as such but the relationship is more than
twelve years old.

     THE CORONER:   I am very sorry, Dr. Slater, to have
interrupted you.  Just remind us of your name because I have
forgotten where.we were up to?  Just start again? - A. My
name is Dr. David Neil Slater, Consultant Histopathologist,
sir.

Dr. Slater, in the usual way you are satisfied that the
evidence you are going to give me in this case relates to


                               2


                                                                 1010
                                        DR.   DAVID NEIL SLATER



 Kevin Daniel Williams who was also identified as No. 51,         is
 that right? - A. That is correct, sir.

 Identification was done by Inspector Timms so far as you are
 concerned? - A. That was the initial identification.

Eut there   is no doubt   in your mind about the identity? -
No

There were various marks on the body itself to identify it?
Sir, Kevin was clearly labelled both by number and by name.

 Dr. Slater, would you be kin<$ enough then to take me through
.
‘the post mortem? - A. My e xam in at ion of Kevin showed that
 the main finding was that of asphyxia.      This opinion was
  formed through the extensive blue ne ss on the face and upper
 part of the chest.   In addition there were small
 haemorrhages in both the face and internal organs including
 the brain, heart and lungs.    This asphyxia had clearly
 resulted from compression of the neck and chest and this
 opinion was supported by the presence of three small
 scratches over the left side of the neck and also over the
 front of the voice box-   This had also resulted in four
 fractures to the small bones in the actual voice box.      In
 addition there was evidence of br uising to the lungs, again
 supporting compression of the chest.

      My autopsy showed that Kevin was a normally developed,
fit, healthy, young male with no evidence of any natural
disease which could have contr ib ut ed towards death and it
was my opinion that Kevin had a normal life expectancy-      In
terms of the mode of death the compression of the neck or
chest has occurred here and unconsciousness occurs very
rapidly, certainly within a few seconds, and there is one
reported case of it occurring apparently instantaneously.
Following unconsciousness then there is no discomfort and no
pain.   Death then occurs after approximately three to five
minutes, sir.

So because when we say asphyxia people think of agony for
ages and ages.  What you are saying is that the person
himself would very rapidly not know anything at all about
what was happening? - A. I should say the word "asphyxia" is
unfortunate in that scientifically it partly includes simply
that there is not enough oxygen in the blood.  It doesn't
imply actual suffocation and prolonged death.

Did you say there were four fractures to the voice box? -
Yes, there are two bones in the voice box, as you know, sir,
and both these showed two fractures each*.

Now the reason why I asked you was this, and I want to put
this to you because I would like to get your view on it, one
Officer will be dealing with the value of this evidence in a

                            3
                                       DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER



moment but she say s that At a point when this lad was in the
gymnasium, in other words he had already been moved across
t.he pitch, she says she helped him into the gym from the
pitch, presumably she carried him.         He stopped breathing.
She gave him the kiss of life, did some heart massage, he
opened his eyes sai d a word and died-        Now in the light of
your pathological findings, is that in fact a possibility,
do you think? - A. Well, sir, I was aware of this statement
and therefore I have clearly given this matter considerable
thought, sir.         I think there are several comments to make
but the moderately large number of autopsies I did from this
incident, sir, this was certainly the most severe case of
traumatic asphyxia that I actually dealt with.         This was
both in terms of blu en es s of the face and also the area of
pallor of whiteness around the mouth.         Sir, it was a very
very severe form of asphyxia and I do not think that
unconsciousness wo u l d have been quicker than three or five
seconds.    I have no reason to alter what I have already said
on that a s p e c t .

     The other very significant thing about this, and it also
supports the seve rit y of this case, is that again of the
autopsies I did ap pr ox imately 15 per cent had sorne sort of
fracture to the voice box, the larynx.     This case was highly
unusual in that in fact it had four fractures to the larynx.
It was by far the most severe case of voice box fractures.
Not only does this indicate the severity of the traumatic
asphyxia at the time but it also in fact makes it virtually
impossible for the person to have spoken by virtue of the
fact that there wer e fractures to the voice box, sir.     So
all I can say, sir, that scientifically and medically I find
that inconceivable that the person could have spoken.

The other thing I notice is that you show in this particular
case extensive co ng es ti on of the cerebral veins and
cereballum and cortical coning and.if a person speaks his
neurons are working, aren't they? - A. That is right.

That evidence wou ld indicate there had been extensive brain
damage and he couldn't really communicate.   Would that be
right?  I don't want to put words in your mouth but I want
to be sure about that? - A. The coning indicates the
severity of the asphyxia and again that would have resulted
in irreversible bra in    damage which   again would totally
prohibit any form of communication.

I have thought about this comment as well, of course, and
there are several explanations (1) that it didn't occur and
that the observer is mistaken but another possibility that
has occurred to me and I want to put it to you and please
disagree if it is not either   right or you don't accept it;
it is possible,  is it not, that if a person having died is
moved air or stomach contents might be expelled and might
make a sound as it escapes, so to speak?    Is that a


                             4
                                                      p. s. j o h n yTf,LOCH



   possibility? - A. It is an interesting comment, sir, because
   it is a possibility I c o n si der ed also myself and that is
   certainly an explana ti on to the noise which could have been
   made which may have mi mic ked the word "mum" but it would not
   explain the opening of the eyes, sir.

Q. No.   - A. Eut   it wo ul d e x p la in the noise.

        HR. FRASER:       No questions, sir, but thank you very
   much, Dr. Slater,     for that sym pa thet ic and detailed
   explanat ion.

        THE CORONER:    Any o t h e r >qu es t ion s for Dr. Slater?
   Thank you very much, Dr. Slater.          We spent a lot of time
   thinking about this sen tenc e bec ause it was difficult.         I
   didn't think it wa s pos si bl e from what I knew of the
   evidence but, on the other hand, we didn't want you to feel
   that ue weren't tel li ng you what was in the statements. We
   felt it was hotter for you to hea r it and have it explained
   rather than for us to keep it un der wraps, so to speak, and
   you might possibly find out some other time.            I hope I have
   taken the right decision.      I don't know.        The only person
   who knows that is you.    We did spend a lot of time thinking
   about it wondering what to do for the best.

               FOLICE SERGEANT JOHN K l L L O C H - Cal led

                             Bv THE C O R O N E R ;

Q. Yes. - A. Police Sergeant John Killoch.,. sir, of the West
   Midlands Police.  1 have p r e v i o u s l y taken the Oath.

Q. Could you then please, if you would, take me through the
   statement? - A. At 0700 hou rs on Saturday, 15th April 1939,
   Hr. James Stephen Wil lia ms saw his son, Kevin Daniel
   Williams, leave the family home with- the intention of
   travelling to Sheffield.    He was to travel by train with a
   number of friends to watch the Semi Final football match at
   Hillsborough Stadium.   Kevi n had a ticket for the match.

        Andrew Duncan trave ll ed to Sheffield with Kevin, Thomas
   James Nickson and Gr eg or y Fagen.  They travelled by train,
   arriving at Sheffield at 1040 hours.     Gregory Fagen left the
   others at the station.     The other three youths caught a bus
   from the station to Hillsb or ou gh Stadium where Thomas
   Nickson left them.

        Andrew Duncan entered the stadium with Kevin at about
   1330 hours via the Leppings Lane turnstiles.  They initially
   stood together in Enclosure 4 but shortly after they moved
   to Enclosure 3.  At about 1445 hours Andrew Duncan saw other
   friends on the terraces, including Anthony Maxwell Grier and
   Stuart Thompson.  Stuart, of course, also lost his life at
   Hillsborough.




                                                                         1013
                                           P,S. JOHN KILLQ^H




      Ac about; 1455 hours Andrew Duncan was still with Kevin
 and although the crowd in the enclosure was tightly packed
 he was not too concerned at that stage.   As the match
 started he was pushed forward down the terrace and did not
 see Kevin again.

     Following the severe cr ushing in the West Stand
terracing Police Constable Michael John Craighill went into
Enclosure 3 and assisted a number of casualties-    Police
Constable Craighill assisted to ca rr y a youth, he now
believes to be Kevin, from the^gate in the perimeter fence
of Enclosure 3 and on to the pitch.    The Officer attempted
resuscitation but without success.

      Derek William Bruder, an off-duty Police Constable from
■the Merseyside Police who was a spec ta to r at the match,
 recalls seein g a person lying on the pitch near the Spion
 Kop/North Stand of the ground.    The person   as having
 convulsions.    Mr. Bruder went on to the pitch and gave mouth
 to mouth resuscitation aided by a St. Johns Ambulanceman who
 carried out cardiac massage.    Mr. Brude r recalls that a
 friend of the casualty was with h im on the pitch.
 Resuscitation was continued and they were joined b y a St.
 Johns Amb ul ancewoman who took over from Mr. Bruder.    After a
 short time the St. Johns Ambulan ce ma n said that the casualty
 was dead.    Hr. Bruder then left the scene.

     Neither of the St. Johns Ambulance personnel or the
friend of the casualty have been identified.  The person
Mr. Bruder tried to resuscitate is now known to be Kevin.

     Special Constable Debra Martin went on to the pitch to
assist and she helped to carry several deceased persons and
many injured persons to the gymnasium.  She assisted to
carry one youth who she now knows to be Kevin into the
gymnasium where she remained with him.

     At 1606 hours Dr. Curpen examined Kevin in the
gymnasium which had been es ta blished as a temporary
mortuary.  Dr. Curpen certified life extinct.

     Special Constable Martin later escorted Kevin's body to
the Medico Legal Centre and she con fi rm ed the identification
by reference number to DC Wei gold.

     On Sunday, 16th April 1989, Mr. James Stephen Williams
identified the body of his son to Police Constable Scott
G1ave.           •

     On Sunday, 16th April, following identification by
Detective Constable Weigold, Dr. David Slater carried out an
autopsy and submitted a report givi ng the cause of death.



                              6
                                                            1014
                                                     p. s .   JOHN   jClLLO.CH




               Evidence i3 included rega rd in g Che .analysis of a blood
          sample taken from Kevin wh e re th <2 presence of ethanol was
          detected.  The witnesses p r o ving continuity of the blood,
          sample are Defective Cons ta bl e Green, Detective Sergeant
          Turner and Detective Sergeant Fletcher.      Dr. Alexander
          Robert Forrest carried out the analysis.

               Found in Kevin's personal effects was a ticket
          counterfoil which is consistent with his entry to the
          stadium via a turnstile.  That concludes my evidence, sir.
B
          There is visual evidence.

          I think I am right in saying, am I not, that Mr. Bruder (I
          am looking at pa.ge 47) identifies Kevin from clothing, is
          that right? - A . He has b e e n shown ph otographs which show
          Kevin which Mr. Layton will deal with later and one of the
          photographs I believe does show Mr. Bruder actually giving
          first aid.

     Q.      there is no doubt about   it that Mr. Bruder was involved?
     A. Nt

     Q.   His personal recollection isn't as strong? - A. No, but what
          he does recollect is corrob or ate d by the visual evidence.

D    Q. We have already mentioned the evidence of Special Conotable
        Martin who said about the lad speaking.    In no way do I want
        to run poor Special Const ab le Martin down because she had a
        very hard day but it is right she was obviously from her
        statements very dis tressed? - A. I also wouldn't want to
        criticise UPC Martin in any way but I have interviewed her
        twice  sir, and she was par ticularly upset as indeed many
        people were but it affected her particularly badly the
        events of that d a y -

               THE CORONER:   Well     I won't ask you to draw a
          conclusion.  Mr. Fraser.

               MR  FRASER:   There is a matter arising out of what the
          Officer says which may pe rhaps leave a doubt in Kevin's
          parents  minds.  Can I ask you to ask Dr. Slater to deal
          with the point that was made in paragraph six of the
          summary, sir?

               THE CORONER:    About the convulsions?

               MR. FRASER:    Yes, sir-
JT
               THE CORONER:   Yes, I will do that       I will ask
G
          Dr. Slater to come down in a moment.

               MR. FRASER:    Thank you, sir.

               THE CORONER     Is there anything else you want to ask?


H
                                                                          1015
                                                 DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER
                                                 D . I . MICHAEL LAYTON



         MR. FRASER:     No,   thank you,      sir.

         THE CORONER:      I will   recall Dr'. Slater.

                 DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Recalled

                            Ry THE C O R O N E R :

Q. Dr. Slater, the point that is being made, of course, you
   have got to remember that Mr.^Bruder was at the Spion Hop
   end, the bottom end and not the top, and he says, "I saw
   this man lying on the floor having convulsions".          Can you
   help us about that? What does that add or not to your
   pathological opinion? - A. It is obviously very distressing.
   Unfortunately when people have not got enough oxygen in the
   brain, as I said in my earlier evidence, which is really
   what the word ,,as ph y x i a ,, means, individuals can in fact have
   fits.  This is one of the mechanisms that leads towards
   death and makes the asphyxia worse.          This does, however,
   only occur when the individual is totally unconscious.            It
   does not mean there will be any pain or discomfort.           ihe
   person will not know they are fitting and actually I                 to
   accept that some individuals do have convulsions and it is
   one of the mechanisms leading to death in traumatic
   asphyxia, sir.

Q. Does it make you feel the other evidence about the lad
   breathing a n d speaking either more or less likely because
   obviously this would be much closer in time to Special
   Constable Martin's evidence than what had happened on the
   terrace? - A. Yes.        For somebody to have convulsions, this
   would imply that the amount of asphyxia is such that there
   must be virtually irreversible brain damage present and
   again this would fully support the concept that the evidence
   of o p e n i n g eyes and speaking is not really conceivable, sir.

          THE CORONER:     Does that help, Mr. Fraser.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. F R A S E R :

          MR. FRASER:   I am sure it does. Dr. Slater.  It is
     difficult to find the phrase to sum the situation up.   Kevin
     at that stage was beyond help.  He was as good as dead.-’ ~ A.
     Yes, that is right, absolutely.

Q. And would feel nothing and know nothing? - A. Absolutely.
   He would know nothing.

            nFTRCTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                            Bv THE C O R O N E R ;

Q.   Inspector Layton* - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
     Inspector in the West Midlands Police.

                                      8

                                                                    1016
                                             D.I.   MICHAEL LAYTON



      Sir, an examination has been made of video film and
photographic evidence and Kevin has been identiiied in
EixjioiuL’i; Ho. 3, al S O, sir, being carried across the pitch
and at-‘the Spion Kop end of the ground.
                                                                   » ■*
      On -a photograph referenced DAC3/1Kevin is shown
apparently unconscious near the perimeter fencing in
Enclosure .No- 3.  On a EEC video tape, referenced MAP 7,
timed at 1523:33:22 this shows him being removed from the
terraces via. Gate No- 3.

      FC Craighill has signed a plan of the pitch showing
wl^ere he first came into c o n t a c t with Kevin and where in
fact he laid him on the ground and that plan, sir, is
referenced MJC2-   The Officer has identified himself on
video, again a BBC video tape, MAP 7, timed at 1528:43:24
carrying a youth who he knows to be Kevin ~ that is a typing
error there.   It says Keith in the summary but it s-hould be
Kevin _ from Gate j c«nd on to the pitch.        ihe Officer did
not know the identity of the youth and at first in fact
believed it to be another* of the deceased but that hss been
clari fied .
          Photograph referenced PR5/32 and PR5/33 which are both
timed
 i litc u  at 1532
           ov» i    show
                    f iivw Kevin being carried
                                       — — -— ------ across the pitch
                                                                r      on a
 emporary stretcher by a number of spectators and two Police
ter
 fficers.
Officers.        PC Hayes
                    Haye* has confirmed his identification on
those photographs.          The Officer assisted to carry two people
on temporary stretchers, both of whom were deceased, but he
couldn't recall any other details and he didn't know the
identity of the persons he carried.             He merely, as it were,
assisted in carrying.          We have mentioned that before.         It is
not an unusual feature that people's recollections weren't
exact .
     A number* of photographs, including a photograph
referenced TT1/30 show Kevin being given mouth to mouth
resuscitation on the pitch by PC Bruder who contirmed his
identification.   Sir, you mentioned this Officer earlier.
In fact, it is true to say Mr. and Mrs. Williams have
previously seen visual evidence.   They have in fact seen
some of that visual evidence again today and I think I am
right in saying they have confirmed that Kevin is shown on
that photograph so, as it were, PC Bruder is confirmed as
having given mouth to mouth resuscitation to Kevin.

The reason I asked is because it refers to a friend and
there doesn't seem to be any other evidence or that?
No, that is right*. It is true to say the initial
identification was from clothing but it has subsequently
been confirmed.

     Six*, can I refer you to a plan which has been given the
reference HWJL40 which is a plan of the terraces?


                 V->
                                  9

                                                                          1017
                                           D.I.   MICHAEL LAYTON




Yas, C201 . - And KWJL41 which       is -a plan of the pitch.

H.JC2 are th^y the same markings? - A. 1 would say, sir, that
in fact -although there are two markings the refer-=ncer.to MAP
7 on the previous plan actually would deal with PC Craighill
on t-hat occasion.

So I1UJL41 we make C 2 0 2 . Let us include that one as well
HJC2 will be C 2 0 3 . - A. Which is PC C r a i g h i l l ’s plan.
(moved to P l a n ) Sir, if we can deal with the plan MWJL40,
which is the plan of the terraces, the first photograph
DAC3/1 referred to in this summary indicates the position
here (indi cat- irig) and this indicates Enclosure No- o and it
is at this point here (indicat i n e ) that Kevin is shown quite
close to the pe ri met er fence.

     The second identification, MAP 7, the BBC tape, refers
to the identification by PC Craighill and the point at which
we see Kevin is approximately here (indicat in,g) and it is
prior to his removal via Gate 3.

     Then, sir, in respect of PC Craighill's plan, MJC2, it
is a terrace plan he refers to but he actually indicates a
position here (ind icat in g ) in front of Gate ^ and a further
position which is shown just otf the plan but it is li^re-
It ia just on to the pitch.

It is diagraunrrjcit ic? - A. Yes.

Certainly the second location can't be taken as giving us
any sense of distance? - A. No, but factually the next plan
will do that.  I think, sir, just to correct myself I should
have been pointing there.

Yes. - A. Sir, in respect of M W J L 4 1 , the video reference on
BBC tape, MAP 7, indicates a position here (indi cat in.Q
which accords with PC C r a i g h i l l ’s recollection. There is
also photographic identification on PR5/32 which is where
Kevin is being carried across the pitch and th<5 location
referred to is there (indicatins) .

Remind me, do we know the time for that one? - A. Yes, I
think it is 1532, sir.  Yes, 1532.  A further photograph,,
sir, TT1/30, which I think refers to PC Eruder, the location
of that is approximately this position here (indi cat in g )
which is towards the Spion Kop end of the pitch.

     THE CORONER:      Mr. Fraser.

     MR. FRASER:      No questions.




                                10

                                                                   1018
                                           Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:

                        Q. Ui>3 the phonograph with the reference LAC3/1       a   timed
                           photograph? - A. No, sir.

                                        Cross-Examined "d v HR.   CATCHPOLE:

                        Q. Andrew Duncan, did he show any visual evidence or did he
                           give a plan showing where he last saw Kevin, when they
                   B       parted company? - A. 1 don't believe so.    Can you just give
                           me a moment?   The answer is we don't have a plan from
                           ?ir. Duncan.                   ^
                           I
                                 THE CORONER:   If I can help you a little bit on that
                           one, what Andrew Duncan says is, "We stood up and were
                           standing about two to two and a quarter yards from the
                           perimeter fence around the pitch.   We were waiting for the
                           game to start.   At about 1445 or so a group of friends were
                           standing behind rne, Stuart Thompson and Tony Grier.   I was
                           standing with Kevin Williams".   Then he describes the people
                           coming out and he says, "When the game kicked off I was
                           pushed forward down the terrace about    two yards. After this
                           push I lost Kevin and did not see him again".    His final
                           remark is that he saw Kevin for the last time on the terrace
                           just before the crush started.   "The last time I saw Kevin
                   D
                           was on the terrace just before the crush started.    After
                           tiiis I did not see him again'   That is his statement, just
                           i,o that we know what it is which one we are talking about,
                           dated 17.5.69.   Anything else, Mr. Fraser, you want to ask?

                               MR.   FRASER:   No   sir.

                               THE CORONER:    Mr. and Mrs. Williams, that is the
                          evidence we are going to take. • As I said to you in the
                          middle of the hearing we spent quite a lot of time wondering
                          what we should do for the b e s t . Obviously we knew Kevin
                          lost his life and we were worried about upsetting you in
                          Court but I think on balance we have done the right thing
                          because you have heard within the limits of what we are
                          doing and summarising the evidence what happened and what
                          went on.  Fortunately, Dr. Slater has been able to be here
                          and he has been able to give you his opinion as to what
                          happened in his view and what in his view is possible and I
                          think I am sure that will help you - not to come to terms
                          with the loss of your son but it is very difficult to come
                          to terms with that loss at all but just to appreciate in the
                          stress situation in which people found themselves
                          recollections tend sometimes to be mistaken and indeed there
               G          are lots of mistaken recollections not only in relation to
                   a*     Kevin but also in relation to many of the other people of
                          which we have heard.   That is not at all uncommon and occurs
                          in normal fatal incidents as well.     It is exceedingly
                          difficult when you are suddenly confronted with a situation
                          to then recount exactly what happened.


               H                                           11

                                                                                           1019
J. L.Harpham Ltd
                            I realise Kevin was a young boy, just fifteen, which i-
                      very veiy young of course *nd I would like you to know how
                      very ^orry we are thdt he should have lost his life at such
                      an ^ariy age in tlii^ tragedy.  The Jury have had to deal
                      with many cases but today, at this moment, we are just
                      dealing with yours and so far as we are able we would like
                      you to know we are conscious of that.   Thank you for being
                      here.
                  B
                           Ladies and gentlemen, we rise for a moment or two and
                      then we proceed to deal with our next I n q u e s t <
                      i
                          (The   Inquest into the death of Kevin Daniel Mi 11 jams
                                   was adjourned until a date to be f i x e d )




                  D




              H

                                                                                     1020
J.L.Harpham Ltd
    HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                 (WEST DISTRICT)



         INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

      VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

A            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



            INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

             KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS
                  (Further)




                     Before

DR. S.L. POPPER. LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM. BS, MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

            The Medico-Legal Centre.
                 Watery Street,
                   Sheffield.

                        On

                   Uth May 1990




             TRANSCRIPT O F PROCEEDINGS




       From the Notes of J.L. Harphan, Ltd.,
            Official Shorthand Writers,           1021
        55, Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX
0 P E N R 1Z BY THE CORONER                   l.



SERGEAMT JOHN KILLOCH Recalled

      By THE CORONER                          2   .
INSPEC rOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS Called

     ( % THE CORONER                          5.

DR. DAVID SLATER Recalled

      By THE CORONER                         10.
       ross-Examined by MR. LIMB             13.

         'JEST JOHN WALLACE GIJMPERT Sworn

      By THE CORONER                         15.
      Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB             18.
      Further by THE CORONER                 19.




     E




     F




     G
      * -




     H                                                1022
■‘riHny, 4tn May, 1900

                    FURTHER EVIDENCE IN

               THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                   KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS


       THF CORONER":’ Now you mass remember on Wednesday I
  kebt you late. ; I said I had to go out and do a little
  bit of thinking, and that is what we are going to deal
  with this afternoon.

       What we were thinking about was that one of the
  inquests which we had done related to Kevin Daniel
  Williams.    I will remind you of this inquest.   This
  was the case of another young man, in fact he was only
  15.    The problem in that case was that the evidence
  was difficult to unravel as to when he died and what
  had happened when he was being taken across the pitch
  and had he said something in the temporary mortuary and
  so on.
        After the inquest was concluded my attention was
  cirawn by some of my legal colleagues, and very
  rightlybecause they were realised it was a sensitive
  problem and did not want to upset the family, so they
  brought it to my attention privately first.     The point
  which they were bringing to my attention was that one
  of the witnesses appeared to say.that when he came to
  this young man at the Spion Kop end, .more or less,- of
  the ground, he had convulsions and he'also said he
  could feel a pulse.     We knew from the visual evidence
  - we are going to repeat all the relevant evidence in a
  moment - we knew that he was being taken across the
  pitch and we had a timing at 1532.    Assuming that was
  right, this convulsion or whatever it was, was
  happening after that point of time.    The question was.
  what on earth was going on?
        j agreed that this was a valid point.    I think we
   were so concerned about the event which happened after
   that, namely, what happened in the gymnasium, did he
   speak or did he no.t speak ~ this was the lad with the
   fractured voice box - that we may not have.put quite
   enough concentration and thought into the earlier
   evidence, but we are going to do it now. We are going
   to sort it out so that we know, as far as we are able,
   so that we understand, if we can, what happened.

        I think if Sergeant Killoch could come back.

   ^                     -l-                                  1023
               SKRfiEANT JOHN KILLOCH      R ecalled

                         Bv THE CORONER:

       THE WITNESS:   Sergeant John           Killocb    from the
  Uest Midlands Police.

. Sergeant Killoch, if y°u read - we are not ^oing to
  reatl the whole summary again because we don t need to -
  but I think paragraph 5 which is where somebody starts
  describing helping him from the terraces. ~ A.
  Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
  t^^cscinj* Police Constable Michael John Craighill went
  into enclosure 3 and assisted a number of casualties*
  Police Constable Craighill assisted to carry a young
  man he now believes to be Kevin Daniel Williams from
  the gate in the perimeter fencing of enclosure 3 and on
  to the pitch.
  The officer attempted resuscitation but without
  success.
  Derek William Bruder is a Police Constable with              the
  Merseyside Police who was off-duty at the match              that
  day.   He was a spectator in the North Stand.                He
  recalls seeing a person lying on the pitch near              the
  Spion Kop and North Standing and describes that              person
  as having convulsions.
  Mr. Bruder went on to the pitch and gave mouth to mouth
  resuscitation, aided by a St. John's Ambulanceman who
  carried out cardiac massage.                   Mr. Bruder recalls that
  a friend of the casualty was with him on the pitch.
  Resuscitation was continued and they were joined by a
  St. John's Ambulancewoman who took over from Mr. Bruder
  a nci a f t e r b s h o r t t i n t s by 3 St* J ohn s Acnbulsnccmsn#

  The St. John's Ambulanceman said the casualty was dead
  and Mr. Bruder then left the scene.

  Neither of the St. John's Ambulance personnel oc the
  friend of the casualty have been identified.

  The person Mr. Bruder tried to resuscitate is known to
  be Kevin Daniel Williams and there is visual evidence
  to show that, sir.
). Then the next paragraph deals with the lady, police
   officer.   Just read that next paragraph as well. - A.
   Special Constable Debra Jane Martin went on to the
   pitch to assist and helped to carry several deceased
   and many injured to the gymnasium.   She assisted to
   carry one young boy, now known to be Kevin, into the
   gymnasium and she remained with him.

                             - 2 -
               A(i. Now what she said we are not going to deal with because
                         that was satisfactorily explained.  Uhat we are
                         interested in is that bit which has been read.    If we
                         turn to page 41, I think I am right in saying that what.
                         Mr. Hruder says - he says he saw a person about a
                         quarter of the pitch length away from the Spion Kop? —
                         A. Yes.
               Bf#              lying on the ground or thereabouts? - A. That    is
                         correct, sir.
                         He says he can remember this bec?ause he recollects a n :
                         antnilance going past which locates it in his mind and '-.v
                         in fact he tried to flag it down? - A. Yes.

                         Then he says:
                              "I saw this man lying on the floor having
                              convuls ions."

                         - A. That is his exact wording.

                         Then if we turn over the page and pick out the bits
                         that are relevant.   He says he went down and he went
               D
                         up to this man:
                              "...and then went to the man having convulsions."

                         - A. Yes, sir.

                         Then he says:
                              "I was joined by a St. John's Ambulanceman."

                         - A. Yes.
                   <\.        “That chap said, 'You do mouth to mouth and I will
                              do heart massage'".

                         - A. That is correct.

                   (J. He goes on to say:
                              "I then took his pulse in his neck.     I could feel
                              a slight pulse."

                         - A. Yes, sir. - -- .
                         He then tried to resuscitate him, mouth to mouth, and
                         undressed him so he could do it more conveniently
                         probably. - A. Yes.

                   <fc. Then he says:

               H                                 - 3 -
                                                                                       1025
J. L.Harpham Ltd
A              "We continued to work on the man hut after about
               five minutes he went grey and his face was
               withdrawn."

          - A. That is right, sir.

  i). lie talks about the man vomiting and being sick and
      having a peculiar smell ~ at least, the, breath*.•
B     Well, his mouth had a peculiar smell? - A / i Y e s ^ j

    ). lie also noticed there was something unus%T>*b<nithis
       rib cage:    -r •        r:-'
                                   -v _ ..-r^-'V^V4'
               "As I did heart massage his;rib^VWereJunnaturally
               prominent."                      '*

          - A. Yes.
    J. Then eventually another St. John's Ambulance person
       came and he left the man? - A. That is right.

    }. This whole thing took quite a few minutes? - A. Yes,
       obviously the officer had no conception of time.
D 3 . Can you remind me about the visual evidence?         It is
          just to make sure I have got it right that there is
          visual evidence, both of Mr. Bruder... _ A.r One
          photographic print was mentioned, sir, and was given
          the reference number TT.1/30.    That is a photograph
          which shows Kevin lying on the pitch.    The person has
          been identified by Kevin's parents.    Shown about to
          give mouth to inouth resuscitation of Kevin is a man who
          has been identified as Police Constable Bruder.     PC
          Bruder has identified himself on that.photograph.

          Then there is another timed print, is it PR.5/32 or
          PR.5/33, showing Kevin being carried across, paragraph
          18? - A. There are two photographs, sir: PR.5/A/32,
          which is timed at 1532 and PR.5/A/33.   That is -also
          timed at 1532.
    -).        THE CORONER:   Inspector Layton, just show us
          where those photographs are.
               INSPECTOR LAYTON:     Yes, sir.   They are referred
          to in the plan MVJJL.42.    PR.5/32 is approximately at
          this position he-re. on the pitch.   That is the timed
          photograph, sir.     TT.130 is not timed, b u t l believe
          it is somewhere in this area here.     From recollection
          I think I did that actually from what Hr. Bruder says
          in his statement, about the positioning on the pitch.
                                              '•--O'-' - •
                                                             -V ..t:*
                                                                                       ' < .. -V ’




                           THE CORONER:   Now Inspector Sawers went to see
                      Mr. Bruder because we wanted to be sure we had the
                      facts.

                              INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAUF.RS Called

                                          By THE CORONER:               .
                                                     -
                  B        THE WITNESS:   Matthew Robert Sawers, Inspector,
                      West Midlands Police.

                      I .believe you went to see him yesterday? - AVc Yes, sir.^^^.
                        w -                              •   t- v           -.' •,'* V--r .     *-

                      In fact it was Mr. Bruder's day off but h e v e r y ' -        - -f;-;
                                                                                        a/
                      willingly gave his time? - A. lie did.

                      Now can you summarise for me what he says? - A. Yes,
m                     sir.   He starts off by referring and identifying his
                      two previous statements to us, sir, the first of which
                      was approximately a fortnight after the disaster
                      itself, and a second statement in August of last year
                      was a very short statement in which he merely
                      identifies himself on the photographs that you have
              D       heard reference to, sir.

                      He goes on to say that I had shown him a number of
                      documents and plans, from which he was able to refresh
                      his memory.   He refers to the fact he had made some
                      notes on the day after the disaster but that they did
                      not refer specifically to his dealings with this
                      casualty.

                      He refers, sir, to joining Merseyside Constabulary in
                      1987 and receiving basic first-aid instruction during
                      his initial training.    That was both in theory and
                      practical application.    He refers, sir, following the
                      incident and his dealings with this youth, to feeling
                      he was inadequately trained in his own- confidence,
                      although it is also true to say that he is absolutely
                      satisfied that the first aid he rendered on the day was
                      the very best he could do and he felt he could do no
                      more.    He goes on to say as a result of feeling
                      depressed about the incident he applied of his own
                      volition for further first-aid training within
                      Merseyside Police.    Indeed, he attended a full week,
                      Monday to Friday course, leading to a further
                      qualification and.much greater confidence in his own
                      ability.    However, with the benefit of thg,t training,
                      sir, he is able to reflect on his actions of the day
                      and he is still absolutely satisfied that the first aid
                      he rendered in terms of mouth to mouth and heart
                      massage were correct and he could have done no more for
                      Kevin.

              H                              - 5 -
                                                                                              1027
J.L.Harpham Ltd
                                                        w .
                                                        n ---




                       He goes on then, sir, to deal with specific matters
                       that I referred him to in his original statement*
                       Specifically, sir, from the transcript and police file^
                       he deals with page 41 of the police file statements,            *~
                       which is page 6 of his original statement in April last
                       year.    He refers and confirms seeing Kevin a quarter
                       of; the length of the pitch, from the Spion Kop end? of
                       thetground.    lie refers to his being on the f l o o ^ a n d y
                   B   clarifies that as on the grass surface of the pitch'*;;

                       He has given very careful considerationi^si'r^t^the^l-r
                       expression that he used of having^cbnvulsion^l^dfin^c;'.'
                       the.light of his further training and what|^?noW|knows
                       and thinks about the incident; was that ,,conyulsions,,^v
                       was not the word that was applicable to these
                       circumstances.   He refers specifically to h*avirig seen
                       epileptic fits and says that what he originally
                       described as a convulsion was not anything like an
                       epileptic fit.   He goes on to say later, sir, that if
                       there was a part of the body that he saw move it was
                       his head and that the word that he best thinks
                       describes this movement is that of a twitch.

               D       He refers to comments he made originally about-
                       approaching the body, the body that was convulsing.
                       Having specifically considered it again, sir, he does
                       say that the body was not convulsing as he approached
                       it.   He referred originally, sir, to feeling for a
                       carotid pulse and originally he thought he had detected
                       a slight pulse.   On reflection, sir, he feels he would
                       be much more skilful if he were required to perform
                       this action again and he cannot discount the
                       possibility that he did not feel Immediately in the
                       right place for the carotid artery.   He certainly felt
                       in the neck region where hethought he would find the
                       artery but he cannot say he would have gone to it
                       directly.

                       I put to him, sir, the specific point I believe Dr.
                       Slater made in his evidence about this inquest a couple
                       of days ago and PC Bruder specifically discounts having
                       felt for the carotid artery with his thumb.    He refers
                       to the first two fingers of his left hand.

                       He says in dealing with the carotid pulse that he may
                       have touched other areas around the neck region,
                       including the Adam's apple and that whatever he felt
                       there he cannot be categoric it was a pulse.   He
                                                                      ,,A feels
                       he may well be mistaken in that matter, sir.

                       Later in his statement of April last.year, sir, he
                       referred to the face of Kevin Williams going grey and
                       being withdrawn.   He wanted you to know, sir, that he
                       cannot specifically say he saw the face change from a
               H       V                        - 6 -
                                                                                            1028
J. L.Harpham Ltd
  normal pallor, or colour, to grey.   lie mentioned it in
  his statement, sir, in the sequence that it occurred to
  him that he was now noticing that he was grey.    He may,
  have been grey as he approached him before he mentioned
  it, or it may have occurred as.he noticed it.

 In his original statement he referred to vomiting and
 thinking that Kevin had been sick.    He has given this
 matter some further thought and he is absolutely
 satisfied that Kevin was not sick.    He did not see
 Kevin vomiting and he did not s<?e vomit on the ground
 or *on his clothing.

. Does he still confirm that there was a distinctive .
  smell? - A. Yes, he does, sir.

 To finish with the vomiting aspect of his original
 statement, he docs have a clear impression in his mind,
 sir, of a fluid of some sort in the mouth, but he
 cannot discount that that could be spittle or phlegm of
 some sort.

 He referred in his original statement to the original
 resuscitation attempts whereby he gave mouth to mouth
 resuscitation and the St. John's Ambulanceman commenced
 heart compressions.   His original thought, sir, was
 that that was for approximately seven minutes and, give
 or take, he is happy with that time and thinks it is
 reasonably accurate.    He then later referred to
 swopping over with the St. John's Ambulanceman and PC
 Derek Bruder was then involved in external heart
 conpressions and this was when he.noticed the unusual
 rib cage and he had earlier referred,.sir, to
 unbuttoning his shirt, I believe.    He referred to
 unzipping his trousers and noticing some striped boxer
 shorts that you will see in the photographs that have
 been referred to, TT.1/31 and 32 respectively.

 I have put to him the apparent difficulties in the time
 sequence of the action that he describes near the Spion
 Kop end of the ground and his specific reference to an
 ambulance and asking the St. John's Ambulance colleague
 who was assisting him and who has not been identified,
 to stop the ambulance because he was considering
 utilising it, sir.

 I have drawn his -attention to the problems in relation
 to the known timing of ambulances arriving on the
 pitch, both of St. John's and of the South Yorkshire
 Metropolitan Ambulance Service and I have drawn his
 attention to the apparent discrepancy in relation to
 the time shown on photographs PR.5/A.32 and 3, sir.




                                                              1029
                                 1. The point is that the ambulances were known to arrive
                                    atT about 1515 and 1517 or thereabouts? ~ A. Yes, sir.

                                 ■). And the photograph, PR.5/A/32 and so on, is timed at
                                     1532? - A . Thatiis correct, sir.

                                   We are saying he was;*jdea 1ing with this young boy after
                                   that? ^ A . That is; correct.
                                                           ■4‘
                                                           ’ i*WSr+Z*=”
                                                     ; •'*rj,£rJrfib
                             B                         >         -w. • • •



                                 ). In fact I putYtheTwVong^times to you.    It is 1515 on
                                   the pitch for tHeiSt^rJohn's Ambulance and 1520 for the
                                   fi/rst .South Yorkshir^JJi^r A. That is correct, sir,
                                   irrespective of- whicfiV.v:

                                   It is still e a r l i e r V A. It is still earlier than
                                   1532, sir, and that’point has been put specifically to
                                   Hr. Bruder and try as he may he is simply ur. »ble to^
                                   reconcile those differences.      I have put to him, sir,
                                   was it for instance a question of one of those
                                   ambulances actually exiting the stadium across the
                                   pitch rather than entering the stadium.      He has
                                   considered that point and try as he may his
                                   recollection is still of it being an ambulance that
                             D     entered the stadium.
                                   lie refers then to being joined by the woman St. John's
                                   Ambulance Officer, who he refers to pushing him out of
                                   the way to become involved as a trained first aider and
                                   recollects this was approximately six minutes after he
                                   changed places with the male ambulance officer.    for
                                   that reason, with the original seven minutes mouth to
                                   mouth resuscitation, PC Bruder feels that that total of
                                   thirteen minutes he could amend to a period of time of
                                   between ten and fifteen minutes of sustained attempts
                                   to resuscitate Kevin.

                                   It was at this point, sir, that after approximately two
                                   minutes of the involvement of the woman St. John's
                                   Ambulance Officer, that the male St. John's Ambulance
                                   Officer stood up and said, "He's gone."    He referred
                                   to the expression being completely grey and would seek
                                   to reaffirm that choice of words as his description of
                                   Kevin at that particular moment in time.   He says,
                                   sir, and I quote:
                                        "There is absolutely no doubt in my mind, both now
                                        and with the. benefit of further training, that
                                        then at the moment the youth I had tried to save
                                        was dead, certainly dead, and beyond any further
                                        help.   I and St. John's Ambulance personnel would
                                        not have stopped if there had been any glimmer of
                                        hope at all.    There was none."


                             H                                - 8 —
                                                                                               1030
J   L. H a r p h a m L t d
He refers to the personal description of Kevin again,
sir'', and refers to the fact he is r.bsolutely satisfied,
it was Kevin Williams that he was attempting to
resuscitate.

    f THE.CORONER:     I just want to make it crystal
clear: that tho.re is no suggestion in any of this of any
criticism of PC Bruder. •   ‘ I 'think, he did absolutely
va 11 an t1y£and did his best.^: ^NoBj,only did he do his
bestvoii; the/day, he is doing" hisVbest today a s ^ w e l l _
througfif;fnspector Sawers, to, tryVand help us understand;      •
whaV^he'^remembers arid I want-that clearly understood by
everybody.      I don’t want you to think we are knocking
him. We are not. All I am trying to do is finding out
what happened.

      Mr. Fraser, any questions of this officer on this
part?    I had Detter tell you who else I am going to be
calling.    Dr. Slater and Dr. Gurnpert, whom I will tell
you about when he comes.    He is a neuro physiologist,
a clinician, and an expert on this sort of thing.

     MR. FRASER:   No, sir, I have no specific
questions, save to say that I understand, Officer, you
have spoken to Mr. and Mrs. Williams, having spoken to
the officer?   I rise because I appear for Mr. and Mrs.
Williams and obviously have their interests at heart.

     THE WITNESS:   I did go and visit Mr. and Mrs.
Williams, sir, yesterday evening, having seen PC Bruder
and I have outlined briefly to them the contents of PC
Bruder's further thoughts and recollections for Kevin
on the day.

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, I understand they are
appreciative, both of the efforts the officer has made
and of his visit and they have no questions.   They
have decided not to come today, sir, for reasons*which
I am sure you will understand but they are fully aware
of exactly what is going on on their behalf.

     THE CORONER:      Thank you.    Have you got any
questions?

     MR. LIMB:      No, thank you.

     MR. CATCHPOLE;      No, thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:   When we have heard the rest of the
evidence I am quite prepared to recall any of these
officers, or, indeed, any of these witnesses because I
want us to understand it.

     Dr. Slater.
                                                                     *
                        - 9 -
                                                                 1031
              DR. DAVID SLATER Recalled

                    By THE CORONER:

Dr. Slater, you have, of course, already dealt with
this case a couple of days ago.       If I remember, rightly
you said, among other things, that;(a).:this ladJ twiLV :
broken voice box. ”: It was brokenHn^ four places^^^i^
Also (b) he was j of allithe cases^yoii'dealt with%^f&-_|
perhaps the most asphyxiated, i f one^can judge^tnat^by;
cy a nos is and so on. Wou Id tha t’;be'a corr ec
recollection? - A. That is absolutelyrVcorrect^sir^Of
all the cases I dea11!with Kevin showed really:ithe?.:^
worst injuries to the neck in that there we ref faurti;;
fractures to the voice box.     In addition there were
three very large scratches to-the neck.        In addition
to the normal signs of asphyxia, the blueness and the
hemorrhages which were very marked, there is no doubt
this was a very, very severe case of asphyxia and
probably the worst one I dealt with, sir.

We established to everybody's satisfaction what had
happened in the gymnasium and the account, we dealt
with that as to whether this lad could have spoken and
so on, so we don't need to be concerned about that.
What we are interested in this afternoon is the
evidence relating to Mr. Bruder.   I will also remind
you that in general that what has been said is that a
person becomes unconscious in an asphyxial situation
within anything from zero to twenty to thirty seconds.
There is a slight variation amongst pathologists, but
quickly.   Then that death usual supervenes within four
to six minutes or thereabouts.   The problem is, as you
have already heard, that whichever way you look at it,
Mr. Bruder was dealing with this young man quite a few
minutes after he had been taken out from the Leppings
Lane terraces.

In the light of the evidence can you help us as to what
you think was going on on? - A. Yes, sir.   I will deal
with this in three general areas and then Dr. Gumpert
certainly will come and enlarge on these and help us
out further.

Firstly, and I apologise if this is an emotive area, I
think I need just to spend thirty seconds in explaining
what death is.--.Death is a sequence of eve„nts.  It is
not one set event and the sequence I will put to you is
an individual becoming unconscious;  whilst they are
unconscious they quickly lose all sensation of pain and
discomfort;  then there is a period of various tissues
in the body which are susceptible to a lack of oxygen,
dying.   The most important one of these is, of course,
the brain, and after about three to six minutes the
brain undergoes irreversible brain damage.       There is
then a point which we call brain death.    This is a
difficult concept, but by this I am implying that the "
brain is irreversibly damaged.   The brain is no longer'
able to control respiration and in fact that person,
for effective purposes, is dead, irreversibly.         That
is a medico legal definition, at least one medico legal
definition,, of death.                      ... ■; - : V , ,

The problem now comes that I have not mentioned, other
tissues in the body.   For example,;theShear t^a^very:
emdtive organ.   When somebody is brain;dead it-fis ? .
quite possible that the heart is still alive and still
beating and this can go on for a few minutes o r ilonger,
perhaps even half an hour.

Then we come to the point where the brain is dead, not
controlling respiration, and finally the heart stops
and that is really the point of whole body death and
that is really what the lay person understands by
death. A doctor going up, putting the stethoscope on
the chest, no heart beat, no respiration, then that
person is unequivocally dead.

I hasten to add there that although the person is truly
medico legally dead, in fact even then there are
tissues in the body that are still alive.   The skin is
still living.   The kidneys are still living.    This is
how we can then transplant them.   In fact it is an
emotive area and although that person is dead, there
are still tissues living.   It then takes another six
to twelve hours for all the tissues in the body to die.

Really, when we use the word "death*1 we have to be
very, very careful we are not talking about one set
event at one point in time.   We are talking about a
whole continuum of events that go on.

I mentioned that some tissues do not die as rapidly as
the brain and this includes both nerves and muscle.
In fact one can have a situation of somebody being
brain dead but the muscles and the nerves in what we
call the peripheral nervous system - not the brain -
are still living and in fact these can occasionally
function in some way.

Sir, that is a -general comment on death.

In relation to the Hillsborough incident, the sequence
that myself has given, and although I have not heard
the other pathologists I understand they have given a
very similar sequence of events, has been a rapid loss
of consciousness, perhaps five to ten seconds.   I
understand I have been the nearest by quoting a paper
where unconsciousness can be instantaneous.    That is
the rapid loss of consciousness.

As soon as that person becomes unconscious I have said"
several times that pain modalities, discomfort, again
disappear very, very quickly, perhaps within a second
or. five seconds.         .

In very general terms, certainly myself - and I Have
tried to keep it general - I then said that death - and
I have used the word very broadly, as you willv<
appreciate in my previous evidence - that death occurs
five, ten perhaps fifteen minutes, after.  I purposely
kept that very open because human beings are very
variable.   You cannot say that somebody is going to
die in fifteen minutes, and not in fiftepn rinutes.

I am trying to put the concept that although I have
talked about averages, very occasionally you are going
to have additional extremes.   I think Kevin was one of
these extremes that did not fall into this five, ten or
fifteen minute sequence of somatic death, whole body
death, but in fact this was extended.

Having said that, Kevin had extremely severe asphyxia.
I have no doubt in my own mind that he had-suffered
irrecoverable brain damage and death within the three
to six minutes that I said.   Therefore, I am quite
confident at that time that Kevin was dead and there is
nothing that anybody on this earth could have done for
him after that time, including PC Bruder and any
ambulance people who arrived.

Again, you will appreciate from what I have said to you
that although Kevin was brain dead I have not said that
other tissues in the body inay not have been living -
the heart, muscles, nerves.    In fact I know Dr.
Gumpert will explain in a minute that in fact there are
mechanisms whereby when somebody is brain dead in fact
the muscles in the body can twitch.    This will come as
a surprise, and I apologise if it is emotive, this can
even happen to somebody who hasn't got a head.    That
person is clearly dead, they haven't got a head, but
those persons can actually have twitches in their
muscles.   This is what happened to Kevin.    He died
early - brain death - but unfortunately in this
particular instance we are talking about an extreme
case where perhaps the heart beating went on for a bit
longer and we noticed these twitches, at least PC.
Bruder noticed these twitches in the body.

I feel this is what happened in the case of Kevin.



                     - 12 -                                1034
From the description - in fact it is only fair to say
you also had a word with PC Bruder because you were
concerned, you wanted to be quite sure that you
understood his' evidence personally, so to speak? - A#~
Yes, sir.

In the light of what you heard and what we have heard .
now, doxyou feel that this lad died, if you like, in;> .
the\totality sense, I don't meant that his skin w a s <
d e a d ;lxit';in lay terms at the point in time when: Mr^    '
Bruder was;; with him? - A. Yes, sir j I am! quite^;^;^^^;'
confident of that.        When one 'speaks to lay peopiejwhoj
have experienced people dying, a word which is
recurrent in these descriptions of death is t h e w a y S ^ '
that individuals turn grey.        In fact I was very
impressed by the content in-PC Bruder's statement of '
the word "grey", recurring several times.         To me as a
doctor that implied that that was the point of whole
body death.        In fact I feel that it was probably
around that time that Kevin's whole body died.         His
brain had died twenty/twenty five minutes before that
at the time of the crushing, but his whole body died at
the time PC Bruder was with him.                          -*   i
                                                              /
He have mentioned these twitches and I think sometimes
they are referred to as spinal reflexes? - A. that is
correct, sir.

     THE CORONER:     Now, Mr. Fraser, is that reasonably
clear?

     MR. FRASER:   Even to me, sir, thank you, and I am
sure it will be clear to the family.

     THE CORONER:     Any questions?

              Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:

Doctor, it is an emotive subject.   I remember" in your
evidence about Kevin you described death in terms of a
process rather than as a moment? - A. Yes.

I would like to ask you a few questions about the
process following unconsciousness.   As I understand
it, in the cases of these victims, unconsciousness has
come ten to twenty seconds after compression of the
chest? - A. Yes#-.. ,

That is as a result of oxygen to blood mix leading to
unconsciousness? - A. Yes.   There are various...    We
are now not talking about the actual cause of death,
but mechanisms.   One very profound view that has been
put forward of crush asphyxia, traumatic asphyxia, it
is not simply only the reduction of oxygen going to the
   brain, but the fact that in fact there cannot be
   circulation through the brain.   The pressure from the
   chest is reflected up into the brain so in fact
   effectively the cerebral circulation stops, so it comes
   up against a dead end and it cannot circulate round.
   But, yes, your concept then is right.

3 . Following unconsciousness, that is to say, twenty
    seconds, say, after the start of the crush becoming
    fatal, is the body capable of facial expressions or
    does it have a neutral expression? - A. First of all
    the word "unconscious" itself is a very vague term, as
    you probably appreciate.    There are varying degrees of
    unconsciousness - superficial unconsciousness, perhaps
    a sort of sleeping...    You are unconscious, really,
    when you are sleeping, and then, of course,
    unconsciousness becomes deeper and deeper and deeper*
    The deeper bit is when one truly loses pain sensations
    and in fact in this particular instance having spoken
    both to Or. Gumpert and, indeed, a consultant
    anaesthetist, everybody I have spoken to is confident
    that pain modalities have disappeared very quickly,
    perhaps within one or two seconds, five seconds is the
    longest I have heard somebody express.

Q. As I understand your evidence, following that short
   period of five, ten, twenty seconds at the most, there
   is profound unconsciousness rather than, say, the
   unconsciousness of sleep.    Is the face then of the
   unconscious person, the profoundly unconscious person,
   capable of expression of any sort, or is there a
   neutral expression? - A. I think I prefer to leave that
   to Dr. Gurapert because you are into a clinical area
   there of what we call reflexes.    I am not trying to
   avoid the question.    I think he will be able to give
   you a very expert professional witness reply to that.
   Would that be reasonable to you?

       HR. LIMB:   Certainly.    Sir, may I pursue that
  matter with Mr. Gumpert?

        THE CORONER:   Certainly.   I want to be as
 . helpful as I can.   It is a difficult subject and in a
   sense we are slotting it into the inquest of this poor
   boy, but it is a more general topic and it will, of
   course, apply in a sense to everybody, but I don't see
   how we can avoid doing it.   Please do pursue it with
   Dr. Gumpert.

       Thank you, Dr. Slater.




                        - 14 -
                                                               1036
           DR.   ERNEST JOHN WALLACE GUMPERT S w o r n

                        By   TH E C O R O N E R :

Q. Dr. Gumpert, could you first of all give us your full
   names, qualifications and appointment? - A. Ernest John
   Wallace Gumpert.   I am a Bachelor of Medicine of the
   University at Cambridge, Bachelor of Surgery of the
   University of Cambridge.   A Member of the Royal
   College of Surgeons and a Fellow of the Royal College
   of Physicians of London.   I am consulting clinical
   neuro physiologist and consulting neurologist to the
   Sheffield Area Health Authority, Teaching.

Q. Dr. Gumpert, although you are a Sheffield man
   professionally, I dragged you back from Cambridge
   today? - A. Yes, sir.

0. Where I tracked you down!    I very much appreciate the
   fact you dropped all your other arrangements in order
   to be here.    Thank you very much.   Dr. Guinpert, you,
   of course, had nothing whatever to do with this case.
   I think you dealt with quite a lot of the injured
   following Hillsborough and indeed you may well know one
   or two people I will be referring to later, but this
   particular case was not one you came across.     You have
   heard the evidence which has been put regarding this
   young man.   What I would like you to do now is to give
   us a short explanation, as you see death, in the first
   instance and then we will try and relate it to this
   young man and particularly Mr. Bruder's evidence
   relating to him. - A. In about 1979 or 1980 when it
   became possible to carry out renal transplantations or
   kidney transplantations, it became very important that
   the supply of kidneys of people who had died acutely,
   usually in accidents, could be increased because the
   life of a patient who has had a kidney transplant is
   completely different to the life of a patient who has
   to have dialysis three times a week.    They can go back
   to normal life.

  A hypothesis of brain death was then discussed, agreed
  and published.   This consisted of certain examinations
  of the back part of the brain, the part we call     the
  brain stem.    If you imagine the brain as being    likea
  walnut, and it- isj it is like having a carrot stuck
  underneath the walnut, and it is the carrot that
  matters.    This is where blood pressure, pulse,
  respiration and a whole variety of other functions are
  controlled.    Once this part of the brain is dead, and
  this death occurs, as you heard from Dr. Slater, in
  between four and six minutes after deprivation of
  oxygen, then the person is going to die.     They   canbe

                          - 15 -
                                                               1037
kept alive by artificial means and some of you may
remember the case in America which was kept alive for
thirteen and a half years.

Some of us were concerned that the guidelines that were
drawn up were not strict enough and that there was no
call for them to be repeated after a passage of tine.
Perhaps unwisely we said this and this resulted in a
BBC "Panorama" programme one night at ten o ’clock when
the medical profession for once actually debated it,
eight of us.    As a result of that debate the
regulations were hardened.    They had to be carried out
by senior people who were used to doing it and they had
to be repeated.    A satisfactory outcome from my
personal point of view, although I don't know whether
the anguish was worth it really.

As a consequence of that I suppose in the next three
years I had to go through this rather unpleasant
procedure many times.   It was part of my professional
duty but still to this day I cannot certify someone
dead without being disturbed by it still.

From this I suppose I have gained a great deal of
experience of brain death and brain damage.   It seems
clear to me, sir, in this case that poor Kevin was
probably dead before he was got out of the area in
which he was standing.   I would agree with Dr. Slater.
I would think consciousness was lost probably within
ten seconds.   I would say loss of pain would be almost
instantaneous - not quite, but almost.

I cannot explain the Liverpool Police Constable's term
"convulsion because to me a convulsion is a major
epileptic attack and he has quite clearly said he does
not mean that, so I don't know what he does mean.   I
think it would be wrong for me to try and guess what he
means.   I think we could accept that he does not mean
any significant movement.
Unfortunately, after people are brain stem dead, they
can twitch and very unnerving it is too.   This is
really due to a spinal reflex. What we think happens
in anoxia - lack of oxygen - is that the brain stem
dies first.   The cortex, that is the thinking part of
the brain, your walnut, probably goes on quite a bit
longer and the-peripheral nervous system probably quite
a bit long still and I think that is the explanation of
what has been described by the Liverpool officer.

I know the Liverpool officer in his supplemental
statement when he was discussing the question of a
pulse says he may have been mistaken, but let us
hypothesise that in fact he wasn't and he had felt a
pulse when he approached this young man on the pitch,
would that fit in with your understanding...   Is that
a possibility? - A. It is a possibility, sir.   I would
like just to observe that feeling the carotid pulse is
quite difficult in somebody who has got a low blood
pressure, as would have been here.   In fact it can be
so difficult it is impossible and you have to put an
electrocardiogram on to know whether the heart has
stopped or not.

I would also like to say something about resuscitation.
I was very fortunate when I qualified that I became
house surgeon of a famous heart surgeon called Lord
Brock at Guy's Hospital.   That was in the days when we
did open cardiac massage.   In other words, if somebody
died you opened their chest and you massaged their
heart between your hands.   A terrifying experience.
It was while I was working for him that one day three
of us were doing it one morning, that he stopped it,
and that was the start of external cardiac massage.
Even to somebody like me who has been doing it for
twenty-five years, it is still very difficult.    The
last time I tried to do it I failed completely.    Even
to a trained person it is difficult.   Indeed, when
junior doctors are examined for this now, as they are,
a significant number fail rather than pass.    It is
quite difficult and for the lay person it must be
incredibly difficult.

You heard Dr. Slater's account of death, shall we say.
Would you go along with that? - A. I thought it was
eloquent.   I felt quite nervous!

You mentioned this point about unconsciousness and the
loss of pain and I think you distinguish slightly
there. Can you give me any idea that if aperson
becomes unconscious, can he feel pain, and for how long
can he feel pain, in your judgment? - A. Again, Dr.
Slater put it very clearly.    You all read in the
newspapers about patients - particularly when they have
had caesarean sections, the ladies as usual - being
able to tell what the doctors were talking about during
the operation.    Again I have experienced this at first
hand when I was doing heart surgery because then it was
often very important not to depress the state of
consciousness too far because things were pretty tricky
anyhow.   When- we used to resuscitate the patients we
used to give them an electric shock.    Lord Brock used
to always shout, "Give it two fast ones."    The patient
would then ask you the following morning two fast ones
were.   Then you would ask, "Did you hear anything
else?" and they didn't, so it is all very much a
question of degree.
   I think slipping from slight unconsciousness to deep
   unconsciousness in this circumstance, one, because of
   the compression and two because of the asphyxia and
   three because as Dr. Slater again explained everything
   is shoved up into the head and so there is nothing
   moving around, it would have been very quick, almost as
   quick as a rabbit punch I would have thought.

        THE CORONER:      Mr. Fraser?

        MR. FRASER:      No questions, sir.

               Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:

Q. Dr. Gumpert you have spoken in terms of passing in a
   very quick space of time from slight unconsciousness to
   deep unconsciousness.   Following deep unconsciousness,
   do the eyelids remain open or are they closed? - A.
   Either may occur. There is no particular rule.    The
   thing we all see on the cinema of the person going to
   close the dead person's eyes.   I don't think I have
   had to do that more than two or three times in my life.
   Most of the people I have seen die have died with their
   eyes shut.

0. Deep unconsciousness is associated with no longer
   feeling any pain or discomfort.   Is then the face of
   the person who is profoundly unconscious capable of
   grimaces or expressions which might be taken as showing-
   pain or discomfort? - A. Not in my view, sir.

0. Is it in fact capable of any facial expression? - A.
   Not in iny view.

0. Following profound unconsciousness, is it right that
   the face will become discoloured towards the next stage
   of the sequence of events, namely, brain damage and
   thereafter brain death?

        THE CORONER:      Could you repeat that question?

       MR. LIMB:   I am referring back to the process, or
  the sequences of events as outlined by Dr. Slater, sir.
  Firstly, unconsciousness, thereafter brain damage and
  thereafter again brain death.   The nature of my
  inquiry was as to whether following profound
  unconsciousness although there may be no outward
  expressions there is this change that the face becomes
  discoloured?

        THE CORONER:     The greyness you are driving at?

        HR. LIMB:      Sir, that is right.


                           - 18 -
                                                              1040
         fHE WITNESS:  Are you asking me to say when I
   think the greyness came on or just the way it changed?I
   cannot tell you when it came on.   I think probably it
   came on during the unconscious stage and I don't think
   the face would change when the moment of death came,
   total somatic death, I don’t think there would be any
   change.                                              *

        MR. LIMB:   Doctor, I am asking whether it happens
   following the entry into unconsciousness towards the
   next stage in the sequence, namely, brain damage? - A.
    u      think there is a change of facial expression at
   the time of brain damage necessarily.   This change of
   expression will be a gradually evolving process from
   the minute the crush started.

           MR. LIMB:      Thank you, sir.

       THE WITNESS:   Sir, you cannot tell by looking at
  a person that they are dead or unconscious, at least I
  can t.   You can by feeling them but you can't by
  looking at them.                                7

                       Further by THE CORONER:

). If a person has been, shall we say, somatically dead
   for long enough, would you accept or would you agree
   that sometimes the face goes paler? - A. Oh, it goes
   paler, and becomes rigid and takes on a stare.   Yes,
   that is quite different.

           THE COROWER:      Anything else you wanted to ask on
  tha t?

       MR. LIMB:          No, thank you, sir.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:          No questions, sir.

    i THE CORONER:   Is there anything else we want to
  ask Dr. Slater?  (No)

 _    Ladies and gentlemen, I will give you a chance.
 It is emotive but it is also very interesting.   Is
 there anything else while we have two experts here?
 You have understood it as far as one is able to
 understand it?

       THE FOREMAN: '       Yes.

      THE CORONER:   Dr. Gumpert and Dr. Slater, may I
 say to both of you, you have done remarkably well in
 explaining what is clearly a very (a) emotive and (b)
 difficult subject, succinctly and clearly to all of us
 and I very much appreciate your help.   Dr. S l a t e r has
                       had to come as well, but not quite so far, and I am
                       very grateful to you for taking the trouble and the
                       time to come and I am sure it will be of benefit not
                       just to Kevin's family', but to other people who of
                       course are involved in this tragedy as well.    Thank
                       you very much indeed.

                            MR. FRASER:    Sir, I will certainly make sure that
                       Kevin's family have the opportunity to see the
                       transcript of what the doctors have said and I am sure
                       they will feel some benefit from that when they feel
                       able to look at it.    Thank you,' sir.
                         *




                   D




                   E

     *
     /




                   F




                   G




               H                           - 20 -
                                                                               1042
J. L.Harpham Ltd
       6    JUN    ’ 94   9:08   FROM HQ OPS                                PAGE. 0 0 2




 6/06/94 09:04 HAA HA691
J?:HA1                                              HAA HA691
■?ec By: T      Serial: 969      Ident:HA691      2059    03/06/94
Phone:
Location:OPERATIONS ROOM ,SHEFFIELD
Type:    9    7   D   R   a    s     Ref:HA00/00/Q0     INFO                 Sub DivsHA
Source:

Detail:           INFO RE HILLSBRO   RE COOK REPORT LAST NIGHT*            CALLED TO SAY
                   THAT THERE IS A MRS WILLIAMS IN LIVERPOOL, WHO BELIEVES HER SON DIED
                  AT 4.00P.M.. HOWEVER            AND A FRIEND WERE NEXT TO THE LAD AND

POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                          AC




                                        INCIDENT LOG                        PAGE 1 OF     2
2104 HA691            THE SPEC CONSTABLE ON THE PITCH AT THE TIME.   HE IS ADAMANT
                      THAT THE LAD WAS DEAD PRIOR TO 3-40 P.M.

                      HE WISHES TO REMAIN OUT OF ANY PUBLICITY, BUT IS AGREEABLE TO
                      BE CONTACTED IF NECESSARY.
2104       HA691      MA:AS I AM UNAWARE OF WHO IF ANYONE IS DEALING WITH THESE
2105       HA691      MA: FURTHER ALLEGATIONS, OTHER THA WHAT I READ IN THE STAR
2105       HA691      MA:THIS INCIDENT TO BE DEFERRED UNTIL MONDAY 6/6
2106       HA691      MA:FOR FURTHER ENQS.
2106       HA691      DE:0900:6




                                                           C -
                                                                        STATION
NAME:           DEREK WILLIAM
                BRUDER

ADDRESS;


AGE / DATE OF BIR3H: 23

OCCUPATION:     POL PC7808


Who states:- This statement consisting of 012 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I maloe
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DA3ED: 270489                                             DW   BRUDER (SIGNED)



        I am a serving Police Officer with Merseyside Police, on Saturday 15th

        April 1989 (150489) I was off duty and went to support Liverpool in

        the match against Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Football Ground.

        I want to the game in my own car with my friend

                                 He had bought our tickets for seats in the

        North Stand for #14.00, fran Liverpool football club supporters club I
        think.

        We drove to the ground via Huddersfield where I dropped my sister off

        at Polytechnic and then carried on to Hillsborough.    Oh the way to the

        ground there was a short delay at the Manchester Interchange on the
        M62 with roadworks.

        Aftar we arrived at Sheffield I went with                \
                                                                 x> the Gateway

        store on the continuation of Halifax Road. This being were we par-Vorj

        the car at about 1.10pm (1310). At the Gateway store there were

        between 200-300 Liverpool fans. We stayed with them and were allowed

        into the store in small numbers to buy drinks.         and I bought

        four cans of lager between us and then went outside and sat on a

        grass verge together with the other 200-300 fans and we drank two cans
BRUDER                 DEREK WIULIAM                                        2


each.    The group of fans was vrell behaved and I didn't see any

drunkeness.    We were supervised by a Merseyside and South Yorkshire

Police Officer who were sat on two horses outside the Comet

Superstore.

Whilst I was sat on this verge everyone was happy and amenable and at

one point I saw a uniform Superintendent and Chief Inspector MIX. past

us.   Between 1.45pm and 2pm (1345) (1400) the two mounted police

officers came over and told vis it was getting on and time to make our

way to the ground. The whole crcwd moved on without any problems at

all. I remember it was the Merseyside Officer who actually spoke to

the crcwd.

We walked to the ground and when vre got into Leppings Lane itself it

was packed with people even half a mile frcm the ground itself.

Because of the crowd my friend asked a policeman for directions to

the ground, he was manning a junction either two or three roads up

fronn the ground off Leppings Lane.    He then directed us to go back the

way ws had cane and round to the Spion Kop end.    I didn't think that

was right but followed his directions and walked back the way we had

care and to the Spion Kop.    This was about 2.20pm (1420).

We then went to the Spion Kop but three quarters of the way round on

Penistone Road I realised vre ware going totally the wrong way and we

walked back.

The time was getting on now and the walk round was long because a lot

of the connecting roads between Leppings Lane and Penistone Road were

blocked by Police.   Because of the time I approached a police officer

on one of the barriers and he allowed us to take this short cut when I

explained what had happened and should him my police warrant card. We

arrived back at Leppings Lane at 2.30pm (1430). When          and I

arrived back at the turnstiles there were no queues whatsoever and a
BRDDER                  DEREK   W IU jIAM                                    3

large mass of people all trying to get through the turnstiles and into

the ground.     It had reached the point of every man for themselves in

ordar to get to the turnstiles..

I made for and entered the far left hand side turnstile of turnstiles

1-16.     There was no police officer by my turnstile.   Over to ny far

right I saw a number of police officers on horses.       I could not see

any police officers on foot but could not say whether this was

because there were none or they were blocked frcro my view by the

ere;*!.

Outside the ground my friend had both our tickets and to try and stay

together I had hold of his jeans.       However, the pushing of the

people was that much that ws were pushed apart and separated.

Ones we were apart I decided to make for the turnstile on my own.

          had got in before me and once I reached the turnstile he handed

my ticket out to me and I was allowed inside.      I handed my ticket into

the turnstile operator and retained the stub of the ticket.

I had difficulty in finding the entry point only by the misdirection

of the police officer, but once I got back into Leppings Lane, I found

the turnstile but had difficulties getting in because of the sheer

number of people. At the time of my entry I saw no gates open other

than the turnstiles.     I did not see any of the gates open.

As I was trying to get to the turnstiles I saw about five or six

teenagers climb over a concertina gate immediately to the left of the

turnstiles. After the first five or six went over I saw a number of

othars climb to the top of this gate tut then drop back into the crowd

outside as if there was someone in authority on the inside telling

then to get back.

Onca           md I had got into the ground I saw a police sergeant and

four constables immediately behind the concertina gate where I had
BRUDER                  DEREK   W ILLIAM                                       4


seen the teenagers climb over.      I approached the sergeant and said

sarsthing along the lines of "I am a Police Officer fran Merseyside,

theres a huge crowd outside and they're pushing to get in, can you do

southing about it or get something done?”.          At this time, I was with

         but I did not produce ny warrant card or formally identify

mysslf. He made no reply to me and by this time it was close to

kick off time so I left it at that.

Once inside the ground I saw no direction signs to ny seat in the

North stand and had difficulty in finding it because the sections of

seating were given letters of the alphabet, however, the letters did

not follow alphabetical order ie ABFDQCM, though I can't remember the

exact order.

I entered the North Stand through a tunnel, there was no crowd within

this tunnel and no problems at all.        I saw no Police within the

tunnel and only a few stewards right at the beginning.

Once inside the ground I saw no alcohol being drunk at all.

I took my seat along with           just as the two teams cams out onto

the pitch.    This was about 2.57 pm (1457). Once through the

tunnel and up the stairs, I went to the section of my seats where two

stewards directed us to our particular seats.        These were right by the

entrance to this section of seating.        People continued to enter after

me and after about ten minutes between ten and twenty people arrived

at this entrance and didn't appear to have tickets for this stand.        I

actually saw two people holding tickets which were for the West

Stand.    This was after the incident in pens 3 and 4 and people had

started to come out onto the pitch.        Everyone started to discuss what

was going on and these two men said that they should be in those pens

and shewed the tickets which were complete without the ccunterfoil

being removed.
BRUDER                  DEREK    W ill JAM                                      5

 I experienced no personal crcwd crush within the ground only that

outside which was about 2.45 pm (1445).        I did not see any crowd

surge within the ground and was not injured.

At about the time these men had appeared at the entrance to ny section

of seating which was three quarters of the way along the North Stand

nearest to the Spion Kop about ten rows from the front, I saw people

climbing over the fences from pens three and four of the Leppings Lane

stand frcm kick off but initially they were directed behind hoardings

and sat near to the pitch.       I could not see whether they were directed

by stewards or Police.

Aftar about five minutes a Police officer ran on to the pitch and

stopped the game.   People then began to climb over the front fencing

onto the pitch at will and I could also see people pulled up into the

seating area above. At no point did I see any gates opened to allow

escape frcm the pens.

Onea play had been stopped the Nottingham Forest fans in the Spion Kop

began to taunt the Liverpool Supporters.

A fan then ran onto the pitch and then ran up to the Spion Kop and

began shouting and making 'V' signs with two fingers at the Forest

supporters.   Myself and other fans in the North stand began to shout

telling him to go away because we could see there was something wrong

in the Leppings Lane end.       *11118 nan who was in his early twenties with

long hair and a black capped sleeve T shirt was then turned back by

either stewards or Police and ran back towards Leppings Lane but was

detained by Police before he got back.

Another older man then ran up to the Spion Kop and then began to wave

his hands at the Forest fans.       He wasn't taunting, he was signalling

for them to calm down and trying to tell them there was something

wrong. Shortly after this the Police footed a cordon across the
BRUDER                 DEREK   W IIilA M                                   6


halfway line.   I'm not sure if this was after the first or second man.

Pecole in the Lappings Lane end then ripped down advertising hoardings

and began to carry people on them up towards the comer formed by the

Spion Kop and the North Stand.      I could see that seme of them were

presumed dead as they had coats over their faces and one man in

particular had a jumper pulled back to cover his face.     Ihese people

were then rolled onto the pitch and the carriers wait back for more

people or bodies.

The police then formed a further cordon in front of the North stand.

Around the same time a number of people wearing tracksuit trousers and

sweatshirts came frcm the direction of the players tunnel and went to

the Spion Kop end. Ihey then pulled down more hoardings here and went

to help carry more people up fran Leppings Lane.

A number of people were also carried up to the comer in front of me

bodily. There were a large number of people in this comer either

laid out behind the police on the pitch or sitting with their heads in

their hands.

I did not see any of the Police in the cordon in front of the North

Stand break ranks to assist these people.

I saw one person on the pitch about a quarter of the pitch length away

from the Spion Kop about twenty feet frcm the hoardings in front of

the North stand.    I distinctly remember this because later on as I

will describe an ambulance drove directly past us and a St John's

Ambulance man who was with me tried to flag it down but it n a r r o n .

I ana not sure if this man had been carried on a hoarding or by his

friend who was with him.    I saw this nan lying on the floor having

convulsions.

The Police cordon in front of the North Stand appeared unconcerned and

'smarmy', this agitated the supporters in the stand who were shouting
BRUOER                  DEREX. W ILLIAM                                       7

for than tx> go and help the people on the pitch. None of the Police

officers left the cordon.

I was very close to the pitch so I went dcwn the aisle, over a snail

five foot wall with hoardings on, I walked through the cordon without

being challenged at all and then went to the man having convulsions.

Almost immediately I was joined by a St John's Ambulance man.        I

identified myself to the St Johns man as an off duty Police Officer.

He then said to me " You do mouth to mouth and I'll do heart massage".

I then took his pulse in his neck.        I could feel a slight pulse.   I

then ccmrenced mouth to mouth resuscitation and the St John's nan

started heart massage.      I undid two buttons cm the top of the man's

shirt.     If I remember rightly the bottom of the shirt appeared

ripped.

We continued to work on the man but after about five minutes he went

grey and his face was withdrawn. As I had approached the man his head

had moved as if he was being sick. When I got to him I cleared his

mouth and the back of his throat of vonit before ccnraencing mouth to

mouth resuscitation.    There was no blood in the vonit. After about

five minutes when the man went grey, a very distinctive smell came

from his mouth.    I can still remember it new but could not describe

it.

After about seven minutes I swapped places with the St John's

Ambulance man and he ccnmenced mouth to mouth and I heart massage. As
                        /
I did heart massage his ribs vrere unnaturally prominent in the whole

of his rib cage even though he was only thinly built. His stanach

was depressed and abnormally lcurer than his ribcage.

After a short time I undid the button on his trousers and ripped open

the zip.    I then continued heart massage.

Shortly afterwards an ambulance entered the ground.       It appeared to be
                                 *


                                                                                  42
BRUDER                 DEREK W ILLIAM                                        8




a Health Authority ambulance as opposed to St Johns.       It began to

drive dawn towards Leppings Lane.       I then told the St John's man to

try and stop it. He tried to flag it down but it continued on as if

it had been ordered not to stop in the top comer but to go to the

Leppings Lane end.

The St John's man then rejoined me and continued to give mouth to

mouth resuscitation.

Shortly after this we were joined by one of the men I described

earlier in the tracksuit trousers and I think green sweatshirt.      He

askad me if I was all right and knew what I was doing.

I said "I'm an off duty bobby, I'm all right", with that he left as if

to go somewhere where he could be of more use with other injured

persons.

Shortly after this man, which must have been about six minutes since I

had changed places with the St Johns man, a female St Johns Ambulance

officer came over and pushed me out of the way and took over from me.

I then stood up and watched as she was obviously better trained in

First Aid than me.

I then stood by the injured man together with his friend who had been

there all along, telling us to keep going and not to let his mate die.

Within two minutes of this, the St Johns Ambulance man told the St

Johns Ambulance wcman, "He's gone", and stood up.       I looked at the

mar's friend who was standing by his head, he was completely grey.

By this time, I felt ill myself and just turned away as there was

nothing else I could do.

I would describe the man who died as:- between       17 and20 years ofage,

approx 5'8 - 5'9 tall, short sandy or reddish coloured hair, slim

build, no facial hair, white eurcpean, I could       see nocuts or

abrasions on him.    I seem to remember freckleson his cheeks, but I'm
BRUDER                DEREK   W ILLIAM                                        9

not sure if it could have been vomit, I'm almost positive it was

freckles. As I said previously he had an unusually prominent rib cage

and depressed stomach.

He *as wearing a light, possibly white button up shirt, light grey or

beige cotton trousers, light coloured boxer shorts.         I noticed no

jewellery or footvrear.

His friend I would describe as 21 or 22 years of age, dark brcwn hair,

shortish hair, about 5'9 tall.    I cannot remember nuch of his clothing

but he appeared quite plump with a slight beer belly. He had no

facial hair nor glasses.

Hie St John's man was in uniform, the only thing I can remember was

that he had dark hair and was thirty plus years of age.

The St John's wanan was in uniform again very slimly built and no

oldar than 18 years of age.

After the St John's man had said the nan was dead I'd seen enough,

I felt ill and had to get out of the ground.       I knew        would have

stayed where he was because he knows no First Aid.      I went over to the

wall where I had climbed in. As I got there I saw a photographer

kneeling dcwn with an orange tabard he was taking photographs of the

injured and dying.

A fan who was already on the pitch vent over to him and said "Fuck

off, you're taking pictures of my injured nates".

The photographer carried cm taking pictures so the fan started pushing

him.   Hie photographer stood up and the fan then pushed him back to

the wall and tried to take the camera frcm him.      The camera then swung

and stashed into the wall.    I then dinted over the wall using the

photographers case as a step.    I then rejoined

He said to me "Gcme on we're going", and we both then left.        I cannot

say what tine this was.




                                                                                  44
 BRUDER                  DEREK   W ILLIAM


 Whilst at Hillsborough the only criminal offences were of a "Mrra*

 public order nature ie, the fans climbing over the gates etc. After

 the disaster within the stand, I saw a number of instances such as

 the photografter's camera and sausage rolls thrown at the cordon in

 frcnt of the North Stand and one old man who threw a cup of tea at an
 officer in the cordon.

 This was caused purely by agitation amongst the crowd by the apparent

 callousness of the photographer and apparent inactivity of the police
with regard to the injured and dying.

 I witnessed no serious offences.

There ware a number of factors which I believe contributed to the
number of deaths and injuries.

Oitside the ground there appeared to be a lack of co-ordination

between the mounted and foot police officers.      The approach roads to

the ground were well manned with Police officers at junctions and

outside pubs and off licences.      However, I made a comment about being

misdirected by the police officer to another officer and he said it

was understandable because a lot of the officers were drafted in frcm

outside stations and had poor local knowledge of the area.      This may

hava contributed to the build up outside the ground which caused the
initial crush outside.

Inside the ground once the disaster had occurred there appeared a lack

of co-ordination between senior police officers and lower ranks an the

pitch.    The actual scale of the incident wasn't appreciated

imnrediately which resulted in a delay in the response and personnel
being despatched to deal with it.

From my own personal experience I and most Police officers have only

basic First Aid knowledge. When I administered first aid to the man I

felt totally inadequate on reflection.      However with that particular
        BRUDER               DEREK    W ILLIAM                                  11


        man, I don't think more knowledge would have helped but it might have
        in others.

        I would also like to add that though the Police in the cordon did not

        assist the injured and dying I saw a number of other officers who did.

        In particular two small policewomen who tried to help a very large man

        but couldn't carry him until helped by fans.




                                                          D W BRUDER SIGNED
          TAKEN
          PLACE:

         TIME:            DATE:      270489
WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE
                                                                           STATION
NAME:           DEREK WILLIAM
                BRUDER

ADDRESS:
                          LIVERPOOL.

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 23

OCCUPATION:     POL PC7808


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 170889                                                 D BRDDER (SIGNED)



        Further to my previous statement dated 27 April 1989 (270489).

        On 17th August 1989 (170889), I was shewn photographs taken at the

        Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield on 15th April 1989 (150489) by WPC

                 ind PC         I can identify myself on Photographs

           (Ref. No. TT1/28) (Ex. No.        )

           (Ref. No. TT1/29) (Ex. No.        )

           (Ref. No. TT1/30) (Ex. No.       )
                                                                       \

           (Ref. No. TT1/31) (Ex. No.       )

        (Ref. No. TT1/32) (Ex. No.          )

        (Ref. No. DM1.4)     (Ex. NO.       )

        On the above mentioned photographs I am administering first aid to an

        unknown male, I cannot remember his face but I remember the striped

        boxer shorts he was wearing.

        I have also been shewn a photograph of Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS, No. 51,

        but I am unable to say if this is the person I am treating, as I can

        only remember the clothing.



        D ERUDER




                                                                                     47
        BRUDER            DEREK   W ILLIAM




                                             D BRUDER SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:'

          TIME:         DATE:     170889
WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATORE:
                                                                           STATION

NAME:           DEREK WILLIAM
                BRUDER

ADDRESS:
                                          LIVERPOOL

AGE / DATE OF BIR3H: 23            _______

OCCUPATION:     POLICE OFFICER MERSEYSIDE POL


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by ms, is true to the best of my kncwledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated In it anything which I knew
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 030590                                                    D BRIBER (SIGNS))



           Further to my previous statements of 27 April 1989 (270489) and 17

           August 1989 (170889), I have been asked to think about a number of the

           points which are raised in the statement I made nearly a fortnight

           after the Hillsborough Stadium disaster cm 15 April 1989 (150489).

           Before clarifying a number of these points I vrould point out that I

           have today been shown a number of photographs, plans and docunents by

           Inspector SAWERS of West Midlands Police which I have viewed to refresh

           my tnanory.    It's also fair to say that my first statement (27.4.89)

           (270489) was the first occasion that involvement with the disaster was

           set down in any detail, in writing, although I did make sane brief

           notes myself on Sunday 16 April 1989 (160489).     I retain these in my

           possession and would say that they do no relate to my dealings with any

           deceased casualty that day.

           I am a single nan and joined Merseyside Police cm 27 October 1987

           (271087).     During initial training at Bruce District Training Centre,

           Warrington, I received basic first aid instruction in both

           theoretical and practical application.     I obtained a pass and was

           issued with an identifying card qualifying me for, I think 2 or 3
BRUDER                DEREK WILLIAM                                          2


years.   On 15 April 1989 (150489) I had received no further instruction

or refresher training in basic first aid.     However, as a direct result

of the situation I found myself in cm the day of the disaster I

personally felt inadequately equipped in either theory or

practise of first aid. I am absolutely satisfied that the first aid

I rendered in tenns of mouth to mouth resuscitation and heart maaaay

vers correct and that I could have done no more, but nevertheless, I

felt I didn't knew encugh and regretted not having taken that aspect

of initial training seriously enough.

For these reasons, I applied on ny own iniative for further first aid

training in the form of a one week full time course leading to

qualification as a first aid public order trained officer.      I undertook

the course in June last year, which means I new have a special role

within public order deployments to treat casualties either of marters

of the public or police officers as injuries occur.

As a result of that course, I feel confident and much better equipped

to deal with injured people whether those injuries be minor or life

threatening.   It also c o n firm s that in fact, ny actions were right on

the day and ny attempts at resuscitation, although unsuccessful were
properly administered.

I will new deal with a number of specific points from ny original

statement (27.4.89) (270489), using the page nutters of that statement.

I understand that the numbers I will use in brackets are those of the

file of statements contained in respect of Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS,

prepared by West Midlands Police under the deceased reference number
51.

Oi page 6 (File page 41) I first refer to the youth I now know to be

Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS lying a 1/4 length of the pitch frrm the Spion

Kop.   I refer to him been "on the floor", meaning the pitch surface,
BRUDER                  DEREK WILLIAM                                      3


and "having convulsions".    I have thought about this carefully today

and with the added benefit of ny training I can say that this vies not a

process that lasted for any time.    It certainly wasn't anything similar

to an epileptic fit, for exaqple.    It was an impression that I had

which I originally associated with the lad vanitting.    I will say that

I did not see the casualty vomit nor did I see any sick on the body or

grassed area around him.    I will correct further references to vomit as

they occur in ny original statement.

On page 7 (42) I describe approaching the body.    He was not convulsing

as I did so (line 5).

I refer to feeling for a carotid pulse in the neck and said originally

that I thought I could detect a slight pulse however I now feel that I

am able to correct this.    I felt for the pulse with ny first two

fingers of ny left hand, I believe, to the carotid artery I cannot say

absolutely that I felt for the pulse before I started mouth to mouth or

after, nor indeed whether I did both simultaneously. Whilst I would

now have much more skill, on the day I cannot say with absolute

certainty that I went, accurately, straight to the carotid artery.

For all these reasons, I can say that I felt for a pulse in the region

of the carotid artery, but I may have also touched the area of the

"Adams Apple" or felt something in the neck region which I originally

thought was a pulse but may have been mistaken.

I refer to the face going "grey” and his "face was withdrawn." I

cannot say specifically that this was a change frcm normal paller to

grey, or what I now know to be cynosis or blueness.   I mentioned it in

the sequence of when I became aware of it.

I refer to approaching the lad and having the irtpression that his head

moved and associating this with his being sick.   I am now absolutely

satisfied that he was not sick, or certainly I did not see vanitting or
BRUDER                DEREK WILLIAM                                         4


vomit.   The movement of the head, if thats what it was, I would say its

best described as a 'twitch'.

I refer to clearing his mouth before resuscitation, by that I mean to

say I checked that his airway was clear before expressing air into his

mouth.   Ttiere was a fluid of sane description but I accept readily that

this could have been spittle or phlegn.

I refer to the man going grey after about 5 minutes and a very

distinctive smell caning fran his mouth.     This was again not vcmit but

its true to say I can still remember it now as it caused me to heave

and feel sick nyself.

I refer to performing mouth to mouth whilst the St John ambulanceman

did heart compression for about 7 minutes.    Whilst this is purely

recollection I believe it to reasonably accurate.

Having changed places with the St Johns Ambulance man I refer to

feeling what I thought was an unusual rib cage and abdcmen.     A

photograph I have been shewn at post mortem appears to suggest this.

I refer to unzipping the lads trousers at this point and in ny second

statement recollect the striped boxer shorts which I have seen in

photographs (Ref Kb TT1/31 and TTl/32).

I have been shewn documents which purport to give timings of the

arrival on the pitch of the 1st ambulance (St Johns Ambulance) and the

2nd ambulance (being the 1st SYMAS ambulance). I have considered this

information (referred to as MAP 1 15.15-33 and RJH2 15.17-08) in

comparison with the photographs PR5/A/32 and PR5/A/33 which purport to

show the casualty being carried on a stretcher at 15.32 (1532) and

which I understand would be before I saw and assisted to resuscitate

hilt; at the Spion Rep end of the ground. I cannot reconcile the time

sequences and I am still sure that I did see an ambulance, distinguish

in rry own mind that it was not of St Johns but Health Authority and
BRUDER               DEREK WTTJ.TAM                                          t


that I told the St Johns nan with me to stop the ambulance.     I have

considered that what I referred to may have been this ambulance

exiting from the stadiun but I don't think it was. My recollection is

still that it was entering the stadiun. I refer to being joined by a

varan St Johns ambulance officer who pushed me out of the way.     I

recollected this to have been about 6 minutes after I had changed

places with the male St Johns officer.   That makes a total, frcm

recollection of 13 minutes joint resuscitation with the St Johns male.

I would standby these estimates only in as much as I feel we attenpted

resuscitation for between 10 and 15 minutes.

Within a further tvro minutes of both St Johns people working together,

the man declared "He's gone" and stood up.     I referred to and re-affirm

that he was "ccnpletely grey" and there is absolutely no doubt in my

mind, both new with the benefit of further training, and then at that

norent that the youth I had tried to save was dead, certainly          and

beyond any further help.   I and the St Johns personnel would not have

stopped if there had been any glimner of hope at all - there was none.

I describe the body of the youth on P8 & 9 (43 & 44) and believe the

distinguishing features I referred to 12 months ago are plain to see cm
photographs.

I have seen injuries shown on photographs of the neck area, however I
did not see them or notice them on the day.
D Eruder

M Sawsrs Inspector
        BRUDER              DEREK WILLIAM


                                                    D BRUDER SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACES

          TIM E :         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     M R SAWERS INSPECTOR 3451
     West Midlands Police
  Evidence Continuity Chart
               For
      DR STEFAN POPPER
             Coroner
South Yorkshire (West D istrict)
        HILLSBOROUGH
      DISASTER INQUIRY
    Saturday 15 A pril 1989
               By
           J M JONES
  A ssistan t Chief Constable
     West Midlands Police


 Deceased Reference No 51
 Name     WILLIAMS Kevin Daniel
       LflbflLlauflMl


Time




           Information




                        Tim *




         Loss of continuity
15 APRIL 1989


                                     0650




   / -                           \
                                              I    v is going to the F.A. ©up
      My stepson Kevin Daniel               semi final at Shefm W . On the
     WILLIAMS le ft Mersey ski*              morning of th# matoh Kevin
   to travel by train to Sheffield          WILLIAMS, Thomas NICKSON,
   to see the F.A. oup semi final.           Gregory FAGEN and m yself
                                               walked from my house to
                                                Formby railw ay station.

               M r .J.S .WILLI AMS                       Andrew DUNCAN

   ^ S 291    1 5 .4 .8 9 1      j           S1441      1 5 .4 .8 9   0650
720                                        1040                                      1130




           V * got a train from Formby                                                       Onoe we got to th* ground        Kevin and I deoided to go into
                                                  Th* train arrived at Sheffield.                                             th* ground. At th * turnstiles
          to Liverpool oentral, walked                                                        Tommy NICKSON beoame
                                                  Ve w ere put on a ooach by the                                                w * w * r * #*arohed by th*
          to Lime S treet station where                                                      separated from Kevin and
                                                   polio*. Th* ooach took us to                                                polio*. A ft*r going through |
            we caught another train to                                                      m yself. Ve w *nt to th * shops
                                                  Lappings Lan*. Gregory FAGEN                                                 th* tunn*l w e v e ^ t into the ;
          Manchester vhen we changed                                                          and had a walk round th*
                                                    did not oome on our ooaoh.                                                 p*n on th* 1*ft (F**n 4 ), we I
               trains for Sheffield.                                                                   ground.
                                                                                                                              did not lik * it in this pen, we f
                                                                                                                                th*n mov*d into th * right j
                     Andrew DUNCAN                               Andrew DUNCAN                          Andr*w DUNCAN               hand pen (Pen 3 ).         1

           S1441     15.4.891 07 2 0                  S I 441   15.4.891 1040app             S1441     15.4.89 |l 130app                   Andrew DUNCAN

                                                                                                                               S I 441   15 .4 .8 9   1330
                      Thomas NICKSON |                          Thomas NICKSON ]                        Thomas NICKSON

      I    S3160     1 5 .4 .8 9 |     J          1   S 3160    1 5 .4 .8 9 1    J           S3160
B»tw**n 2 p.m. and 2.15 p.m.
th* p*n started to fill up, but
      th»r» w a * no crush.
 V * w * r * standing about 2 to
     2 1 / 4 yards from th *
        p *rim *t*r f*no*.


            Andrew DUNCAN

 S1441      13.4.891 1400+
                                               Kick off




1445                                      1459:30



                                                                                          i
                                                                                          i
                                                                                          i


                                                           When the game kioked o ff 1
           1saw a group o f friends                        was pushed forw ard down
          standing behind m e, I was                       the terraoe about 2 yards.
       standing v ith Kevin WILLIAMS.                      A fter this push 1lost Kevin
        The atmosphere was happy,                           and did not see him again.
             n*AnU w # r* f iM iM                          1looked around fo r him but
                                                          oould not see him anywhere.

                   Andrew DUNCAN                                      Andrew DUNCAN

         SI 441   15 .4 .8 9 |l 445app^                   ^ S1441    15.4.891
 Photograph shoving Kevin
WILLIAMS in distress at the
      front o f Pen 3.            Video s till showing Kevin
                                  WILLIAMS at the front of
 Possible identification by                  Pen 3.
    Inspector LAYTON.
                              ■   Possible identification by
                                     Inspector LAYTON.
            PHOTOGRAPH

DAC.1.4   15.4.89                             VIDEO STILL

                                  MAP 7    15.4.8911527:58
                              1528:43




 Video s till showing Kevin
VILLI AMS being passed out
         o f Gate 3.

Possible Identification by
   Inspector LAYTON.


            VDEO STILL

M A P?   15.4.89   1 528:33
                                                                                          4




1528:43                                         1532




          H v m assisting people on the"
           pitch and I assisted a youth                  Photograph showing Kevin
           who I now know to be Kevin                     WILLIAMS being carried
            Daniel WILLIAMS from the                     across the pitch by police
            gateway o f pen 3 and tried                   officers and supporters.
            to resusoitate him on the
           pltoh.l was unsuooessfUl and                  Possible Identification by
                   le ft him there.                         Inspector LAYTON.

                      P.C 1790 CRAIGHILL                             PHOTOGRAPH

          mS 18166 1 13.4.891                          PR3.A.32 15.4.89       1532
          >             1          1        <
                Video s till showing Kevin               I assisted to oarry at least
                WILLIAMS being placed on                two people aoross the pitch.
              the pitch by a police o fficer.          One o f these I can be seen with
                                                         on photograph and I am told
               Possible Identification by                 that this person is Kevin
                  Inspector LAYTON.                         Daniel WILIAMS.B 5 1 .

                                                                    P.C 437 HAYES
                            VDEO STILL
                                                        S 3742A    13.4
               MAP 7     13.4.89 1528:43
I am a polio# o fficer w ith t h e V ™ ^ * s t -       m in 1
M*rs#ys1d* Polio*. I went to         mouth to mouth, th * S t. Johns
  the F.A. oup semi final as a       man did heart massage. A fter
spectator. I » v a person on           abut 7 minutes we changed
the pitch, about a 1 / 4 of the       over. Eventually a female St.
pitch length away from Spion          Johns officer took over from
 Kop, about 20 feet from the          me. Within 2 minutes he said
 North stand, he v t s having        to her "He‘s gone". I then left
         oonvulsions.                             Mr.D.W.BRUDER

             Mr.D.W.BRUDER

 S 1222     15
                                    Photographs:- TT1 /2 8 ,2 9 ,
                                   3 0 ,3 1 ,3 2 and D M I/4 showing
                                   MrJJ.W.BRUDER attempting to
                                     resuscitate t young male.
                                     Mr.D.W.BRUDER identified
                                           him self (S I 222A )
                                    The young male identified by
                                     S.C. 221 MARTIN as being
                                      Kevin WILLIAMS (S621B)

                                                 PHOTOGRAPHS

                                               15.4.89
                               1600   1606




                                                I was in the gymnasium.
 I was assisting in oarrying
bodies from the pitch to the                                                      I stayed w ith the body, he
                                                I was asked to oonfirm
    gymnasium One of the                                                         was allocated body referenoe
                                                deaths o f persons in the
bodies I carried was that of                                                              number 51A,.
                                              gymnasium. I oertified death
a young boy who was later
                                                   on several bodies.
 allooated body number 51.

                                                         Doctor CURPEN                      S .C .221 MARTIN
          S.C .221 MARTIN

          15.4.89                               S 56     15.4.89                  S 621    1 5 .4 .8 9
 S 621

                                                         S .C .221 MARTIN |

                                             I s 621     15.4.89   1606      1
                                                                                                                          I


                                                                                                                      I
16 APRIL 1989




                                                                                                                      i

                                                       In the presenoe o f Deteotive   V ith my w ife I came to the
                                                       Inspector TIMMS 1identified     Medioo Legal Centre, there I
           I accompanied body reference
                                                        body reference number 51        identified the body of my
              number 51 to the Medioo
                                                         to the pathologist Doctor     stepson Kevin VILLI AMS to
                   Legal Centre.
                                                                  SLATER                    P.C. 1269 CLAVE.



                        S.C.221 MARTIN                            D.C.638 WEIGOLD                 M r.J.S.VILLIAMS

            S 621                                     S I 2 8 0 AW 16.4.89


            AMBULANCE LOO
                                                                                       M r .James Stephen WILLIAMS
   D 834                                                                                 identified body reference
            16.4.89
                                                                                         number 51 to me as being
                                                                                         that of his stepson Kevin
                      ietween 15.4.89 and 1 6.4.89                                               WILLIAMS.
                       I was doting » a reoeiviny
                       officer at th * Medico Legal
                        Centre. During th i* period
                                                                                                  P C. 1269 GLAVE
                       body reference number 51
                         was identified to me by                                        S 801     16.4.89
                            S.C. 221 MARTIN.

                                 D.C. 6 38 VEIGOLD

                      S 1280A V 16.4.89
                    V ___
                            \
I o«rri*d out * po*t mortwn
•xam lM tion on th# body of
   K#v1n D«ni*l VILLIAMS
body r« f*r*n o * number 51.



           Doctor SLATER

S2763K    16.4.891   F^M.
                                                                                                       WG 602
                                                                                                        (2.69)



 STAPLE                                                      West Midlands Police
 ATTACHMENTS
 HERE                                                   FA X          M E S S A G E

 FOR THE ATTENTION OF:           C M          S O     P 'T

                                            ‘S O O T H          ^ o e tc s




                               F .x N o :   0 "7 -4 a         5 a . 3 l ^ ‘3 S            t r


 FROM:                         West Midlands Police                              Date: ^        • (o

                               Depertment:          CTC-X^-A ( p~\    (7 !> lS C L

                               Telephone No: O c ? -\ ^        2Co               Extension:

                               Fax No:       O cM        G 2 . 0          5 ^ 0 0 ^ '



Total number o f pages including this page



Remarks/Action required:




                                                                                     ■C


Authorised by:
                                                     rtment
  Mr D G IBBS i ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE
  (INSPECTORATE)

  CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT D G T GREENE t
  COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE DEPARTMENT



  KENNETH DANIEL WILLIAMS                                         04.02,93




  Further to the recent correspondence, I draw your attention to page 5 of the
  transcript of proceedings of the inquest on the k May 1990, paragraph <A’.
  It la clear that Inspector SAWYERS was directed to see PC BRUDER as a
  result of an enquiry from the Coroner. I also draw your attention to the
  other transcript in respect of proceedings on the 2 May 1990 at page 8,
  paragraph       Dr SLATER, when recalled, makes it clear that the concept
  that the evidence of 'opening eyes and speaking1 is not really conceivable.

  It is evident from all these circumstances that the distressed condition of
  the Woman Special Constable was sufficient to produce an Inaccurate account
  of the facts as they were not possible in view of the medical opinion and
  clearly conflict with the evidence by PC BRUDER.

  At 11.45 anj today I had a telephone conversation with Derek William
  BRUDER, Police Constable 7808 of the Merseyside Police, who confirms that
  his second statement (unpaglnated - but taken on the 3 May 1990 by
  Inspectors SAWYERS) was made entirely voluntarily and without any
  pressure, duress or other persuasion by Inspector SAWYERS.

  It was interesting during the conversation with PC BRUDER that he also
  indicated that a solicitor, on behalf of the relatives, had interviewed him
  and suggested the possibility that his second statement could have been
  furnished as a result of cajolery or other improper action by the West
  Midlands Police. Additionally, PC BRUDER was challenged by the solicitor
  as to whether his contact with the Coroner was construed by hia as undue
  pressure. PC BRUDER maintains that he has made it clear to the solicitor
  that this was HOT the case.

 In all the circumstances it would seem clear that the conflict in the
 evidence was factual on the accounts given by the various witnesses, namely
 PC BRUDER and Woman Special Constable MARTIN, but all of the evidence
 supports the account given by PC BRUDER.

 CONCLUSION t

 There was no improper conduct by Inspector SAWYERS in re-taking the
 statement from Police Constable BRUDER| he was merely clarifying a request
 r>f t-hft r.r»v>nfln. the transcript at page 5 of the 4 May 1992,



\ u urjBrewe
  Chief superintendent
        super*;
                            IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE



    Applicant’s Reference        Notice of Application for         Crown Office Reference
    Number                       Leave to Apply for                Number     .      .^
          j h   I H3n            Judicial Review                           co(
                This form must be read together with Notes for Guidance
                           Obtainable from the Crown Office
                             To the Master of the Crown Office
                                   Royal Courts of Justice
                                          Strand
                                    London WC2A 2LL
    Name, Address and Description      (1)            Sandra Stringer & Donna Carlile, the
    of Applicants                                     mother and sister of Paul Carlile,
                                                      deceased.

                                       (2)            John & Theresa Glover, the father
                                                      and mother of Ian Glover, deceased.

                                       (3)            Joan Sinclair, the sister of Michael
                                                      Kelly, deceased.

                                       (4)            Leslie & Doreen Jones, the father and
                                                      mother of Richard Jones, deceased.

                                       (5)            Peter & Joan Tootle, the father and
                                                      mother of Peter Tootle, deceased.

                                        (6)           James Stephen & Anne Williams, the
                                                      father and mother of Kevin Williams,
                                                      deceased.
     Judgment, Order, Decision or       (1)           Various decisions of Her Majesty’s
     Other Proceedings in Respect                     Coroner for Sowit Yorkshire in the
     of Which Relief is Sought.                       course of the inquest held between
                                                      the 18th day of April 1989 and the
                                                      28th day of March 1991 into the
                                                      deaths of the deceased hereinbefore
                                                      mentioned and others at the
                                                      Hillsborough Stadium on 15th April
                                                      1989.

                                        (2)           Conclusion or verdict recorded by the
                                                      Coroner’s juiy at the end of the said
                                                      inquest that these were cases of
                                                      "Accidental Death".

4
                                              -   1
                                                  -
Kevin Williams’ Mini-Inquest



At Kevin Williams’ mini-inquest on 2nd May Dr. Slater, the pathologist, gave
        t

evidence that death was due to asphyxia and that his injuries were likely to

have resulted in unconsciousness within seconds and in death within three to

five minutes (page 3B-E). However, evidence was then read out, in the

course of the summary, from two police officers which suggested that he might

still have been alive for some considerable time after he sustained his original

injuries and capable of being saved. The evidence took the following form:



(i)      There was first a statement from a PC Bnider which was referred to

         in the summary in which he stated that he had come upon Kevin

         Williams lying on the ground of the pitch having convulsions (the

         rest of his statement in which he referred to Kevin Williams’

         vomiting and to him having a pulse was not read out at this hearing

         though this clearly provided further evidence that he was still alive).

        Clearly this evidence suggested that Kevin Williams was still alive

        and moving a considerable time after his original injuries and even

        after being moved onto the pitch. This raised the question of
whether he could have been resuscitated though PC Bruder stated

that his own attempts at resuscitation eventually failed and that

Kevin Williams went grey.



However, a further statem ent was then referred to from a Special

Constable Deborah M artin who had made a statement to the effect

that Kevin Williams was alive and had been briefly resuscitated as

late as about 4pm. In the original, statement she made which was

not read out at the inquest but merely referred to, she said:



"He stopped breathing so I gave him the kiss of life, and heart

massage and a doctor also helped. He started breathing and opened

his eyes, his only word was "Mom" and then he died".



This statement was referred to with some scepticism (page 6F of

transcript and page 7D-E).    But clearly it once again raises the

possibility of survival long after 3.15pm (as late as 4pm) and the

question of whether death might have been prevented by more

timely medical intervention. The Coroner was sufficiently concerned

about this evidence to call further evidence on the matter on 4th

May at a resumed mini-inquest into the death of Kevin Williams.
 Kevin Williams (the resumed mini-inquest^



 When the mini-inquest was resumed on 4th May the Coroner called further

 evidence which was undoubtedly intended to discredit the suggestion that

 Kevin Williams had survived for some considerable time after sustaining his

crush injuries and to reassure the family by qualifying and undermining the

testimony of PC Bruder and Special Constable Martin. The further evidence

took the following form:



(i)     An Inspector Robert Sawers was called who stated that he had re-

         interviewed PC Bruder on 3rd May and that, in the light of the

         further questions put to him, PC Bnider now accepted that his

         description of the deceased as ‘having convulsions’ should be altered

         and the ‘movement’ was best described as a ‘twitch* (6C). He also

         reported that PC Binder had now qualified his claim to have ‘"felt

         a slight pulse" and that he now accepted that "whatever he felt there

         he cannot be categoric it was a pulse" (page 6G). He further reports

         that PC Bruden now accepted that he had not witnessed Kevin

         Williams being sick (page 7b).



(ii)    Dr. David Slater, the pathologist, was then recalled. His evidence

        was that Kevin Williams’ death was caused by a "Very very severe

        case of asphyxia" and that there "was four fractures to the voice box".

        In his view unconsciousness would have resulted from the crush
          injuries within seconds and irrecoverable brain damage death would

          have occurred within three to six minutes thereafter but whole body

          death may not have resulted until sometime thereafter (pagers JO-

          12). This might explain the apparent twitches some considerable

         time after he had been taken from the terraces. But he was sure

         that Kevin Williams had died before Special Constable Martin

         arrived on the scene.



(iii)    In addition, a Dr. Ernest Gumpert was called to explain further*the

         distinctions between brain death and whole body death and to record

         his view that Kevin Williams was brain dead before he got out of the

         area where he was standing, when he lost consciousness.



Subsequent Developments Regarding Williams* Inquest



Subsequent investigations have revealed that considerable pressure was put

on both Special Constable Martin and PC Bruder to retract or qualify their

evidence as to the signs of life they described in Kevin Williams. These are

set out more fully in the statement of Kevin Williams* mother, appended

herewith. But the manner in which the very significant evidence of these two

witnesses was presented to the mini-inquest was highly unsatisfactory- Clearly

the jury and the family should have had the benefit of hearing oral evidence

rather than somewhat misleading second-hand accounts of their original

statements and of the qualifications they had subsequently been persuaded to-
make to their original evidence. And clearly the edited version of their

evidence actually presented was, at the very least, not a complete picture of

their eye-witness accounts.
                     D E P A R T M E N T O F FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                      GUY'S HOSPITAL
                                       (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

Dr I E WEST, M i , Ch_B.. F.R.C.Path.. D.MJ                 VSlrED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
Dr RT. SHEPHERD B.Se. M i. B.S- M.R.C.P«h„ D.M.J.           GUYS AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
Direct Telephone Lin« 07 1-407 0378                         LONDON BRIDGE, SEl 9RT
(Fm : 071-403 7292)                                         TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Ext:3118 / 3119


 SCO:21/92/IEW                                                         29th October 1993


 I have studied the photographs of Kevin Williams, Michael Kelly, Peter
 Tootle, Ian Glover, Richard Jones and Paul Carlisle. I have reviewed the
 photographs together with the original post mortem reports.

 A ll photographs are identified on the album covers and there are Barks
 of identification on all of the bodies. Names were inscribed upon the
 right lower limbs#

 The photographs of Paul Carlisle confirm that he has died as a result of
 classic traumatic asphyxia. There are also some abrasions on the forehead
 and chin consistent with being crushed in the incident.

The photographs of Richard Jones confirm the classic signs of traumatic
asphyxia in the head and neck with evidence of constriction around the
chest.   They also confirm the presence of inhaled vomit in the airway.

The photographs of Ian Glover reveal more minor changes of asphyxia with
cyanosis of the face but no overt swelling. There were abrasions visible
on the undersurface of the chin and on the left ankle.

 From Professor Usher's report it was clear that vomit was present in the
 deceased's air passages.   Inhalation of vomit may occur during life in
 a number of circumstances including compression of the chest and/or
 abdomen.   Traces of vomit may also enter the airway as a result of
 passive regurgitation after death, either as the result of attempts at
 resuscitation or when the body is being moved.

The photographs of Peter Tootle are not particularly helpful in that
there is no close view of his face, The photographs reveal abrasions over
the lumbar region of the back and over the upper chest region adjacent
to the spine.    The facial features, as reviewed in the full length
photograph, do not suggest the classic features of traumatic asphyxia,
nor can I see any evidence of substantial blunt trauma to the face.

I have seen photographs which, on the cover the album are labelled
Michael Kelly, but the indication on the leg of the deceased is Kelly -
A.P. with the number 17841. The photographs do not appear to be those
of the deceased described by Dr. Clark in his post mortem report. The
photographs of the deceased show a man, 167cm in height, showing moderate
truncal obesity with heavy tattooing on both arms. The deceased in this
case also showed signs of severe traumatic asphyxia. I do not believe
that I have seen the correct photographs in this case.
                    I t i 3-i                  I Ifcl'i   11t   ijij i ‘          C?i 40 j " i i 'i


                        D E P A R T M E N T O F FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                              G U Y 'S H O SPITA L
                                          (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

Dr. I.E. WEST, M i., Ch-B., F.R.C.P*th, D M J.                             UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
Dr R.T. SHEPHERD B.Sc„ M i . B.S.. M.R.CJ>«h., D.M.J.                      GUVS AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
Direct Telephone Lm« 071-407 0378                                          LONDON BRIDGE, SE1 9RT
(F « : 071-403 7292)                                                       TELEPHONE: 071-955 S000 Ext: 3118/3119


 The photographs of Kevin Williams appear to show the correct body* They
 do not indicate the classic signs of traumatic asphyxia.     There is no
 swelling of the face although there is some cyanosis. The most prominent
 findings that can be seen on the photographs are the injuries over the
 undersurface of the chin and left jawline just below the prominence of
 the larynx (Adam»s apple). The photographs indicate one long abrasion
 under the right side of the chin and an abrasion under the left jawline
 and two abrasions over the region of the larynx. An additional abrasion
 is visible just outside the left eye. There also appears to be deformity
 of the neck in the region of the larynx.

In my opinion there has been substantial damage to the front of Mr.
Williams neck as the result of compression of the neck possibly caused
by his neck being crushed under the feet of individuals in the crowd or
caused by his neck being crushed against soae rigid object.           The
deformity seen in the photographs and the fractures, found by Dr. Slater
during his post mortem examination, strongly suggest that damage to the
upper airway was an important contributory factor in the death of Kevin
Williams. Damage to the airway at this level may lead to obstruction and
swelling of the lining of the larynx which reduces the amount of air that
can reach the deceased’s lungs. As I have stated in my previous report
1 do not believe that this type of injury would lead to unconsciousness
within a few seconds.    Whilst death may occur rapdily following such
laryngeal injuries this is not inevitably the case and death may be
delayed for a considerable period. This type of injury is amenable to
treatment in the form       of an emergency tracheostomy or a crico-
thyroidotomy.   Whilst an emergency tracheostomy is a relatively major
procedure, crico-thyroidotomy is a simpler procedure which involves the
passage of a tube through the membrane between the thyroid and cricoid
cartilages.   It is possible that if one of these procedures had been
carried out at the scene then hewould not have suffered from the fatal
asphyxia which led to his death.

Both cricothyroidotomy and emergency tracheotomy can be performed in the
field although, in the latter instance, with difficulties owing to an
increased likelihood of haemorrahge at the operation site.
I could find nothing,from the post mortem report            or from the
photographs, to refute the realistic possibility that this young man was
still alive after 3.15 pm on the day.   I do accept, however, that he is
unlikely to have spoken the word "Mum" if he had already suffered
convulsions due to lack of oxygen. In my opinion, the primary cause of
death in this instance is damage to his neck which would not have been
inevitably rapidly fatal.
                        D E P A R TM E N T O F FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                               G U Y ’S H O SPITA L
                                           (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

Dr. IJ*. WEST. M.B., Ch.B, FJLCP«h., D.MJ.                            UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
Dr. R.T. SHEPHERD B.Se, M i . B-S, M.R.CJ>*ih-, D.M.J.                GUTS AND ST. THOMAS’S HOSPITAL
Direct Telephone Line 071407 037S                                     LONDON BRIDGE, SE1 9RT
(Fax: 071-403 7292)                                                   TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 E xt 3 l l 8 / 3 i l 9


 In relation to the individuals who have died of traumatic asphyxia; it
 is possible to say that, with sustained compression of the trunk, death
 could have occurred prior to 3.15 pm and that they were likely to have
 been quite rapidly rendered unconscious. There is no way, however, that
 one can state with any certainty that death occurred within that period.
 If the compression of the chest had been intermittent they could well
 have survived well beyond 3.15 pm.




 Iain Eric West, M.B., Ch.B., F.R.C.Path., D.M.J.,
 Consultant Forensic Pathologist,
 Director, Department of Forensic Medicine,
 United Medical Schools of Guy’s and St. Thomas’,
 Guy's Hospital,
 London, SE1 9RT.
                                                                                                S 7' &                    1412
                                                                                                                          S37»
it                                             West Midlands Pollcs
LUU
                                           STATEMENT OF WITNESS
H 22                             (CJ. Act 1967. 6.9; M.C. Act 1900. 6.102; M.C. Rules 1981. r.70l
II3>
17 24
tl 21     Nam* . . .                                              . .M     a rt.
1* 26
20 27     Age . .                 (yrs)           Date of Birth ..
21 2>
          Occupation . . . ......... \Jinexx^>\ c x ^ e / d
IS 22     Home or bo*ine*a address
IS 29     and telephone number
17 24
IS 2*
IS 2S
20 27
21 2>
          This statement, consisting of     ^      pageU) each* signed by me. i» true to the beet of my knowledge
IS 22     and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be Sable to prosecution 9 1
16 23     have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
17 24
IS 2S
IS 26
20 27     Oated the                         day of M
21 2  »
iiT       Signed                                                     Signature witnessed by

                                                                     Officer's Name

                                                                     Rank .

            .... L .QsSco... S te p W s . ,'?e*er . .VWV-a.-YYXumecI
           W\j0or\.. \ i Mivrja.. o i . Arko.. .oJbcve... .Q ddies^s.............. ...
                       \ ... a m          T b . ..                 .. 9.‘
                                                                        . C •..                                  .o?cfX.
            hcM ff,. b c o v x .                   .o ,.                           . o jl. .v^sor^>,. A . D s ^ ..
            c x i^ o      . o . . . . v j S q ^ o v ^ . S S c - k - Q X . . V c > . V la C . .g X ~ . . W a . . o X ^ o . . .
                       O v x . / S a S w r t o * * . . . \ € f r \ J N p x S \ . . A S X Y . A ..
            Ino.. .+ to ...                                                                                    . .\y \......
           ^ 4          ^ 6       . .to ..
            Uvi.enpcsB^..a # \ d . .                                  AAVv. .fefesJr.*...............
                    .V..                        .. ta>. .VuJ..                                                           —


                          .. 'VvjTe.c^.. ..h A e r ^ e ^ . .                                          .. U m ^ X p o 6 A -
            \t.                                 .. CTXO^KNJsi^ft-C^..                                         .. CX........
            Q x v x 5^>. . c L .. J ^ s w v c i s b              y .. .cjcr..tvw. J o c k i
            \ J W . .. o . ..^ c^           ncV   ..U4%\o... . c v y ^ N A d o r i ^ . t W . .. o m v y ^ o . ..
            c m . . .XXVA..                                 ^      .. & & . .               ..fecAAfiW. ^ \ 0 G . .



           .Csvvci..                      . .fix . t W . .. y^>.owxD^ . .. Ugjcvc.. .& \w dw t\q.
           c"x x & jck.... .O.^cs..ir W . .. V v x ^ i ..Vc>..<S a . .•ftA Q & i / N

          Signed                                                  Signature witnessed by

           ’0*feum appOobi*.       T
                                                                                                               WO41)
                                                                                                                9.97)
                                        West Midlands Police
                                 STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                         (C.J. Act 1967. (.9 : M.C. Act 1980. *.102; M.C. Rutes 1981. r.70)


Continuation of statement of                                                                        {........
  op^\6& ..                                                          .ot..■.o>..^ b , .                  .
 .Tlfo^eUar^.. \cwtv                   . .(W:..                .. £bs>d. .a * \d . ex..                 k.
 A ^ V -e y ..         . 'ieV .c. . . p u b . / . . .      . .cta flS U e . . .S V > c > i i ^ o M c . AV)jr^
               .. v^fri<ujV. . .Q^^.da5>o*y^.. 0>y>di . .Q^odSed....
 o d \. oAoout... §.-.QS. p k \. .                    .. co i)cK . .cV<rv^r.. .dja^>(^d
 .U ^ ..             .. .^ O O s f.. t o . £ v . . P.Ob>.;. .u J V x x c W . N.. rV ^v m N c. .v^DsO
 GcdX^d, ..!! .TTVft.                .. .uA^cb. As>.. .C^caot:.. § rAQ....
                 ..v-^cdX.                                ,.. !TXV^..druitr.
 .t^ r> ... \e £ h .. ,cvn5. . .\poJlc€<d... ,1 m . .cc£vc_W.. ^ ^ u A \t r e
 .\.. .dc>v\!.v\i..        ... v^Asqj.^., ..W^Axva. .T^cKksL. Qjm^aai -
 yvvaxxis. .V>q .. .y>'.\.cVw.. .u^.. .v?>p...                                         . vxac&cK .                 V
      Xa^Vswtu. Lve... s p t . -CJ|4. .^"W*... cceveJh-y...                                                  Vxd
ik a .. .Cnan^vciy..)...dAd'.Ysr... .^f£u.                                                                     .
doojc\^\c\a... .q X c V e e A... cJLcoVxo.V^..l ^ r r ^ o - c d . ..VWO^V: .Q.'jL
i r W & ..                                  ...t o .                                  .».■..       ..Scu-io.
a . ..\.o.v.a L .. .?oSiccl .. .dc?dejd.. .a^rvr^d .. c*v>.. .                                                ..
ccxr>&r$}.. .XVftcvr. d:o.. .^W... .cwiiur\d.,.. .bu&. .v?oe.. .d^d.'rd:
feJSASfe. . .CM\»v\.. .<sscc*d:.. o.c.r. d^rfedc\Q v>s. .^ x im .. Ad^...


qcjcax-W . .V\adr^.fo££x-\. .VijQj^ne. .tVa.. .premcAo^.......
\\eo jr... o >*\&..           .. .vAOc^re.. .St?. .. o p ,. .77&q .. .wvdsd..
Cw.. sAne,..                       . .1d»... £ to m d J .                  . .Vkc.......
                 ..W x q ...t ^ \ s t e £ £ o . ^ (..o k ^t X ..W ^ | V v . .^spxrxYed-
. \ . . .^Os^.. .vm2x.. .£ >j^VJriocw. .(dLo^od£X.. j£rV.dbarr5J!^m^.
          VMd. .QgcJ^cdi^} .cs^ctmed.. .a t.. A ^ .. .Qodies. .aJi.tL^
                      ..! v 0 j X \ § ^ ^ P s > ^ C ^ C y ..a-feo>..c d . ..e^bo.uV...2..-AS>^*-
T T l ^ ^ r r W r . ^ r .. .<>£>,...                         ..CX^>..S-iOf^rv.,.. ^.^.V. .C^....
.Qjfeat.. .Ofuu-d... c |. ..           . .aM .. bcv^.'TsG.. .to. .agSr.......
..t .tV^v...cvbo^Y;..Id ..                                .C^d! Ikt.....
£v^\i££xf. . .)o&-... g^yv-x. .. c^Xjp-j^^od^ovx.. Atr.. <?d^.*. .m te.
O r n ^ d s.. .KKstxe^..            . .o ^ d ... .^c\o.v\»f\cv.. .V?s?.V. .VK&ne
             .djo^-V... .tao.                                       ... o d \ .. \vrrrCV.. S ^ O C A .
.U .W A       n   .. .V«VtK3.. .*£CV7.             .. .?f*ry>£\U.. .^OT.                       . \ . .v je m j..
.1$».. .\^ajYd^d •. £b'.\ca. .o^o^aol^^. .. cxwd.. .Cvo. J ..                                                sv>
.V^c.,c m s h j $ ,,. c v sa. ,c4- ■:Vko. ...?dW^-. . V x y s e s ..                                 .^Ve...           •

Signed                                                Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                 VX                 WO 411
                                                                                                                                              (Amandad M 7 |
                                                     W itt Midlands PoNca
                                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                 (C J. Act 1997. «.9; M.C. Act 1980. t.1 0 2 ; M.C. HuIm 1981. r.70)


Continuation of statement of . ..........................................................................................................................
 .Qnc.eAv... .ft?*.. V.. .Cro.t.                             \            . .f.o.rhsor.. .^twewrd..u^\hvm....
 AYx l .             .A ^ W . .         .. Y v w a s e s . . .
 }qq\\m\6. ..Ky^,.. W V . A to s e . ..            ..Vscs - MiVvar^,.t e .. C t o .
 !q£c?^sV 5£ . .\ \ s d .       .A y?.. £ x o > c^ t. .< & & '.< & .. .%ao&\ . m ...
 .'q^. .v^cvckjX'cvcy .. n f o t f e . .                                        .. V i x c ^ i s ..                           .1& & .......
 .OoxvcS...                             .. ^ o . ...p a c k e d .                                    .w \ x x . . $ & & . . . u&Jte..
                                                .. .a>rvd. . . V.. .V ^ o c k . . y ^ o .                                        .   .oztzr.. m j u
 ymjecmist^k...                             .a .. .£eXkx. .^o^c^joq. .'fcQ&C’
 . Vq . .wkd. . .'.uIWo.. .sc o x c u ld .. .Vq . .Y\o ^ . .           o r ....
 . ^ c v p o e d ..OaY.....VA'V5?.. O u p s , .. S M ^ e , ..C^qW&C>. .A>p:V..t W e
 .u~.c\a.. y>sc?.                                  ,'^cx. A \m > . . t o . . f & U . . .QJX&. L .SSvws* ..



Qoc\x^... .^ A O A O D 3 r b .s ,.. .0 3 " .. /O vd,.. .G\}V£>.\£\£ l . . W c . . O oa^JrjsO .'
      .S&CQsjo. ^ . .. Vd.. .W&jcx .Vc.. .Woe... QCVUv^vd. AW 1)pveKriooS
               . A.. k \ a & .. y>D..                                       .^ r     ^ d ^ o . .VAfhore.. A. ,uXv>fed
V^.. .Cxp.;... .Or*\d.. .iko.. .0 \W .. .d ^ J ^ a ^ u .. \ . Kovd. .©rstevf\t
A te ...rmsxxsd.. .v upq . . c k f ^ c . . iVko.. . o a M ,. .A t.A x s o .V ..^
a'N'sq. . .c3^ouV... ^ O r. 3 >S. .o\v<\sAtes.. .Yq. .. Q 0A:.. Ao.. £V..........
. .Vuc          ... c*£.. ^ v s c k s . .\>\c\jlq.. . A.. .V>o$>dad.. .'(vv^.h c te V
.VP..^...^Vejova^...vuVvo...V^^..C%j^...\W...^^.b,.0^^
AmyxAoA.. .\fc. .feccy... A ^ .. jnvsu. .. /fe . A .. .p o ^ * > d .. AK^u AVe.
.\\x.'ce>VA£./ . .tk-ofe. .v>x*o.. O s .. P<5Sa£&3 co >o o ^ .. .^ V w v d ^ o .....
Cky. .VVa . . .O.VV^JT.. .^sd£,.. .VyN£>J^\v>a... S>sxe... .'CYD.. CYX^-ipt
.\.>o.. .uvJ\Vy^C)oV... .cx... Yyoy^eX,... A. :^dUso. .                    ..cUpfeot
. VxAo^,.a .. .ck)2cj>'\. c-^XUcc.^... ^ T ^ x ^ o t .. .oAqd^A.. .Vsr.?0
.         .. Do^cv^.?. . v ^ f ^ \ . AV>£... . ^ . a c a . .'WAcusfiXivv.      .......
. .Vvtocx^N-xVc. .'xs^vd.. .AW .. .VovvVMd,..                  .. £d\Kc£.. d>>d!vd



                                               .A W ..                                          ...’



Signed                                                                  Signature witnessed by .
                                        Wsst Midlands PoHcs
                                 STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                          (C.J. Act 1867. a.9; M.C. A ct 1880. a.102; M.C. U n 1981. r.70)

Continuation of statement of                                               .........................

         OfcV>Vc^y...1. .QC^yd'.vxJt..                        . u M W ; .AKo^r...                                   .
                                     . . O r v ^ V v . .o r :..                                        )q q -&O o X
 .\Vr v \. .                                         ........................................
            .V^Xck.                 ..c   w     \ syv6 v..                     .. \!d...qpt........
 ^ e ^ x ^ .e id . .^cwv. .yviu..                                  ..\xs. 'k^o. . .C^Viod>. .ao^Svd/
         ... OvtAJyxd ./...)...                       ...C?y>v.                 ..C&VsQr..                   .C^
 •Vt-£.. .wbv^\^S?.UL... V^X>j0ts?C>O,. . .^WT:.                                 . .Vp.. .Ccwsj^. .AA'VCU
                        ... .(S?=>..V.. ^wsoUV.ed^... )... ^?co-v> . . ^ ..........
 PDUccjtsNCafiv... .oAd ..ex.. .^evos.^ord.. .o^ovn .iW -. .Qo&&......
 uiWV>. As>.. bo.o3:<$£^.. Qr>.. .AW... VsL-fV... o.'f... A m . .tor.V\.T
 SA'Ws.^.'. . Ai=>. .'irta... . .CjpA^.^.         ....           . .^fcvr.Ved.
 . ^ ^    cst <n s ^   C y ..vvvfe>. .Vfe.. Q y v ^ . d ..'.v a ..ex..                           .Qf&<irtea
 .VX>^vtMLry.. fas,.. .w^ip'fv W?. .C!^. ••.i^sjNv.. .^ ft^ e u d . .Vo                                             /
VvQjcuI . . . . V o ^ o i ^ s . . .^ V « r r .                                               . * 5 ^ $ x s. .c i.
 AWiv. . .ewkre&.. .\i&...                                    . .v.\a.           . .^>Ve^s.. .cm>.6' .
                 .. .vos3^..               ..   .1.+ .“2 r . . .v^iscVx. . U K v s .                           .lo
 AV&...       .. a a .. .v^uo.. .ev en ed . . .ASa.. .Cr/\s\yy><X..............
      k^xur. .a ... ftvmxske.. .ocr.. .^o,... .V.. A eoJJ^d. A. Wcvd..
 AOfcW..cWxxvtP. ..c^.. .^ . c^. v.'oq. . .'Ofvy... . f     .. ^ o ..\
 . W u ...Qp5\)^>..jcuvc^.. .U>/frXV&o..^VvTo..'Vku.. .tv>y\v\aJ.<. .UoaJic\v\c
 ■bsjeo. :\W . A\i*m\oV .tVssJe.. .wjere,. AgcvcIs* . .cL ..                                                ... > J
 .WcUskvrsa.. .Vtvr^.. .Osk^o^cAjv... i.V.. kv&o! yvl... r e o X W . .\u o.
.CQyvc^^ted.-. ...h%..\.. xecxcW d.. .ite... .^^rscU^orr^erx..
.a^x .T^ve..o!0>&r..               .     . AW .. V y x v M d * .       .. w s x e . ..
.V^oor^^d.. .uy>,.. .b.vocXw\a.. ."^W.. .v*sp^-x... s o .. !\^:.              .a...
.GCvp^ .c^. . . ^ s ^ W s a .. M o . .W u^ .. C>a^xcV^./ .Cc^o.vvscd......
. Lv>&\. .$££$\s>.. p.OsmaOO... W\£L.. .Vo.. .CrtX.. .o o t . o.v^Ax>..iic
. \ejm xs ..-... OVW-. :H^s^?Vv&.. .9 c .\^ . .CvmA. ..                    . )!v.e,.
.a^cecvd\i..                   ,...V.. !5>cx4^o. .. .r \o ... .^b^ca..Qf..
.Coys)occi\...VAi^\v^r>.. .\^9....Q                    cvxs\>(n 6.*.........................
           £ N 6 X v&Oo\y*A ...\                0 f V ^ l S A ..\J)p...^CWsQ^KJV^LTe..
. fcW.. .QrDCv^.. .\VTr" .^V\.                     ..... L. Oc\d.. b.e»x.. .Vrlb..
.^ V ^ > . .?.^>cuix\.\o...y^a...bv^...S.V^.?.c                                                '        Y-^-
. di&)         .. 9o^\\aJioJ)*x..                             .. VV\Xa.. .>.yOT.;.. .\ r. SMjo ..

Signed                                                Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                   WO 413
                                              Wast Midlands Pollcs
                                   STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                          (C.J. Act 1967. s.9; M.C. Act 1980. a.102; M.C. RuIm 1981. r.70)

 Continuation of statement of . . . . .                                  .....................................
                   V                         . !p&vs.AW.. .^G.cpU. .W W d ..... AV. .Vivuo
                                                       .. t a u l . .i C U r e c ^ A ... ^ W . t < s d . .
    .                  .. o y x . A W .. .y>                                 . .\ .7 r ^ > .c v ^ ... y \ o . .o.<v&.
    c^ cuc\Wv<>cl . .q^ a .. .oW$V>c>.\. ..            . .AW. .emjvyxA,, .ocid
 t W . .O yvisoJ.. . Q&do ^ h o x \ .. .V.                   . AW . . £ b - j < \ s . . .
 .VvQjsj.vic\a.. .cv. .o p .. .aA:. .AW..          .. Yxkg,. V.u e . .olxeadj
              .atao.vit: . .H a .. C#sy^A^.-. .o a At*>cW .AW..W
       A...Of^..*rvO**>>
 .Qfurcsk... jfbt. .a ... cao.\j>\&,. .ajL.. .<Xvjcv^te^.. }Qa£c><:<z., A. .(feidr
 .vxvv^exj^...\3£X^P0rv<x\ma... m c j T e . .. .Q^r>.c^..yv>o.<fe...Ysow^&dl
  Ax\ .. teu^..AW.. .orev^c^^r.. \... .Q^o\a! yvt.. .mov&,A. .a y \< ± .AW
   ^ Q ^ r . .. uvo/x... ToaaAA^Q,..... ftV. .bxk>.A.£Kex\. .V^cwcAn.I.
  Coo.V^'.'cvA.. .wvov.e .. 1.. .cs©fc>'. rv±.. .reoAU^.. Vxjo .. .cU.&rmad,
 aA. . \A*sa.. .^>\v<s^or.. .\o ... dVW?.. r^cd^as...AVsc*A.. .\!v e ,..
 )©ee*v .t a ,.. .it.. .v x ^ ... .v\oAW^\a... Av\aA... A. .U^oovi'.^....
 .Wcuxe.. x^.\2A^red.. MaVV>.. aA. . .Ic&Lv^cl.. .Qs. .k>.\ c l . .Qpo«sk.\
        .TAVa... Or^s>Ka/ v x . .<s|-... AW... CYL\*4<A.. oAi.. fetmwrvd •••
 .rcso.. .teeripsA. .Vo.. .dp:.. m c*e... cv\dk. .Tv^o.ce. .\*NAeysse. .Oc\
 . 1.... bac^u^s.. A9...                                     k , . .VJ-CVP.. ^ X V £ > v ^ \ x i .
 .Uxsyxa,.. .^\W >.oA W .. .U-Wrv. .                                                   .c)^<xto<\G
 .c^VsTrnW.                                  .. .VyftAigvvrxn...oAkvxa.. o s c ^ . ^ s ^
 Wcvds>.. & r & . . .?>\vcoyA^..                  .. A te .m w £ l.                . .esc<^.e
AA^.. .Qfo??V^                .............................................................. .
&A.. AV«v?... ^Vr^c^i.. A.                                                    .. Q'A^yvo.j,. .1.
.




S>V\U. Aocuft«k.. .vyM^cuid.. .Vo.. .f.vcu^.. .Orsia                             . .mu           ’
.iwaires.. .uiYvo.. V.&.. \<fe>A. . .^\cA\*r.. o . i , .. aso.^ck. AVa......
. .^pvvxcL.. A... duV.K^A.. .%*£&.. .a ^ a ... .VAOfwh^. .or.. <&o.\xjrr
.              ..A ^ c k i .. .o v x .As^...A^<xucc.;. ..\m.:^..VAxvo. .riw ^ V
.y\Q..             . .V^.. .mcNa.. .\eA. .oAows...                             a .            ...
. A.. .ua,?!                        .. CMuune.. .c^-. ..c\..                            .Ctojgd
. s^>r.o^,.. A.. ^p.^>A7^.eyA.. .wxcuV^q.. .co'oA.v^vjoA . ,^>^ssvrce
                ,. .YTso.. . ^ U v v . .V^Av^/^'rr^or.vAord^.. .cdi             .b ^ Q
                U , .c.^.. ,\ W . .an^vkd..                  . .vxsa.. .^ u « w d s ...
. d c ^ v x .. .c>>c\Vo.. .VW.... t o u r n e e .. £ e > '\6 ^ q .. .cAp^vx. b u ...
  V\^ .Q \t t V x ....L .C rA d .feo x .. £ 7. .. .oW .A ^ ...f t \g ^ ...
Signed                         .........................    Signature witnessed by .
                                                                                                                                           WO 4 1 *
                                                West Midlands Police                                                             *-*«•*»
                                       STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                              «CJ. Act 1967. *.9; M.C. A ct 1880. 1. 102; M.C. Ru<m 1981. r.70)


 Continuation of statement o f ............. </ ^ >.'. V / . . . .                                      .....................................
    ."oVxvvyx .W..                  .,'p v -a ...                                                                            A......
    ■Vs£v?... c W v . . W                  .
                                           7 V & . ..                   . .rxvap.eu(l...              O o d ..                            ..
    o f . AV&..         .. cx\Ly>.K\d.. .                                                ..m v ^ c i.. te ..c^dr.
    Ak >.. X\&?>.. q .v>Y.. .uftvo..                                                                     . .b v l...
    . V S a .. f e o c a *.. S^g. ..                        .. .\x\aW>cl .. Q          s z                   .Vs^-.
    .V Q . . Ax.^JT.. AHiCyC'CV.. V^p- •.C^^Od...                                   . .irAsA.. : f e v x j ^ > C l . . cx v ^ o
    .tta,.. . p v Y c h t . .. A       v   >... .V.... .W^Sxncx ..VVft.s^..t o d i .............
    .ov.er>.. .c^ •vVjCv^- ■ •           --AQ >v\ec£$r. .o \d ... t o u t e d .......
          . .VKq. .S?\d£. .C^,.        .. .CVNd.. .£<dA.. A?q. .
                                                 S S sQ .

    .ftj&cc. .Vq. .    .. q p t e .. K^hju^ . . .V\od..              . o i^ c sa c i..
    C v \V o .                    V d K ; . . J h t e . . .C V N C S . . . Q ^ c \ c A Y > S J 7 . . £ & U c x . O          p h f e i
    Vxwvi..                         .. c u ^ x - a .. . b e f o r e . ..Ys&.. u ^ a o . .
                                              ... -WOnc^. ..                      .. fccu^:f>.<A.. S CO .iQj?4r. --0 >^V
 oL .. .¥te... V.emcvcSv... .\.... V^-Neci.. .V\v*a.            . A ^W krds...
 .V \c.. .q p f e ... c*vd.. a .. .9A kc&.. .Q\\&^a*s. •X ta^Y *^.A \iw \
 .Vtano.. xVd. . .qpAe... .a a d ...           .cacvVp. ..!ckr.. ,p.\\cVx-.......
 .rr^Q .. .. A fo ^ a .. A.. .. A ^a.. .YdWcje. .O.^Mbr.
 .           . .y\N£.. tavrr^bsfi .. . c v r m ^ . .oxvd.. .d ^ c c ^ d ..rrso..
 .c   L > \..   .Ovr^V^... . y . \ ^ C ) o > l x > o ^ y ^ d ^ c > J r ^ V t a . ..OUwOoftXi.
                        .. . b c v O / r ..   SJ. \ > . . O y k    .t o . . V w     .. . f e ^ O s ^ C t . .    .QJC\d.........
 .C e ^ m ^ e d ...                                  . .v? ^ ..                   .. o o i .aj^rr. iVf t..-V^vmcs
 .Q/pd.. .C5 V>^:. ovxVx?. rrkwi,. .^>a\c\a.                                            .Ckd. .dud. .^ct . c a .
 . .\e v ^ ..                               .. ,uw )c\\... /VWfe. .vvcxo. .o.vsa.. pcW3c\<^var
 .(UTJ&C>VX..VsJVsP. ..Vv^v?...V o n .. V N e Q s ^ . v y .i ^                               o T .   . M . ..\o...V\.(\jt:
 .A V . .            . .,p o .\ ^. .. A * N D . V W t f . . .\cMdr^OAWvk>ft.d..\0 .9 t.                               .q j> &        ..
 .\xsAt-.. .vxv^... P > C ^ . . c j a d .. b £ X f l U o a .. . p ^ U b a .                                                        .Uf>
 .C vx^.. .D.N.eJ:. .o y \ .                                       9
                                                .. V W ... . .'* V c A xx .-... f^9?. .Vr. /^e^.\2Qjd .
.bajck^. A... .CXu\d.. ?=£&.. <a.. A a d .. .MJkvo. .V\ad.. W a
.Cv\es,. .cA^^?d.. .cv\d.. XaoAced.. .cv?.. ^vo^o/Vv. .W.d.......
.                      . .o.v.-Y...                                                                                       .^CXyx
.^ V A ^ d .A ^ ...S e > r^ ...^ .-...V ^ ..V M ^ ....< ^ c ^ ..!^ .f^ -
                    . .<T^r./ . .O.'TN.. .\visO.. .£e£3y... fo i^V. .A........
.C^\d.^....q^...V^....Vvs^....V^^Vvvk^ .. .< ^ . '^ . .O f ^ d .
      TAW^. . ^ re .. Atx^xV^.. c ^... s^ djos^ sx . AS^vool . A.'Cd'^Tec
.O.v\...V\^/.PaCM n.. . .v.vcsj^Tov'vlr... .Q.^, .iW ... 3
Signed                                                            Signature witnessed by
                                                                                               b_
                                                                                                        WO 411
                                                                                                  {Amtndad t.t7 )
                                          W «*t M id land* P o flc a
                                 S T A T E M E N T O F W IT N E S S
                         (C.J. Act 1967, ».9; M.C. Act 1980. a.102; M.C. Rufe* 1981, f.70l

                                     .VA^'frrTX..........................................
 Continuation of statement of . .. .<=^     ^ :...
  Cs^icV..                  . .^Y\coYvoa.. .Vo.              . ,'VW.
                  .. .cu5.. ,^yceVcVv5rk...                           ..Gcd. ,c^>oXW^
  Aad... .V^cvy^. .Veo^cvr>£L..              .. fccx^rds. .c&u.v>. .O^vcV .
                . .:VVq*c\. .^oTt! -9 ^ W . .. .Vo.. .v ^ ..o ^ ..^ t e k ^ s .
        rKftte!.. .q^q.o:V. .. .^>...                 . A..                      . .cl .)b $sai -
  .wocvjcvovcv. . Osf>d... A.. .'Vlow.Vv.. Q>. ..y&S.'C£#c< > ^ ..a>N&y>c..
                •-Vq ...vcvxstts.                                    o w . .k > . ..Yko... v ^ v v r ^     .
 .v*(Vvc>. . A!ck.                            .. o c\. .AW. dorm^co^...^A \
 A\v?.. . e ^ e s . . . O p ^ d . .. .CV. .^.VvP.d:.. Avms...                            ..
 . .'TAW.                      . .okxc*;* ... )V^v\n*. .o'd.,... Uftu&e y. .vJk.VV\
          v^Yv..V?\0 'c5djL... )cvoh: ,.. .VAe. .\ao/>. .. S?V.^.                    .....
 .UaVto.                  . .va(VaY.€^. .^Vvx^t. . ,CV*>d . . O s . . X \cfo& .. .OfoA^O..
 .C c A a v x e d .. .^y^nrvj^T/... .\..                        .A V . ..'Ctvx^r..             .t e &   & x \

 .. U v M - w ....... ............... .............. ........
            . rrS ^e,. .U^cxawh.. Ov?v>jAAv*vvn.. CKju.V>v*n. .VvM p..A_
 Cc>0 \cV.. .dp. .to.. V\£i^.. .uj^n^^Va. .^\vsV... CUocA...^o.A.....
 kv.dvVke6 .. .Q ^ vm d ..                     . .c^. W ^ l .. Axv^ured.. .CV\d...
 .          . .\x\ed.. .to.. .C£>rnv.£acV... .Cmd... Xec^joXTie,. .V^cCi.
 .A v .. ^V'or.V... V r u Y s a .. Ao^r.ej:.. A.. .CeVucjaxd.. .to..$ U x \ d .. .tti
 Acxd y.. Av^x^cy. .aAo.'csc..                    .. .vaoJtA'v. Xs^d . .fk ^ ^ .ck^sQ.
 .C\c>s*>d,.. X.. .AA\oacA^..                 ...V m ^ o ...             ..\5r x a m c * c o s
 .^....m&...cx*>d..oS...COo^Va..                            . .o VAxdts>..,. A\          ...
 .W o .. .u.p.. .OsjcvcV.. .p^cxcod.. V\wcv. .cxsto..                         . c*duer.V\se -
.w>oxsJr...w . c s ^ 3 . ...^ ^ o c \ d ^ \ a ...t o . .. /Vp A ^ . .\\uns ..t o . i x a
.ohWr... fc?\d&.. p L .. .Vte.. .Qtrorsci... .vjkJWre.. .'Vks.. .VMXtaxSVu
C^.. XW.. .WVAoC^d .. V^Te. . . . . .                                        A%. NArgL,.
.\ .u^ked.. . W o . .. o p s . . .. .\lo... .bdaxd.A.. C h . . P o \ \ a u ! ^ c w \
. .C£voc\&... .'fbr^x^rd... ax \d ... .po Ued.. :XW...\od$». dvjmj^&r
.0 9 . .cw>d... o .v .e r.. V\vp>... .'fo c ^ ... cv>d. A... .fecd.\.^sa.XVftv\
.V5c s o i r . . . W . . . L v c ^ . . . d o ^ v d \ ^ . . . . V ^                           ........
.CX^^..K^....Qnruv^...jay>A...p.\cw^...VS^
. .p'.OtcK.. aw . .VN^.. .Cs£eci.... uJW e,.. Aw ...\v^r\uced..SA^e..
.V^£vog..c^.eyNd^....Vo.-................................................
         ...X ....iA s Q ^ ...V A ^ U ^ ...b .c ^ ...o > ^ ..to ..^ ....
               .. Lc^cl .. .'TT& xcxcsl .. .Qsyxd,... ^?cxx^ Vu.o
Signed .                                             Signature witnessed by . .
                                                                                                                   w o 413

                                           W est M idlands PoAca
                                     STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                             (C.J. Act 1967, a.9; M.C. Act 1980, » 1 0 2 ; M.C. RuIm 1981, r.70)

Continuation of statement of .
                                               •. j Q A ^ e ^ s ..T».coVV>..to..


                                         .V>y x o ^ > .. .uAsaX^str..                              .. v c ^ x ..Vs^ ce
 d f i o ^ d . . o . r . . o d M J .e ,. .b j^ c x v c & & .. )c>vjl .. VKy??,. !d*£v?.. A . ...
 v<vcv?>.. a y >. ..a             .. toftr. . a ^ ... & c v 2 >e../. ^ x .caa\d'.vvi-... e v £ y \ .
                      s ^ c d ..
                        ..                    . .V c T O V ^ d ..
        .. Av^.\x\Cj .. ,Qy?s. A^Q l. .. deXTS-MLC.. .CM l$v^x\d. ,<*)oao:V.
 "AW . .Q v r e o s 7 r :< ^ ... £ - .7 7 ... .C ^ . , 'H ^ . .. .Q d . d . . J0CXVr£>...........
            . . t o . . yxsft... fc>v^.. . V ^ c .
          V... d £ d k e d .. .c^xxsowd.. c ^ - . .YKa..                VcA/s.. .,£ b c . c \ ....
 VA/^(\d£./.. c w c V . .VKolvx .. A..                             . .W>o^r. . .            .c^.
 ’CXVj. .. .vrscde.^.. v?(M£Ad. . ) & c k .'.\ * \ .
c5 ^ . A... ViOO^Q cV.. a y v . A v p d .. .cUxecMcvN.-... ,W \u ..
 9>^>de.d.                  . .Osvxd... .v=>V>Ov.-VecV.. .Vq .. XvsQ... .%o. d .U£_ud
 O j . e r . . c x * \d ... VVjcxi... p.sd^ ecL . A W & .. .U£>. Arvto. . . W & . .....

  Nic*dVv .. cS>?^Xrsd... .VS'd^Cs .                       . .\ ... b t t Q V j e . .d^avg>x.
  t k A .. .Ooovd... .‘s o ^ d ....).. .^G&d&d.. . t o ,. .Q&5. . .o j o t . .c>fr.
 tk&... .Q n jvm jd ..               . .v*e... OvU... .\ej£d.. X v k .. .orYisvr^d. c&
cdocxvd.... i^r.-OO.                ... CM^sd... .Ik ^ x d . . feack....                 .A-^ . ....
                                                       ........................................

        M -. .y\ o . . .VsWsfc... d sjd .. A.. .Uo'.\.Vx\£lss». .Q^AjddwACt . .ftved
 Vjd . .Qoxx^vdfij:. .Vex .V * a . . .Cs>.. Cx> m jgcsal.. .o p U ^ X J T . .........
 taster. A W .. .'<vN£dtd\. .u/c*£>..                            . .vo.. .Y\\ja...............
                       . .V k a .. ? b \\C £ ... .^ v £ -fe ... s = \C v ^ .. t o . . < ^ 2 c t . .It. ..
 <=&&>cc&x\       .. . t o .. .V recd... i w .. .v^o.d& *d.. .c lq . ex. .p.ofc&c
  O.^cUbT.. .^A.tucd>c>.'r\... rcdSsCLr.. .H ^ V \.. .Os.. . .v?^\£JOS..........
 GXYSJoTQpNCvi • •.. ^ .v to cd h OV\. •... d r ... .VM^?. .o Wvjaoo^. . t o . . .
 OAwVftid.. . C K C r \ J £ \ V & .. .VAiVvcd..                     .. V vOs^ \r\S^V^'\CI....
 b o V . .VVa . .. .?o V\Cq.7.               . .c i^ d .'y d ... .Gscwcd..                   ....
 dJVs<d^-y. .. .c d A ^ s o ^ c ^ ..                                .. ,‘S^rejrcd.. y i h k Q .
 O   ^       ^ . ^ .. .vv?»... .
          u s l s               9 > o U v ; \ a o > o r .. V W . .. .V>^v\ck .. Vs&cvjdsd.

 \ .OV\.CQ... OV0ojC£J7. .. \jJVyja ... jf>.vjlXQ-d . . . .OOV. .O.fr: .A te ........
 \ e m    s x c s i   ....Q     ^ y &   .. . u i W o ... c v b b o ..
         . D .V W :.. .^ > e o ^ w .. .o ved . . . o . ^ . .'XArO,... -k ^ s z M u i. t . r W d
 ( ^ AO^..,NM^v .                                         .. ^ o . 9 .v.r.b.y .. .
                                                                                 W..yVh^^V.,k^

Signed                                        ..,.         Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                          V        WO 413
                                                                                                                                             (Amanda* i.171
                                                       Wwt Midlands Polics
                                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                  (C.J. Act 1967, a.9; M.C. Act 1980, a.102; M.C. Rutes 1981, r.70)

 Continuation of statement of . ...................... , \ .......... ................................................................
  .                                                     . ,c? c ^ - o c A. .                                                         . .T S fe ,
 ..Ataijog.Qjo.\cl''!\f..                                                                         .. V ^ . Q ^ .        .Q X X       .A ^ e ....
 .. P d U x s . .. \ a A v o . .. . ^ ' n s o c i .. . a ^ Q S ^ . .. V V & . .. h                                     o X     ^ .    .Uxuj.
 . \\ys&.>       .. Cc^scS ...VnQvSTS.. . . . ,v?.^e,d .Vo...
                         . . .
 . WUp.. .H a ..                        . .b.o.V.. .cxU. .A v i i a . .d ii\
 .                  ..^ . c ^ V . .. ^ V r ^ \ 6 .. A S o r e . , .................... ........
 ....... B > .CV$?\CoAlxA ./ .. A                            W     . .O . ^ C ^ V ^ V ^ C ^ . C K \ .
 . V , v k o W . y y x o & c ^ .. . c k v ^ . ..                                                   ..v j v ^ .          . . o J r . . .VtQ    ^ vA
 . T fS V s & te .. i x s x o . .. v x c > . . . o x £ \ a o c v v o c v 3 o c w . . .q ( s . A S a .
 . C :O W .\C k ,.. . i W . .. .C^XV.V m 5 >... ,'AC.V . ,e ^ .O X G (V s..
               .. V^iWivx.. .CR^.A^^e-vT^cy... .Vo.. AaraY.. .U^-C\f7.
 .UA\cl*v ..VWre-..      .. .cx... c^.<:.c^Qv>1. .C ^ .. .PdV^CC.. O^pyC'X
 .                71^>.V\dS>... Q ^ s V . ^ j . .. ^ & m . . A W , ..fcuocvsASYe.s..........
 ..O c 9 ^ v y > O y ..V > C t e ^ ..C v x ^ ..0 <ra o o ^ ^ \ v > a .. .'tVrQ... c u j ^ e ^
 ■C?y^. . V L a ... J C O A jL a                  ..                                                                           .. .O icv....
 W <    l   ..   ■VqcwS'VSIo .. . ^ Q ^ a v c •-«-                                       ^




             \ ... .Cv*^\ .. WWk vwc \... .\?a...                                                     .. .C-QO f.y... t o . C\\N£




Signed .                                                                Signature witnessed by .
Incident   102     281089 0P4909        ALLOCATE ACTION PRINT

ACTION NUMBER : A7559
  ORIGINATING FROM : S1794


                    NATURE OF ACTION
 CONSIDER SHOWING VISUAL EVIDENCE TO STEPHEN HART
 H/A |                                          |
 INFO FROM S1794 STS WAS IN PEN 3 SAW A YOUTH WHO LOOKED U N C ONCIOU S,LOST SIGHT
 OF HIM THEN SAW HIM ON PITCH RECEIVING RESUSCITATION APP DECD. GIVES DESC

27-10-89   1756    0P1047   RAISED FROM S1794
28-10-89   0840    0P4909   ALLOCATED TO DCI TOPE

ORIGINATING FROM        S1794
ASSOCIATED DOCS
-INKED ACTIONS


          RESULT OF ACTION - PLEASE WRITE CLEARLY
ACTION A7559




DETAILS OF ANY PROPERTY

PROPERTY REGISTER NUMBER
ACTION RETURNED   DATE :
REPORTING OFFICERS :
(RANK,NUMBER AND NAME)
RECEIVERS INSTRUCTIONS :




                                                                         RECEIVER
-'URTHER ACTION NUMBERS :
STATEMENT NUMBER :                     REPORT NUMBER                     INDEXER
PDF NUMBER        :                    OTHER DOC NUMBER
STATEMENT READERS COMMENTS

                                                                          TAT a READ
DFFICE MANAGERS OBSERVATIONS :
                                                                              (^3|

                                                                        SIO
Form No. 10

LFCDA                                                               MEMORANDUM
jgndonfrt♦ OM0
             9*9K»Authority


  From ? T >                    CX & 'A- C ........
                    0 7 7                M esrcM



   Date 2               3            i     k          -       ___________            R e fre n c o M lU S g S U € * t.              k     iS A S m i b g .




                                            . L M i t S X ___
 ..u^jecifecJt                                             i«iiigSfeaju..
 ....exA..................                                 Sw®ta£„-„..f 2 .t*.s f a a g s s i .
                            s£^Cr.T^O^.,                       .Xd£..
       Q 'i        (AS5 >iS\J;fi.........„..... ...........
 .......................X ................. ..............................& .E tfA ^ „ .x * £ ,.....
 ;!**.&£                                       . ^ .fi...„-\.f^. Xhi.£,                     ^.^X^Xffrop.                          .1

 .....fefelM'sd_________ Ufe GfuM 6 -Q.. ^ T g - S                                                       -T^> -T>HE.
       .(M?.^.^......v.w.:..^...hr^                                                  x>±fe...
  .XQ...„&.^>.^e...;r^cr. c c j o Q> c ^ pfe.gs&>ofe.£..                                                    x       M crr>ccc^                           ~r-<e
              ^ M           vr ^         X ^ .6 .                                                               T P - N lM C , 1 ^ ,            Q f tw j

                                                                                                    ft^vCj£v^>£y^ Cpra McsgS&SflCH.

                                                          vjbfto                                    _jcA£Xt^....3 .ni.'s. l--AT £ - _
         ^oe_uC                 <s>r      u\o£«.Pc>ou_ SvtfPoKrrfcfcS,                                  < o \ C                         'fU&M. Vi£££
                                         gP       0-1 T O           T«Ae         V^faa-             To        Cpg;T                             C&QV\
        \^3vA^-r                Sct M ^ it
  •»•>»••*••••*•••••••*•••••»»•»••»»••••»~tt‘~ttt~t
                                                           #vr          t w   ^it
                                                          *~— *-- *---------- tt~*i
                                                                                        -cir^t.           jfH ‘o L-Cc v a .T CR*^»W.
                                                                                          tt--- ti'rTiiiinrifmiiiiTT m Ili^n iffi~iirii~i~T~m--- i~i~h h m i>m

        eW           l\ \J££,N                                            .


  ..................... G M                                                                                                                       RX^
        "T«A£,         OcbT
  ►•••****•*•••««♦*»••*«•«*»•    S>Ti°^C>
                          ---- ..jw     —                           X     tvicrr v'ceo
                                                                                   —-1 T            O/vjrcii iCr£>-
                                                                                                  TTff ii     rint'iiT t~iT Ut i O Tt---Pfetfuf
                                                                                                                          ~t~            r i~tr~tr~~1
                                                                                                                                                    11■inn
                                                               .. £§>.__ o ^f- TvV\.^......... ^ / ^ g. iMVftQftCUitQC .
                                                                                                                    ..fAXS.g^f                       "H^e

                                                                                                                                                             _

               .                3   \£                                                   ^.ev-C.^            ^\ e         UCOtlCr>              <P^\~vPlOI
        CAU(^                   At           (VPG-O^           1W   .SOhrs                   UH^jvi           -TiAt, "^Aa\S. U ) ^ £
                                                                                                                         -----------
                                                  ,X ^ = r.                                Ptv-U-                           v     6>€ C P      O f r .   ____

   •
              GOvt-tL               y^CIIXItOIOtK
                                       a^ H                                                    AtoiO
                                                  >«»<>««l«>«<«»»»««M»««»»-««»»»»«t«M»M««««»»M«M««*H»M
                                                                                                              C'KAtOTvKiCv                     sj£&£
              VA^^LO^                             ...........................                                                                 .........
                            ~T«a €:            '"fey=\AV^                                o*orro             "TVAc .             P'T\M           fV>iO
          X 3§.             CgjCx^^,                                          1 !^                                                   GgCyftfri__
              “TO               >N -TVA&     M.vo^u_»2    S>£t^r vO<^                                                                   ...   (continued)
                 .. ;.'H ... ................... -...... — .........
Form No. 10

LFCDA                                                          memorandum
londor   ftCiv*       Authority




  From                                                                             To.




   Date.........................................................               Reference


         D v£ . ^ a ^                                                                                                                   _____
          r^o€.wvPvU-                                                                         J___________________________
  ................ ,jr^r                                                              .V£>Sr.£                iX^.^r.9._________




                                                                                    .
                                       T>o        a        & > . i . .. p£....rT6         ^ ^ r .& 6 ^ * >
         .rvve               c o ^              x.....xHD.ocai                   .\r...\^^.       .£>.                                    —
                                                             x......ii                                                        :ix±^.__
         Kj O X v o S D                                       .Vrr^.i.^.S?.....^.QT..„.^f^.....^nS.^.                     ^ C - <-___

  .- .r ^v-^Ojoc-Ojraoov)5>#                              To         T y ^                       ..
                                       XT       ^ T O O O .. Jjp                 uAfii'TCv<v^G. P> M O T r | £ fe. <v\<Vrj ___                 _

         “ffSLM irvl              —cq        &-£rS                       .....*           ........ ,3^S              .T^^0 .£^.....XV^kEj-
          f^?€nPrfL£ £ > j t q                   ae^XQXC!^.                                                               t^ev-oO             .
           "          O      -     v        S    :                           .. fi-iS-'-*-lfOC^        P                             )*>0 0 t_
            TV'-^r. "T€r£.S-<=,><-\MC,                        PwnJv>                          |
                                                                                              ^ & £ r^e.P         ~BP.^ /vN ^ L jE.

             ~ o          c,&yg>P           .'^.r^.^5. .W“..^.....SjQ..i/^S.....Q^rf..T..
          P^SCJrJ_                           .. b.^.'.9,
                                                       ......^SS.W^.^..3?......T>^Sr.....„b^r.X...5^>
                                                                                                    .^...3^.^..i^.^.^
          ,'W=fie*=HSK ^rO^sT                     Tu.erJ             X       SPvvO          /\    PCiV_\V.C f^fVO           6.0N& OsiTCi
           ■Xh£-              P \-c (L * \        fo                                                                      crfr X A 6 .___
            jfxapg^ec-                           ..^ . . . . „ t u . ^ £ . ... ^ a s , fv y pw^g:                            tOotM&ee
                                                  C^PV'\r-\Sft.GCs                  {3»SrvA vKL£i_              .............. .
                          T»Afc             PwA-ief^                 ^i€-^                                   c r^F ^                 Pv-cc.w
          £>M          'TVO&            R5£Fi£j2t£-                -cyysiO                            O A OPr^>A^-c-.
           y'Ae              Oc-co^- ^f-iOi            ,X.....XQ.!n;^                                           TK>vr         X-Vo-VS.

           q o v Nic,OQ^.f^..,..7XQ>.„..X^^...£X3S!^..............                                              >.£f..A..9ri?S!.Vfi,.. _
            Qt.               0   \r FVkJM            H 6 -1J ?       XXZ    ^^.^.....Sr>....^^.^.?.              Py^OO ^ CjCT

             ^.^.....H.^^......r^.s^                               iav>£3.££.             .\H....I^%                            c£            .
             XVV<p                                                             ^ 0 .^^ 7.;...... „............ ....... .
                                                       \jja6r4              X £ 9 1                          Xp         T?Y4e        fte P &
                                                                              .




         CrF               -me               T ^ : f <c: t^ l5. X....^r5?5?/£:^£;.7^?.                                       &vC<>HX
                  O         x _ C_                       <0 ’& t             a      PcN-J                         U-M

         X....bf^^......>r^^.^.^'.                             X^nftr            tvv^ m                      ( ^ a    d    .x     ^ & ^ X

  ,.1...I±^..^?.^^                      A         SV^AAX;                XOjMiO^X,                .^..^.‘.b!.^.....T^.. (continued)
Form No. 18

LFCDA                                                          MEMORANDUM
londor>frftA Ow<Ottw    Authority




    Date...................................................................... Reference................................... ....................................
    C\CrA-\_                X- T D CxX-                         Qv^X           y^VM.,. _ ,F>.ft^~T ^ (VvQ                     C ,^gT\ F >CftT£.
                               <v\M        ciArvuiSrvjPcvsiCi                                                    fevJkCJSrf^fYr^ ~Tt) '

                                ■0i\ £                      3 V ^ .....£ \X S r !^ .___ ^                                 W & v-Pl^P u P
                       Avo0 7 T V A                                                                  ^                         __ f i y   Q -    "T^G..
        ^-r joHio?.                         rvwi3>O\^*^v-kie w                 C & £ o           .
                                                                                                                          fvs>yugQ              \ r X.
                                                C r£                .....r^g^<fe>T7^C^t£. . X                                        ^Fca& ^eo
         &H            -rv^ferv>          TO      P g & .) S X .       !.t^. .TV*«&.___0                 &   &    ^ £ D   £ ’S i &   __ .Q£....!?J^.1 ..
                                                Xr...XSr>.&ft.....TXQ.                                              .QfeJS.— .KXSys?...........
     ,...&>£&E.                                                    ...... .&v£I.......ttftC>—                                                           __
           .B.1.YJO..T....................................... ...... .........................
                       X <„.,juey;i                                      w^KXts t o                               ^>-> PeoerigfeS                   -vo

          C^s.               !k -= ^ £ .         Q..£G*Jft.wXUsS.                      .D f ^ ..^                XQ>. 3^ T .„„„Q IkV .^ ..
      ...£=Tt2Q............................                                                      3 B & .....^ & .U W              ^ £ r .£ .S ............
          !*}.£&£......................                                    Q & & S& &          ... X ......................
                                                                                                                                          __3 0 ___

          ,£gN)vv).L                                          .O P ^ O ^ W X ^                 .S (J 3 ............................ .................
                                                         . & d ..h*c^.. x                                        & ^ u a a .w .^..:x £>..
          ....Q v .^ .£ ....X * ^ 5 .......... £*£>SX ... S £ . .....
              i^g^es^).......................                                                                S z f & 7 . ............

           ...X A jft^ ................................ „........... ............
                                                                                      ..............                       ^?.55’.....K^:.....
                                £itc^           £\     ^J^.^^/^.......Q£......7D.jc^ § ! ... kfi.^:£.J.^S....3^.....
           ..^ M          r ^ .                                                                                                      Bcftk&s...
           .£S... ^X^^.^^?....>...^....^fS.^...!£>...^...c^s£......y.aQ....
              ( W £ o                 jv\.i£.    t ^..„.£o v Vo x              fr^^....?^E£i...                                  !D±fitT.....fAftD..
            ..^..^                  Sbxe9^.....!3^^s>.              , o£.. .^..^£....&u..v.. .6 <U<6 *jtva...>J..£J.....
            ...t^ ....^ A .^ .> .£ ? ^ .                                 fr^w^r.^           .^   5 ^ ik .-.....................................................
                                                        QiiCiCrf               ............
               P ^ ^ y _ .c                                 5 ^ 9 .....X . ....... ............................ .^ .'i,

             ...t ^ 6 a(l                F ftc a ;.      .w .O h S .                             9 ^ ..^ .          X -...^ .^ .k ^ .I ^ ....c ^ ....
                   P o o ' <?>/\uJU               *5 0 °*£-                                                                                (continued)
Form No. 10

LFCDA                                                         MEMORANDUM
london    4 Gwl D»*wnc* Autftonty




                                        DQSiaL                            .. _________________________________
  J £                                                 ..ft                                   __________________________________       3&L.
                                               ....   .S^S^.A^9.... .     t e ...________________________ ______________________

                                                                                  .. _________ f e £ o o < s                A-i£vJfr\S

                                                                                                                                   ....
  .......... S.....'«fel3:.....BS3fefe?.                                               ___.............
         TO             *=wO         Pc^O<ac\'r\»OCs. fW^&O'J^CTNiC^                         P n sJO       CO'VS            JKJFoAMa?
                       T^£....OS«o                                    .3... .^.^a.W......y^.AZ                      .S^....C>.£0___
                  ...........                 X........... _______________________________________
                               =CQ^„..„.v^AO.              0^.>..^^....3?....^.^£....3^.fe                       Safil^SuiSlSL.
         ;m£n                  .^..e^^..^A.^...r......^....................... ________________
          f^ftjSQj-rsl               .^.S^.Q.y^...^...f^^.^.fe......^.'^n? ^ *^U&.^j>£. t ..TQ;,,
          .ft                           ... p?§^j... 2&...^.^.^....sf:.....£^....j                                                     ___
                                                                                                                                               .
                           O M          ~ ^ S r ^ 2-\^Cv         TVJk.C
                                                                   .          C^MV^ViOV^XOY^X                        U_CsO*C*S£>

         :ss.            /**.:*. L ^ T .                   .(^a...s.<^.w£.             :£»&£..
         &gs&a^...j&.£.....................                                    .^.v.fcS=Si.. .... .W..^r^....^}rf^l...T
                                        TO     &£.           ft=vP^^- TC
                                                                       . 3 v^O-S»             0   =rv)£?£L\<v£v TV\£;t£. fACtk

          X .                        ...B^lj^C^r......^...3^.......... Wvy)£_____________
                                                ^uvoo^.u^                      itsi.                  .. £$:.\*cA           f ^ O __
               J^>.t^5T^FOfcr^................................... .............
   .................. ......................._________ ^.....X^.:iL..!9d.Q&.....
           c                        *                  ;          .            3.3r...^.&£2&£....9Z.....QS.C Z^pojC
          3 Q ...S r .£ ^ .S 2 .2 ^ J .         B..\^.../......^....)^^S-                            .^..SSfeGn         M . 9 ......
            Coov- O                  ^ t ^ O L -^1..............               A . . . . . . ^ I . ( ^ . . ^ ? . .ysh~TvA    v\\W\___
                                                                                                              o^J                 A    n   Q
                TH%                                                   M.Ofe     ,Cn^ O ' ^ ^ T t ;g c . ................
   .............................U^c,... .........................fv\.fer... ^S+£n ... .t*AS... .................^ .$ 3 ...
                                                       pyrvAO v-VSv- t-^PrS 5 ^ 0 * ^                                         AvfrZ^Stft:.


         .UJA£>               0 ,0   ^ ^      v.KXT.O.                                                 Ic^ST.     fi^yL^Q iMyg
         ■
         ^ ..■...HI<£1                    .VftAv'lrl... ^..V^.................... . X .£>‘£ ...                             (continued)
Form No. 10

LFCDA                                                                              MEMORANDUM
    0
i o n or> F * «   0C m l P»f—    A u th o n ty




    From                                                                                                          To.




      Date ..................................................................... Reference............. ...............................
                                    S c= > v ^ £              T \ < v\t. , T                    <V^\<LSO                             t-V.vV\                   * -\'S                <ViOt>^6
        rvj\Wv\ftW5_  ...... A                   ..........          P A&m          T - C j O s ) V-^
                                                                             m o x m n m l H . i l l « . i n « » < n m m m > m » « « n m M « • —* • « » — « » • • « • « « • • — •   K\^           &Y£.OvTvT
                                                                                                                                                                                          ..............



         0        *=- T i a 6                           Ovfyifc* .       v T ics^    VM?,,,., C W *                                                                                            .
                                                               KfeyjPv^C. v-yxyyv v>j~re> ~w\^ _
    ..^....S.^5 .                                                                                                                               u)v*.ye>-i                          uqas               r ^ o OT
           \            (M.iu-6                        v ^ o A-'-l    ffccx-v. 'nCX€.                                  CtRoO^D.




                                                                                                                                                                                          ------- .^.,.— ...t:

                                                                                                                                                                                             (continued)
esaiv-.-::' •••   ••   'Kyiy'y
                   •>'; RECORD
                  >    U e to m
                        P ottc*   &                                                                                                                         —
                         m ie m m                                                                                                                           M       M
                                                                                                                                                            MWEW
                                                                                   H M                           m s M mmmm.
                                                                                   M
                                                                                                                 —                       a B M     B

                                         riJ!                                                                        '..       y.\   “■
                                                           £uo    >./~ i ’*?*?'-   i \       ‘   ■ '-, r : i
                                                           '^   3 I ? ^-   -
                                                                           ‘*-           f- . * *+ ?       '/




                                                                            — ■
                                                                                     ■ ^ —                —                I




V




                              ••■'
                                 •
                                 *
                                 '-•''~‘
                                                :--'vv:\
                                                                           ■;’^ V v                        :•*

    •    >-.




    I
                          ■       ;   -'ty i




                                                                                                                                                                        •;■




                                                                                                                                 ..••■«;’■j-rs.^.>,-trr’- /■' -■■ ' £ L.-•',-gj,iiWM
                                                                                                                                  ^•pmm                   ..^gs*BTngggg I '*
                                                                                                                                 la ir    -   V   -• .    4a   *   S’- ~      . J*s» *-•'.


                                                                                                   ■-.?:'5r'..' -T

                                                            ■'•.                    '■.'..
        Copy ofrecord providedJo •dcci**'5
                                    m m m*m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1 *1 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M7»
                                                                             m f m n f l i f t r tf IIII f t ■


                                                                 STATEMENT OF WITNESS
15   22                                           (C.J. Act 1867, a.9; M.C. Act 1980. s.102: M.C. Rufat 1M1. r.70»
16   23
1?   24
18   25   Name ...                                               slot*€j0k .Q                    %
IS   26
20   27   Age ...,i?7 ...Jyrs}                                          _       Date of Birth
21   28
          Occupation ... n                           * c /ijU                      e r
18   22   Home or business address
16   23   and telephone number
17   24
18   25
19   26
20   27
21   28

          Thisstatement, consistingof ' ~ f       psgefsleach* signed by me, isti^te thebe«lofmy knowledge
15 22     and belief and Imake itknowing that, ifitis tendered in evidence, Ishal be liableto prosecution ifI
16   23
17   24
          have wilfully stated in itanything which Iknow to be false or do not believe to be true.
18   25
19   26
20   27   Dated the                                                day of IA<V<                                                                                   19
21   28
It                                                                .....                                             Signature witnessed by
          Signet

                                                                                                                    Officer's Name .

                                                                                                                    Wank                          A                        No. .J

              . [      o m         A   . a       .                           s h   a    m                                                             .   a/.          M    j   i       . . .& 4 < e r t£         .
                                               a*** .                                                                                             / fw t. .a. J tte .....
                           U tV .. v x f t . .& £ .. /a w d m
                           sm . ,<4t. JtvKpC&i. . l& s.. qJ& ia/ .’. £ .                                                                                                     . /. Q»m .........
                           •            <ULf
                                        a / /                                                                                            a m jd                   . lm > t. d e e * .
                                             'fsrtf                                                                     oM.. <rfr. .# * * /.. Ctfjz *...........
                                                                         .a             A    p       M      / . .    <ff       . r ./.                                                             J tP H A
                                             m.         mB           £   ^mjm                        '. .           f  .\ tj/B ,                                   a. * ®   S^w              mm9 .*
              /y u f.                                              .h rw J L                     c                   m                                        .   m J t.                      *4 * t
                                   h fe M M s                      ,t         '                      |»<#^.                                                                              a     .   Jt
                           '       I
                                   .              H     M         k tfc r U        a L       .. i s r .H                            &    . C      A           &     * j 9 .     .                       f i f o   i .




             h       i e   ,i t t m          p       flz d       . .                    cm   * ? .          o m         J   .       .m        h d v m                                        . k m      m     ) ..
                                        .    o        jt f k       a     . . m          d    .m             ,   ./ %        j l         ..M       G       S       .i * .
             n w i,..                            c                      . fw       Je.               /a ..
                                                                                             ...................... Ol.V ^ l .                                                                                T
             jOoJiS..                                        .           .          .            .              .               .             .           .            .            .                   J

                                                             <m (\\jed..HP.,
                                                                         / r
                                                                             fim im di
                                                                                    X •
                                                                                       m .a,./mm.
                                                                                        l. z   y v
                 M     &       y                       ^                & w h w < > * * < x . .                                     iv                .... y                 w £ . one.
                                                             .. / ? £ .                                                 T b U . .A & u A < 1.'                                      M              .a^r
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .<?

                 &Ax*vdc... ifSQar*.. h .. 2 m , ~Fk&?g~. .&€<*< y^or^fW.
          Signed                                                                                         Signature witnessed by
          * 0#f«t* as tppbcabM.
                                                                                Midland* Poilc*
                                                  STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                      (C.J. Act 1967, s.fc M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. M m 1981, r.7Q)


 ontiruiation of sta'tofjpsnt of . . . »

  0p.c$*& . .oJ>m J.. jb                            .t* J t.k jc .              ./W a t : .jf e f e e /.j^ e . G /w J d k ... . . .
  / / i . y f e . $ o m &.. ./&&•&.. M                                             . . jf iA              .. Q u^b^J^m qt .                   s t& n *H ....
  oU *e< .                                ^                             . A r n * m . . . ® * m i a . £ e * k , . , p * - . /w                               &       f..
  l / s k .& ( & p A & t . ..i f k o d t . .. h y . t k . < & * < # & ? . .                                                  .      .    .     .         .   .   .
  jO acfeJf... &>..&%.. A m /.. &. .<4+i*<k..
                              ..A . .                                                        .H & .                                                  .1

  f o k t m r f . ..                                               2 : k $ f r * r a J h . r t! h r .. . L € f ^ M a ^ .
 € * d .              .............................................................................                                                                        ^
                    . w Q b k . . #U6                                           -ted. rjM A f..< x .                                                 .

  Q /^ ..iM *d h e a t.                                                 ? & . . i&                u fe + a .. . . # . a s . .v # v ,
  t* h + & .. / > & £ & ...                                             .                     . 7 % s s d .. d              ^ . r u      ^ . .

  h    ..^ w j i .                                                      .                                  .'v X fiL . .
                                                                        .* * £ ..           pm aao              L . . . J M # * . itiu n p u q b .
                                                  K. , C M < \ . „

      l..(^ ..k a r...% ^                                                                                               ^aafc^ss

  itfjx /k g &      t.s
  ’7 X & + &                                               .c r / ^ J ^ f . .Q U A J 2 H & & . . fAc . . . M
                                                                                                           T v £e r ,. a                         OybrVJ^W
                                      ... Awt. h& .. . «                                                   k            .. Jo. <\oM.
   .€ m Jy\j & ^ < k A < *4 L f.. I .f a t Mt t e m. .                                                                  .         r i 6 £ &t . . .
      q m 4 .   f . ' f t a       .   . s . 4 ^ 6 . . .w c u ..t f M                           a e * / .. . a U         r ..t w      ...«H
                                                                                                                                         i &U le .

  & le*4aSai .... L .                                        .. jQ eatffer-.. ' 1                                                     I ts. . . C n f c S . .
   ^ a /4        . . Qa       j       J ...i ^ y . .                .
  £ C . i ^ o £ . , . # * # ? & . . . f e . . . & j< L O fQ .                               i & 4i . .. t t H A b k .. < n v n r o ^ e . ...
 r f k a * . . . h s . . m q a #*                     ____
                 ... . « b ^ 4 ..a. .£ t ^ . < b s M . . a / . .. * W ^ .


                                                                                            ...                         d tte c fe d . ........
  fo                                                           .<*/€&.                  P     p       u   f c     ■ ■                            C   T h J y .   .
                                      /       .      .         .            .. o r           . . f v ^ . j o . o r m ^ r . . « « 4 ...«i.....
  i M ^ . ..                                                                                                    . e & e 4 .. .sasM^.                                  .

  a.                                          .. h 'td & fc ., X% m4.. .*$& £.                                                                                   . ..
                                                           c u a            .                                                                 . .tfu g . . . . .

Signed .                                                                            Signature witnessed by
                                                                             '’S B P T ' ' '
                                                                             fffgt Midlands Polie#                                                                            v*

                                                                     STATEM ENT OF W I T N E S S
                                                     <C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M-C. Act 1980, *.102; M.C. IUm 1981, r.7QJ

 Continuation of statement of ...r£<dr^Cfty4</.                                                                                                    .... .........
  .. &     l& te u /M . .                            Q        w     d ..    {U & f?.           A           jp p a h fe tf* .                       ...................
                            .. pfa&d... he/o*s>., o*/r.                                                                      .fiom r.. t*&A.. e*l*& dy
      cy< p t< k# . o u tM . p a c k e d , . M ^ . .?%#*&
      o j x m t . . Z . ^ J . T C h z..             . .f a d ..o y w c
                                                                                                                                                                     .
      I b € m                                        m             J L . . o f...i% k r .A o r J ta /: .
     .m    m          e ,       M            o   m       r .                      .. b   e m       U         &     ..          .r l k .j               f m          r f . . Jk\

                                                                                                                                                                                             .....
     w & J < M                      q ..                                                               .    i m         < *. S t t i M          x M       f . .iM              M     Z r t&       H       r

                                                                                               7                                                                                              ....

      fitjU&r:. Q&Msr...h 'dt.& jf,.rw *&.f. / . . . . . . . . .




                                                                        .*a.f       *2? ..<*.                     j d t 't f b h . . k y \ / p              u       ^ i ^ s          W-e't*




 •O       M               tiM            ...     cmr                    .1 % ^ . ,efi5v4r.                                             ., T . m . w .
 .^       e a z m .d l..                                                                                                                        . .£>? “S?
  . J % < U # * . . V s k . .c ^ o s > d ., . . o m ^ T . .                                                                                        . .n 5 k m                      J « d .. . h           ..

                                J &          i r * o d w              h .   . c ? 4 . . a . .*£4,.                      l . r t f d       *    k   . r i i ^              . / m        r u    a       k       f

                                    ..                    .. awMa.. .fa. .faz. .<*.piJxh..                                                                                                 ..Y....
                           .CjomMJi..% K o b ! § h d k d . ... h y . .r t ^ U , .s r Q & c . .. < ? ^ K
     ..l.jM ^ ...k m s m jf...a m                                                          "           ^             J J/1~                    —                              — *
  ‘^Lv^- ^                                                                                                                       ... . ^                    .............

..    0       /       o         u        *       d        .       ...0 1 .                                          ^                              . '* * * * • '                  * * -

. S f M           .       q o c fM                   k^.kynk.rfkji.&*.$:. p®s/...                                                                       /                 .           . i ^. ..
                                                                               ..^.4^. .#^4^..                           . a c M      H       f . f r o         m         h    c    ......
                             k ^ o u j ^ . U .. i i y & r ..m b * * .M « y . . .i% 4z..^X!uu
. .tn j ^ t . . . k f . . . hjQA.'r'OtmiZ
                               k ^ y / o t m ^ ...
                                               .,. .^r
                                                   .i/r.               . M .t m .
..ith^r..                                            ..*004.. .goSS^Sfiy..                                   d m 4 > ..............                                                    .....
. •/                                                    . S fi.o frfw s .                                               . .& 4 & 0 (p
. . d s n ^ H . ..                                                      ( . f a i y & S 'e t i ' . o y ^ f . . ^ w                    d .r         m        d       . .


Signed                                                                                         Signature witnessed by
                                                                       mm     Midlands Poilc*                                                       *
                                                      STATEMENT OF WITNESS                                                                                          ■©
                                          (C.J. Act 1967, «.§; M.C. Act 1980, «.102; M.C. Ruin 19B1. r.70i


Continuation of                          «nt of           .. K w        mftMj.          .Jo%rtoPA
                                                                                                .w ..QK 'Y
                                                                                   J . C r s . ' p p K   € ,€c£t&
                                                                                                                & £ .............
                                                                                                                    .
                                                        ..............._............
                                                                               .& f la
                                                                                     a ..  m A , . 1m..........
                                                                                       . . poqA,       * N f . .                                                                          m       . .

                                         <. ltiO
                                               i i t .sxtil..
                                                           a t&jz
                                                               q o rQocUt,.
                                                                       a /i. L   I..
  m        &    K   j . .. h                                                                              . .< ^ r .                    f t &       t .   .<   3 ^ ..                             ...




     C m s /L f. . .
                             k &   c &    f..         . J i W .t e           ^ G    U        .                    .                                                       .
  q<J£..k*.c&>..                                                                    .I. dzbcdcd-.                                                                             .my,
 w         m        . . c t e m           .       k   .                             .h           .   .k   o       h    .    V       o   ../.    £     <         ^   k     ^       . J     h

 JijL . ixxdc xfk.. H&-.. ik o £ ..                                                                                                                            . sm**?,
  HkZ<. .SQfVMA,... («-O
                      0 0<uw
                           / .. .
                                .                                                   /.. £Ca
                                                                                   ./.    £ <^• *L£ .XuJL
                                                                                                       y lf.. .
                                                                                                              .                                      5
                    & J lh & .td k . . ^ . . A > e .
                         .

  M             r ..*                           4© -H a                       <. C M . . . M & . .......
                       1 . tort. .. m / . Qit-ybK.. f a s t : . A i d . o ® u jf. M i* * .. tv * * .......
     P & J U z J r ..                                                         ^         Mrs..|^               u       . b       z   H       ^   r    V ¥ S .. f f / d &                     f . . ..

     '& & £ ...m stsp(& .. . f o . r u / a .. t e c y ^ . t U r t r w j k                                                                                 m tM . . £ U * f.
      d x d . %.|.                                    .e(*rD.v\.0 a                 .£<]dt&..$}..                                                                             ......
                                   . . L S o w ^ .. .©s k                                    +                                                  e                                 .                     .
                         vimj. ..                                                                                                                                                     o       s   &     k   .
     I .   § o ^^                                             jO        f^   k . .. i c ^ y .& M . .. &>.. .^ 4 1 .. .C ^ f : . ^ . .
     a                                          cj m.              ^                                                                                            k   . k       #       ! .

 d j L 0 j . . o h . . m . . m ^ .^o h .k
 .(.              (£ * * * * .. A t .
 Om A . . ifcryJij. lA<Xr6.                                                             ..
                                                              . /. .QMmJ. .c rv t4 .. m .                                                                           . .o *d ...

  w            . aer. avif. /. . . . .                     I    . A_ .. . i. ^ ,/ . .. , ........                                                                         ...             ...
                                                      .. JM...sks^tb. .04. ./..C&M ..



     M & a . C sA X U d ...H & ..(j^...C fkJ p . . m                                                                       . fitrx£.'.}..¥& t*J-..l$.
.. H           t - . .        n e &      s .. ^       xm. ~        ‘    •


Signed                   <4                                                          «                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                              <s
                                                                     »««—m.                b.ii..                                                               f .&>•<»*
                                                                     VT9|I M f f l W N I I rOllCv

                                                            STATEMENT O F W I T N E S S
                                                 <C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Aot 1880. «.102; M.C. f U M 1«81, r.7«


Continuation of ttatemant o f                                        C%YV.
                                                                                                                                   m           k .
 c    b        h       . . M        &       . J 6 . .   u   J A     .. O    m    J        ..                      M         ( 4 . .        m    & .    .M
          >c(.. CwM. .Q2&. sAkarf.../. .. QauJd... d&f. t
  t*st.. a.. S.f'.P<&aS..e m b .m ^ ^ .             . . . l a ..........
               kpL            ...1.. m *jt..oh,.~7hv<L                                                               .iU m t..
     i b   i d         . .&         u j r t . t%            s ^ r   ..                        .* # &      .m      s m          ®       k . . . p       m       f m   .   .Je.


     I .   m       &   m    _J_t    . k > ..      .<*..                    . m       .    i       M     . m          ..
                                                                                                                »t * » • •. •m
                                                                                                                             -* a * m          .     .$Me.
 £ | X .. s j ^ 4 .                                                                                                  .^ U . . K > O A .

 put. .msft*.*.I. .tmJd*. .t. . MsJ. .a. .fiyJ^.ksL..
             .. 0 ^ ^ ,. fie.. vDoi. u*. .H a.    .t o .                                                                                                                         . h i.
 k s * d ..M a U b .                              ol & a      ..hoA*/.. .<&*>. .fejp*. /. 'flwt.k..fa*.                                                                     ....
                                                                                                                                                       ..                        ..........
                                                                                              .   by&M.m                              fm       * m         .                        . . . .

                                                                    . f a / . . k c f U. .                                .                    h ^ . h m x d ...
  m        m       m        . , .1 .. e # m         .                                                   . d U        J v U         fo . . . < & . .                          >o      m        .

                   fDaA.                                                         I...hZMem&e*..
                                    tid ..                   .H      jl     . a ^ ^ u . ^ 4 . bo< *S9(*.
                                    U.         .$ & . & $<& & & . . b . .
                                                                                         ..   . / . .   .&W..
      /e$,                                   t.O M d .                                            $ ...m r .




 O j U ^ d b * . . . £ * M k.                                                                                                                  .fbtrr .M ow f. . . . . . .
 *&,.                               ... 4l4, .. ^ Q k . 7 ^ C , .                                                                  . * M        .                                         -


                                                                  c w       d    . . . f a t i k . .      m     &      s.                                                   .h
                                                                                                                                                                            .....
     em A jde. c tf. .(w #svJ &>...                                                                                                        .d jo ./^ o ^ . ../p.<&4
     i4    J d             .. . k       d     . .fO.ot^..c fa &             jJ * .        /..                                  .d     U        x s *

     M kA*...ah...hC &M ... b lk t s & .f .k i* . . k *& . S.Q's...fa *
                                                        J ffe L ..   f^O^... G                    /A tA * .     .S    C       ts tA    ..                      .^ . ^ A
                                            .. a .. jtih dz* .. b tJ m * . .. «t|0. .s k ^ k .. & # d .j


Signed                                                                                            Signature witnessed by .
                                                               mm                Midlands Polica                                                              *-
                                                   STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                       (C.J. Act 1967,1.9; MX. Act 1980, •.102; M.C. Rutes 1881, r.70»


 Continuation of ttalement of ...                              .rX                               .   0?                                               ..............
   J U       . .. N       o   M         .Sfatirf.                w         i t . S fO ia * . M                        p     ...........................
    .I. . . . -i— <«. . ,
                        . f %         X & . ..            j^rr               c u ^ t i l*l .* fU a m o J vI 's* i .
                                                                     < > . irwiv.                                                 .v «TMr             . . o k a . .• r , ,'7'»,^pi
                                                                                                                                               ,w , , , , , r w

                                                           ^   p     f h     m       a   .       .on*.                                          ..tM.. L i * . ;2 0 j




   < W & .. .                                         ,. /r/e.. S o X i                              f k      r   n   t .   . k    l . . £ * J f .. d fO iM           o fj$ .




   c b       a   d      .. I..                        ./o. ..*.                                            ... I.                                            .J b e , o.
                          .a      #    d   .   .                       .                              I . .       cW<^..d
   1     .                                                            ..    h    .    s . b          o     J z U          e n     ...

  ^ > m h ju t.. 3 k i * w .        itk sU /.               . I '.'tk tv s .
                  dm. sJkrf. . v /' Ao*. M & J & d . . m j f i ... fr*sd..ksL..
                 .' f   k o d z ..         I &     r ..                                      .a.         . c t s i . h h s ..1..




   &va/<2&AGM . ... f e y ^ L / . .                                                                   . ©M..                        . tAoM . . . f a. . I. .
   b . . k M . . . i m k ^ . c h ^ h ^ . , . . . ........................ . / . ....... .
   /. ktfk. A                     d f e t w . . h Q ? h } . aM & . k U & . . O U r n . ^ M i 4 ^ H . .
   teY H Z. f t f U s . . . S u A P s r fe ft. .. a W . . f t & L .. U td h z J ... m d k ..
  h ^ c x /d U .H d ,.< P lm r €...J.&v*?. .a., sfuagk-. & £ ..                                                                                                     .oo& y.
                                                                                                                                                                           .....
 H ^ c ^ a .. .-to..k d c . . .a..                                                                                ..^Jt. .eC aov'... I. r t
   *JL. w x k . d&0>M . .                                                                                         . U J^m .                           .               .1
  ^ocr/
 o e a j z . . b o & J z i., . t m ^ s d . . a . D cv/H c r ^ . . . .......                                                                           ..................
    .£       ^ h . c U        n 4 * \ . . l e >                . . . S e &            . . i f . . ^ . . t &                  K    b .   .q-.<,. c m W . a ...
  d&zky..                                                        .CVnJ. ..5.cU^ e^)o^. ./ a . .hrC0^S^......
    . yPorvnfe^. . .io . . ^ M r . .                                                         .                        cjs&          . . * f M . !d o < J < r / .,. .
                                        ..ovys .                                     o^v             ( m      * * .- .      ./..h       z f . f r .       k a C f . G Y . . . . .

  !m & ..p . w * . .. < m 4 .. . h w M ^ . . . k s L . & z u . . <            .-..I. f a d .
  N * j. . . v& u Jek . j L o J r . . . k d . . .fio v U a .. a f o y .q M v Z .
   w 0j> $M £$u ... .4^***.. .vnf..                                                                                   ...(p.. . H ^ v > .. Gk* s*p . .......
       ' /y                   .                    ..^ . .. kt&su/h.*..                                               .faiJ. .
Signed                                                                                   Signature witnessed by
                                                               Wm           Midlands Pollcs
                                                    STATEMENT OF WITNESS                                                                         ©
                                          (C.J. Act 1967, s.9: M.C. Aot 1880, *.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r,70l

Continuation of statement o f                              .


   M w te u S c d s L . i / e
   C t i A b k . . . . i r t i.iMfv£4*.
                                                   2                                                                                                        .
                                                               . .CKJt/id. . . . / . .                                 W .. A
                                              M&,       .,1$.stpAf..MytL ...4^4*1.                                   50. ../. ofvja . y . . .

   £   -   m   £ ^ M         u    j   3 L iL *         .. /.. $9v<*J..                                        .. .0 < M ..
                    ,        .        .       ...tu^AA. . . . l a .                             .Iu a .                              ( ..c k d .ts t...
   v.-.-or-v.-*.. A & !ol... £v<^v/fV£.                                               ...............................
   /..c        & A f i       j r . . t i . Q A f i j f c . .b z & k . .                                                          q   A . l . d i & A t

  m    m        k   . . h        . . .    s e e ..o        m     * J   o   * &   '.. &    ( M     . < M   Z . . . I . .a   W „ a .. <             u * & .. . ..

               h & . -toUU. .rt?L ,                                       .. bk& fU & d..          ..
                                      r t l s ^ . G ?fr. . t t & . S U ^ s . , . . p h & w zd . ..
  fwCL..M                             $. . . . /             ./c^u4\a. . y v w m ... ( W . . . . .
  hid.. . . . ^ 4 . .                                   h^omQS.                                  .                 .                      ../..,. . . . .



  sA       ^ k / d       .   .            ,     .       .k x 2 &       ^ ) ..v ± %    4 4 - . ,£ 4 * 4 # b i      .., 3 p ./...O                u j:    f t * * .

  CfiJ...W kM s... i m . cca<^.. d 4 ^ ^ ..« 4 d . GM>.
                                 O Y S ...tM .. S * .                                                              .h d f f i
   i s .x l             «sfl^ I 'b t f k , J%ocx . f p w ^ c u f f i U                                        cd           .d to & .kX xA ..
                                               C                   M                     >                , / & £ . m . .A.cro.. /. ...
                                          .). .o/aJ.. c U              r   . .( * M   r .. t &   A A V v &      'y k a     ..M       m    . .   juWil.
  3 * i 4 .         . . i m .................
                            .                 ..... ............ .              ...
   {% . . 2/ & !'m
                 .A p « M t.       .. .1..        derus*.1.. o J j . . & t. .i% A . ..
  M c i c 6^ v r s .. & l                           /                                            .. i t U o * * . .. o j h                        ....
                                                                                                                                         ;;




Signed                                                                            Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                       (/
CORE BUNDLE
                                    APPENDICES


1.   Copies of statements of Debra Jane Martin and relevant parts of the
     notice of application for leave to apply for judicial review held on
      5 November 1993

2.   Copies of transcript of inquests 7 December 1990 and 14 December    1990
      and its judgement

3.   Copies of statements of Anthony James Edwards

4.   Copies of transcript of inquest of Kevin Daniel Williams and information
      from

5.   Copies of statements of Derek William Bruder

6.   Copy of ANACAPA chart of Kevin Daniel Williams

7.   Copies of a report of Detective Chief Superintendent D G T Greene,
     West Midlands Police and the relevant part of the notice of application
      for leave to apply for judicial review held on 5 November 1993

8.   Copy of report of Dr Iain West

9.   Copies of statement and action of Stephen Peter Hart

10. Copies of original notes and statement of Anthony Joseph O'Keefe



                                      VIDEOS


'The Cook Report*   -   Thursday 2 June 1994

Views Inside Gymnasium    -   REF VRM 2

Views of Ambulance from South Stand       —    Ref MAP 3

Views of Ambulance from West Stand     -      Ref MAP 7

Compilation Video Produced by West Midlands Police
       Chief Superintendent Love                                    D4C/JM1/S& C8F.96/94

                                                                    Discipline
       The Chief Constable, Hr Richard Wells vis
       Assistant Chief Constable, Nr Davies
                                                                    7 June 1994


                    ♦The Cook Report*   -   Thursday 2 J w m 1994

Following the screening of 'The Cook Report* on Thursday 2 June 1994* research has
been carried out at this office to establish whether the program* revealed any new
evidence froca the events surrounding the Hillsborough tragedy•

Inspector Phil Woodward and Police Constable Ken Oreanway have produced the attached
report and are to be congratulated on producing thorough research ia such a short
space of tine.

There are a nuaber of discrepancies In the Cook Report*             the program*   lacked
objectivity, but aost important it revealed no new evidence.

The issues referred to in the enclosed report are aany and at ti»es conplex* My
suggestion is that the report is read carefully and th*n should the reader wish to
have further clarification on any item then perhaps a Meting can be arranged. In
particular I find Ken Greenvay's knowledge of the disaster extreaely helpful.

Saving read the report the question of what to do with the Information contained
within it will have to be addressed. X as of the opinion that there is sufficient
evidence to contradict the aajority of Mr Cook's •findings * but whether that would
serve any useful purpose is open to debate. Zn particular it will be difficult to
find a suitable forua for refuting the inaccuracies in the Cook Report.

In the TV progranae Mrs Williama , nother of Kevin* says that she is to approach the
Attorney General for a fresh enquiry. Clearly that avenue is open to Mrs Williaas
and it will be an option to do nothing until coanunication is received fro® the
Attorney General* if ever.




Chief Superintendent
Discipline and Conplaints
            'THE COOK REPORT*     -    THURSDAY 2 JUNE 1994


                          EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



 HO-Mat EVIDENCE WHICH WOULD CHANGE THE OUTCOME OF THE LORD JUSTICE
 TAYLOR INQUIRY OR CORONER'S INQUEST



«0 EVIDENCE DISREGARDED, ALTERED, IGNORED OR WITNESSES NOT TRACED


PRESSURE APPLIED TO CHANGE STATEMENTS

DEBBIE MARTIN               -   NO OFFICIAL COMPLAINT

                                NOTHING   TO  SUBSTANTIATE         ALLEGATION
                                OF PRESSURE BEING APPLIH)

STATEMENT IN QUESTION           DOES   NOT  ALTER   ANYTHING       FACTUALLY
                                MERELY SHOWS A TRUER REFLECTION OF
                                HER CONDITION IN THE G Y M N A S m

                           -    CORONER  DECIDED THAT   WHAT SHE HAD
                                TO SAY HAD ALREADY BEEN SATISFACTORILY
                                EXPLAINED

PROGRAMME ALLEGES THAT     -    INCONSISTENCIES IN EVIDENCE
AT 3.55 P.M. DEBBIE
MARTIN CARRYING OUT        -    LYING, ATTEMPTING TO MISLEAD OR AT
MOUTH TO MOUTH ON               LEAST BADLY MISTAKEN
KEVIN WILLIAMS
                           -     VIDEO SHOWS HER FROM    3.50 P.M. TO
                                4.00 P.M. AND AT NO TIME DOBS SHE
                                APPEAR TO BE ATTEMPTING TO RESUSCITATE
                                ANYONE

POLICE CONSTABLE BRUDER         GAVE   FURTHER  STATEMENT   WHICH  HE
                                MAINTAINS   WAS  SUPPLIED VOLUNTARILY
                                WITHOUT PRESSURE,    DURESS OR OTHER
                                PERSUASION

                           -    STATEMENTS    R E AD   IN   SUMMARISED   FORM
                                AT INQUEST


INQUEST

AMBULANCE ARRIVING AT      -    VIEWS OF THAT AMBULANCE FORMED PART
3.37 P.M. NOT FEATURED          OF THE COMPILATION VIDEO SHOWN AT
AT THE INQUEST                  THE INQUEST
 LIFE AFTER 3.15 P.M.

 BO INVESTIGATION AFTER       -    COT OFF TIME DECIDED BY COROHER MS
 3.15 P.M.                         TO CAOSATIOR

                              - AHACAPA   CHART      SHOWS   INVESTIGATION
                                COVERED   EVENTS      BEFORE   AID   AFTER
                                3.15 P.M.

KEVIN WILLIAMS ALIVE      - MEDICAL EVIDEUCE SUGGESTS ngmn BEFORE
AFTER EXTRACTION FROM PEN    EXTRACTION FROM PHI WHICH CONFLICTS
                                  WITH SOME LESS HI QUALIFIED PEOPLE

IF CERTAIN PROCEDURES         - AT PERTINENT T D f B WHO WOULD HAVE THE
SUCH AS EMERGENCY               KNOWLEDGE AND EXPERTISE TO CARRY OUT
TRACHEOTOMY AND CRICO-            THESE PROCHMHUBS
THYRIODOTOMY CARRIED OUT
EARLY ENOUGH KEVIN MAY        - MHJICAL EVIDBHCB SUGGESTS KEVI1 ALREADY
NOT HAVE DIED                   BRAIN STBS DEAD


SYMAS

WOO LD NOT ALLOW           -      STATEMENTS MADE T O SYMAS SOLICITORS
PERSONNEL TO BE                   QOITE NATURAL AS POSSIBLY CULPABLE
INTERVIEWED BY WEST
MIDLANDS POLICE
INFERENCE OF SKULL
DOGGERY


WITNESSES NOT TRACED

STEPHEN HART      )        - BOTH      WERE   TRACED     AND   STATEMENTS
                               OBTAINED.
ANTHONY O'KEEFE )
                           - EVIDENCE GIVE! OB PROGRAMME CONTRADICTS
                             THEIR STATEMENTS WHICH INDICATED KEVIN
                             WAS DEAD PRIOR TO INVOLVEMB1T WITH
                             POLICE CONSTABLE BRUDER

ANTHONY EDWARDS            - TRACED BUT NOTHING NEW IN HIS EVIDENCE


ALLEGATIONS NO FULL ENQUIRY

NO FULL ENQUIRY AND        - LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR CONDUCTED THOROUGH
LESSONS NOT LEARNED         INVESTIGATION WHICH APPORTIONED BLAME
                             AND HIS RECOMMENDATIONS IN RELATION
                             TO   ALL    SEATKR   STADIUMS,    GROUND
                             IMPROVEMENTS AND SAFETY ASPECTS HAVE
                             BEEN IMPLEMENTED
PROGRAMME MAKERS DID NOT ALLOW SOOTH YORKSHIRE POLICE TO TAKE PART
HAD THEY BEEN INVOLVED THEN THEY WOULD HAVE BEEN ABLE TO RESPOND
POSITIVELY TO ALLEGATIONS



THIRTY MINUTE            - LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR INQUIRY AND INQUEST
TELEVISION PROGRAMME       LASTED SIX MONTHS.    PULL INVESTIGATION
                           LASTED MANY, MANY MONTHS
                     ’The Cook Report *    Thursday 2 Jane 1994


Introduction

     At the request of the Chief Constable an investigation has been conducted
     into 'The Cook leport* shown on national television cm Thursday 2 June 1994
     relating to the Billsborough disaster on 15 April 1989 and in particular
     one victia, Kevin Williaas.

     The investigation focused specifically on the alleged •bullying1 of
     ex-Special Constable Debbie Martin* the suggestion that an            which
     was featured in the prograsae was not included in the evidence given at
     the inquest; and, finally at the suggestion that b o m of the 95 people who
     died were still alive after the 3.15 p . m . 'cat off* tiae decided by the
     coroner at the inquests.

     Outlined below are the results of the rescan* which not only addresses
     the above but also iany other aspects included in 'The Cook leport8.

*Bullying * of Ex-Special Constable Debbie Martin

     Ho official complaint has ever been m a d e by Debbie Martin or anyone on her
     behalf in relation to the allegations of pressure being put t m her to change
     her stateaent.

    Brief reference was made on this point at the notice of application for
    leave to apply for judicial review held oa 5 loveaber 1993. A copy of the
    relevant part of that document is shown at Appendix 1, in particular
    Page 29 Item 21.

    A further reference is aade in the judgement of the judicial review, in
    particular Page 24 Ite* D and E and a copy of this document is also shown
    at Appendix 1.

    At Page 252D, the Coroner said*

    •We have already Mentioned the evidence of Special Constable Martin who
    said about the lad speaking.     In no way do 1 want to run poor Special
    Constable Martin down because she had a very hard day but it is right she
    was obviously fro® her stateaent very distressed.

    A. I also wouldn't want to criticise MFC Martin la any way but 1 have
    interviewed her twice, sir, and she was particularly upset as indeed aany
    people were but it affected her particularly badly the events of the day*.

    The stateaent in question, the final one aade by Debbie Martin, does not
    change anything factual to what had been said previously but aerely includes
    her feelings and confused state of aind.

    This stateaent shows a truer reflection of ter coodition whilst she was
    present in the gjanasiua and this can be corroborated by the video reference
    V M t/2 .


   In ’The Cook Report* Debbie accused the police officers who visited her,
   to take her fourth and final stateaent, and saying that they did sot believe
   she had in fact been at Billsborough. This beggars belief. In • previous
   stateaent lade by Debbie Martin on 12 July 1989, Bebbie             tuimmm
   to a video shown to her by West Midlands Police officers in wMdi she
   i&sntifies herself. West Midlands officers would hardly adbuss Debbie 0 ^
   not being at Hillsborough when they had clearly seen ter oa a video
   recording.
       Copie* of all statements made by Special Constable Debbie Martin are also
       shown at Appendix 1.

The Inquest

       It is said in the prograaae that the inquest was never shown the arrival
       of an ambulance at 3.3? p . m . when Police Constable Bruder was assisting
       in giving south to south resuscitation to Kevin Villiaas.

       This aspect is one of the inaccuracies of the prnji i— n as t V arrival of
       the aabulance was shown to the inquest in the fora of the compilation video
       prepared by the West Midlands Police.

       The aabulance is also featured     in two other videos reference MAPS and MAP7
       which is footage obtained fro*     the BBC and showed different eaaera angles.
       The latter is incorporated in     the compilation -video prepared for the L o r d
       Justice Taylor enquiry and also   used at the inquests.

       Transcript* of the inquest dated 7 December 1990 and 14 December 1990
       reference to the compilation video being shown at the inquest.

       The relevant parts of the transcripts are shown at Appendix 2.

      The aabulance appeared to be the one referred to by Police Constable Bruder
      at about 3.37 p . m . which did not stop despite people banging on the side
      of it. The aabulance driver, Tony Edwards, said in his stateaent he saw
      people trying to save friends but his instructions froa the senior aabalance
      officer on scene, Mr Hopkins '..... there wer« casualties at tbs far
      of the ground and he needed ns on the pitch and that we were not to stop
      for anyone until we got to the far end of the ground. Be told os to pit
      our two tones on and go through. Me did as we were t o l d    '.

      Edwards is unable to identify any individual who banged on his ambulance.

      The stateaent of Tony Edwards is shown at Appendix 3.

Life After 3 . I S p . a .

      This was the subject of such controversy and debate froa the outset of 'the
      inquests. The 3.15 p.a. cut off point was decided by the coroner. Dr Popper.
      This ®as for inquest purposes only. A full investigation covering events
      before and after 3.15 p.a. was conducted by the Mest Midlands Police for
      the lord Justice Taylor enquiry.

      In the case of all 95 inquests the person carrying out the post aortea gave
      evidence as to the injuries sustained by thevictims, the cause of deatb
      and the tine scale of their deaths, which would have been fairly quick.

      In the case of Kevin Williaas, Dr Slater who carried out thepost aortea
      on hia said Kevin had sustained four fractures to his larynx which would
      have aade speech virtually impossible.
      The coroner called an expert witness. Dr Goapert, a Consultant neurologist
      who said it was clear to hi* that in Kevin's case he was probably dead before
      he was extracted froa the area where he had been standing. Be went on to
      say that after people are brain stea dead *       ..they can twitch and very
      unnerving it is too       '• This is doe to a spinal reflex which is thought
      to occur in anoxia - lack of oxygen - in that the brain stea died first.

      A transcript of evidence of Dr Slater and Dr Guapert are shown at Appendix 4.

      Police Constable Sruder In his statement shown at Appendix S said he assisted
      a St Johns Aabalance officer to give *oath to aoath resuscitation to
      Kevin William. Be continued to do this until advised by one of the St Johns
      Aabulance officers that he, Kevin, was ’gone*.       Police Constable Bruder
      then left the stadiua.    Suaaaries of both statements supplied by Police
      Constable aruder were read oat at the inquest of Kevin Hilliaas on
      Friday 4 May 1990. See Appendix 4.

     Ex-Special Constable Martin said that she carried levin William into «-he
     gym where she noticed apparent signs of life and went on to say she gave
     Kevin aouth to south resuscitation and that Kevin ottered the word

     There are four witnesses, three of whoa gave statements, who actually dealt
     with Kevin Williaas and who were satisfied that when they had finished their
     dealings with hi* he was in fact dead. This was prior to Debbie Martin's
     involvement with Kevin.   There are also two aedical witnesses who suggest
     that Kevin was dead prior to his extraction froa the pen.          It begs the
     question when all these people had given up on Kevin, how m o l d Debbie Martin
     say she saw signs of life in hia? This presumably is borne sore out of
     opt intis* than reality.

     The Cook Report placed a lot of emphasis on tiae being a critical factor
     in the rescue of Kevin Williaas.   Be stated that Debbie was giving south
     to aouth resuscitation on Kevin at 3.55 p.a. Bowever, froa the evidence
     outlined above, they are either lying or attempting to aislead or at least
     are badly mistaken.

     Froa the video, reference VRM2, she is seen froa 3.50 p.a. to 4.00 p.a.
     in the gymnasium and at no tiae seen to be perforaing any fora of
     resuscitation on anyone.    This, together with the transcripts of evidence
     by Dr Slater and Dr Guapert, the statements of Police Constable Bruder.
     Mr O ’Keefe and Mr Bart and the information froa             totally negate
     her claims to the condition of Kevin.

     The information froa |            |was received in —   a
                                                            « telephone call     to
     Headquarters Operations Rooa on 3 June 1994 and also shown at Appendix 4.

Additional Information

     The Cook leport highlighted other inaccuracies contained in the — ------
     as below.                                                       v ^


    In his introduction Cook said evidence was disregarded, ignored and witnesses
    were not traced. These allegations can be refuted.




                                            %
Sir Malcola Thornton MP, alleged in the program m that event* after 3.15 p . m .
w erenot fully inquired into. This is incorrect as the Nest Midlands Police
enquiry covered all aspects including events before and after 3.15 p.a.

AHACAPA charts were produced for all 95 victias shoving their aoveaents
froa the aoaent they set off that aorning to the post aortea. To give an
ezaaple of this a copy of the ANACAPA chart for Kevin Williaas is shown
at Appendix 6 .

Allegations were aade that police officers were leaned on by their colleagues
to change their stateaents. Mrs Williaas said that Police Constable Bruder
told her that the West Midlands Police had approached hia with a brief to
change his stateaent. However, this is refuted by Police Constable Bruder
hiaself in a telephone conversation with Chief Superintendent Greene of
the West Midlands Police when he says that he aade his stateaent entirely
voluntarily and without any pressure, duress or other persuasion.

A report froa Chief      Superintendent Greene pointed out that a solicitor,
on behalf of the relatives, had interviewed Police Constable Bruder and
suggested the possibility that his further stateaent could have been
furnished as a result of cajolery or other iaproper actions by the West
Midlands Police. Police Constable Bruder maintained that he Bade it clear
to the solicitor that this was not the case.

A copy of the report froa Chief Superintendent Greene and a copy of the
relevant part of the notice of application for leave to apply for judicial
review held on 5 Hoveaber 1993 are shown at Appendix 7.

The prograaae pointed out that the aabulance service did not allow their
personnel to be interviewed by the West Midlands Police. The inference
was that there aay have been soae skull duggery if they had done so.

Don Page, the foraer head of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Aabalance
Service (SYMAS) did say in the prograsme that their own solicitors took
stateaents froa their personnel and furnished the West Midlands Police with
copies of those stateaents.

This is quite understandable as SYMAS, as one of the eaergency services,
could be held culpable for their actions on the day.

Chief Superintendent Mike Poster, who was one of the senior investigating
officers froa the West Midlands Police was interviewed by Cook and only
a short    excerpt of that interview was shown on the prograaae.      Chief
Superintendent Poster has possession of a copy of the fall interview
he said that Cook put it to hia that the reason why SYMAS personnel did
not make stateaents directly to the West Midlands Police aay have been
because of the West Midlands Serious Criae Squad affair. Mr Foster pointed
out to Cook that the Serious Criae Squad affair did not becoae public until
August 1989, soae four aonths after the Billsborough disaster.

There was then a difference of opinion aaongst the aedical profession as
to the possible survival of Kevin Williaas and the alleged uttering of the
word *aoa*.
 Dr lain West, a Forensic Pathologist at Gays Hospital said that If certain
 procedures had been carried oat to levin after he had bees extracted froa
 the pen then it ispossible that he may not have suffered fro* the fatal
 asphyxia which led to his death.

The procedures he referred to are emergency tracheotomy, which is a
relatively major procedure and crico-thyriodoto*y, is a simpler procedure
which involved the passage of a tube through the Membrane between the thyroid
and cricoid cartlidges.

The question is therefore who at the pertinent tiae had the knowledge and
expertise to carry oat sach procedures and in any case if an emergency
tracheotomy was carried out on Kevin it would have been to no avail as he
was already brain stea dead.

A copy of the report of Dr West is shewn at Appendix 8.

Two men appeared on the prograaae who identified themselves as carrying
the advertising board upon which the body of Kevin Williaas was placed.

The inference given was that these two aen had not been traced when in fact
they had been and stateaents obtained froa the*.

One of the B e n , Stephen Hart, said that he knew that Kevin was alive bat
unconscious at the tiae. This is in contradiction to the stateaent he gave
to the West Midlands Police as he said in that stateaent that when Kevin
was lifted onto the advertising board a policeman caae forward and palled
Kevin's juaper over his face and he realised that he was dead.

An action was raised by the West Midlands Police for visual evidence to
be shown to Hart for identification and continuity. Hart declined to assist
in that action.

A copy of the stateaent given by Stephen Hart and the action are shown at
Appendix 9.

The second man, Anthony O'Keefe, an off duty fire fighter, said in the
prograsae that he thought that Kevin was alive, however, in original notes
prepared by O'Keefe on 29 April 1989, he stated that it appeared to hia
that all the casualties were in fact dead and had been for soae tiae. He
was then asked by a Doctor to point out anyone he knew that had signs of
life but in his opinion there were none.

A copy of his original notes and statement are shown at Appendix 10.

Both Hart and O'Keefe say in their original stateaents that for all intents
and purposes, Kevin Williaas was dead prior to hia being carried across
the football pitch and prior to the involvement of Police Constable Bruder.

A number of other people were featured in the programme, namely Mrs Stringer,
Ms Routledge, Mr Spearitt and Mr Glover.     It is felt their contribution
in the programme was aerely for effect.
     The judgement of the Judicial hearing held on 5 lovadier 1993 shows at
     pages 29 and 30 in relation to new evidence of Kevin possibly being alive
     after 3.15 p.■»»          I find it of far too tenuous a nature to justify
     a new inquest       *.    The relevant part of that judgement Is shown at
     Appendix 1.

     Allegations that there was not a complete enquiry or that lessons were not
     learned is incorrect.      The Taylor report apportioned blame and his
     reoamendations with regard to all seater stadiums, ground improvements
     including safety aspects have all been implemented shows that lessons have
     been learned.

Conclusion

    After a considerable amount of research it appears that the ’Cook Report*
    is seriously flawed in many aspects. Contained within are a great number
    of inaccuracies and contradictions of what was said in the r— j— --
    some people and statements originally given to the West Midlands Police
    for the Lord Justice Taylor enquiry and the subsequent inquest.

    The results of the research show that no new evidence has come to light
    to warrant any farther investigation and a thorough inquiry was carried
    out into the Billsborough tragedy by the West Midlands Police.
                                     APPENDICES


 1.     Copies of statements of Debra Jane Martin and relevant parts of   the
         notice of application for leave to apply for judicial review held on
         5 November 1993

 2.     Copies of transcript of   inquests      7 December 1990 and   14 December 1990
        and its judgement

 3.     Copies of stateaents of Anthony James Edwards

 4.     Copies of transcript of inquest of Kevin Daniel Williams and information
        from

 5.     Copies of statements of Derek William Bruder

6.      Copy of ANACAPA chart of Kevin Daniel Williams

7.      Copies of a report of Detective Chief Superintendent D 6 T Greene,
        West Midlands Police and the relevant part of the notice of application
        for leave to apply for judicial review held on 5 November 1993

8   .   Copy of report of Dr Iain West

9.      Copies of statement and action of Stephen Peter Hart

10* Copies of original notes and statement of Anthony Joseph O'Keefe



                                         VIDEOS


'The Cook Report*    -   Thursday 2 June 1994

Views Inside Gymnasium    -   RKF VRM 2

Views of Aabulance froa South Stand       -    Ref MAP 3

Views of Aabulance froa West Stand       -    Ref MAP 7

Compilation Video Produced by West Midlands Police
         N o tic e     fy #
         t-e /iv g ro PrPPs'hu
         Fo€. Z a b iC i/^ 4 e /i£ t,i




                                         IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE


    Applicant's Reference                    Notice of Application for     Crown Office Reference
    Number                                   Leave to Apply for            Number
                                             Judicial Review
                     This form must be read together with Notes for Guidance
                                Obtainable from the Crown Office
                                         To the Master of the Crown Office
                                              Royal Courts of Justice
                                                      Strand
                                                London WC2A 2LL
    Name, Address and Description                  (1)       Sandra Stringer & Donna Carlile, the
    of Applicants                                             mother and sister of Paul Carlile,
                                                             deceased.

                                                   (2)       John A Theresa Glover, the father
                                                              and mother of Ian Glover, deceased.

                                                   (3)       Joan Sinclair, the sister of Michael
                                                              Kelly, deceased.

                                                   (4)       Leslie A Doreen Jones, the father and
                                                             mother of Richard Jones, deceased.

                                                   (5)       Peter & Joan Tootle, the father and
                                                             mother of Peter Tootle, deceased.

                                                   (6)       James Stephen & Anne Williams, the
                                                              father and mother of Kevin Williams,
                                                             deceased.
    Judgment, Order, Decision or                   (1)       Various decisions of Her Majesty’s
    Other Proceedings in Respect                             Coroner for Sowit. Yorkshire in the
    of Which Relief is Sought.                               course of the inquest held between
                                                             the 18th day of April 1989 and the
                                                             28th day of March 1991 into the
                                                             deaths of the deceased hereinbefore
                                                             mentioned and others at the
                                                             Hillsborough Stadium on 15th April
                                                             1989.

                                                   (2)       Conclusion or verdict recorded by the
                                                             Coroner’s jury at the end of the said
                                                             inquest that these were cases of
                                                             "Accidental Death".

«
                                                         i
Kevin Williams* Mini-Inquest



At Kevin Williams' mini-inquest on 2nd May Dr. Slater, the pathologist, gave

evidence that death was due to asphyxia and that his injuries were likely to
                                                                           •


have resulted in unconsciousness within seconds and in death within three to

five minutes (page 3B-E). However, evidence was then read out, in the

course of the summary, from two police officers which suggested that he might

still have been alive for some considerable time after he sustained his original

injuries and capable of being saved. The evidence took the following form:



(i)      There was first a statement from a PC Bruder which was referred to

         in the summaiy in which he stated that he had come upon Kevin

         Williams lying on the ground of the pitch having convulsions (the

         rest of his statement in which he referred to Kevin Williams’

         vomiting and to him having a pulse was not read out at this hearing

         though this clearly provided further evidence that he was still alive).

         Clearly this evidence suggested that Kevin Williams was still alive

         and moving a considerable time after his original injuries and even

        after being moved onto the pitch. This raised the question of
whether he could have been resuscitated though PC Bruder stated

that his own attempts at resuscitation eventually failed and that

Kevin Williams went grey.



However, a further statement was that referred to from a Special

Constable Deborah Martin who had made a statement to the effect

that Kevin Williams was alive and had been briefly resuscitated as

late as about 4pm. In the original, statement she made which was

not read out at the inquest but merely referred to, she said:



"He stopped breathing so I gave him the kiss of life, and heart

massage and a doctor also helped He started breathing and opened

his eyes, his only word was "Mom* and then he died".



This statement was referred to with some scepticism (page 6F of

transcript and page 7D-E). But deaiiy it once again raises the

possibility of sunival long after 3.15pm (as late as 4pm) and the

question of whether death might have been prevented by more

timely medical intervention- The Coroner was sufficiently concerned

about this evidence to call further evidence on the matter on 4th

May at a resumed mini-inquest into the death of Kevin Williams.
 Kevin Williams fthe resumed mini-inouesrt



 When the mini-inquest was resumed on 4th May the Coroner calied further

 evidence which was undoubtedly intended to discredit the suggestion that

 Kevin Williams had survived for some considerable time after sustaining his

crush injuries and to reassure the family by qualifying and undermining the

testimony of PC Bruder and Special Constable Martin. The further evidence

took the following form:



(i)      An Inspector Robert Sawers was called who stated that he had re­

         interviewed PC Bnider on 3rd May and that, in the light of the

         further questions put to him, PC Bnider now accepted that his

         description of the deceased as ‘having convulsions’should be altered

         and the ‘movement* was best described as a ‘twitch’ (6C). He also

         reported that PC Bruder had now qualified his claim to have ‘"felt

         a slight pulse" and that he now accepted that "whatever he felt there

         he cannot be categoric it was a pulse" (page 6G). He further reports

         that PC Braden now accepted that he had not witnessed Kevin

         Williams being sick (page 7b).



(ii)     Dr. David Slater, the pathologist, was then recalled. His evidence

        was that Kevin Williams' death was caused by a "very very severe

         case of asphyxia" and that there "was four fractures to the voice box".

         In his view unconsciousness would have resulted from the crush
          injuries within seconds and irrecoverable brain damage death would

          have occuned within three to six minutes thereafter but whole body

          death may not have resulted until sometime thereafter (pagers JO-

          12). This might explain the apparent twitches some considerable

          time after he had been taken from the terraces. But he was sure

          that Kevin Williams had died before Special Constable Martin

          arrived on the scene.



(iii)    In addition, a Dr. Ernest Gumpert was called to explain further* the

         distinctions between brain death and whole body death and to record

         his view that Kevin Williams was brain dead before he got out of the

         area where he was standing, when he lost consciousness.



Subsequent Developments Regarding Williams’ Inquest



Subsequent investigations have revealed that considerable pressure was put

on both Special Constable Martin and PC Bruder to retract or qualify their

evidence as to the signs of life they described in Kevin William;. These are

set out more fully in the statement of Kevin Williams' mother, appended

herewith. But the manner in which the very significant evidence of these two

witnesses was presented to the mini-inquest was highly unsatisfactory. Clearly

the jury and the family should have had the benefit of hearing oral evidence

rather than somewhat misleading second-hand accounts of their original

statements and of the qualifications they hadfsubsequently been persuaded to
make to their original evidence. And dearly the edited version of their

evidence actually presented was, at the very least, not a complete picture of
their eye-witness accounts.
                                                               T       S        » i'




                                                                                                                        smnm
            fwc:               o m th        jm m
                               m    m   w


            ADDRESS:


            M X / DATE DF BIRffls 25

            OCQJPAIlCMi        PCX SC221


            Who states:* T M s s ta tem e n t c o n s is tin g o f 004 pages*              signedeach
            by me, is true to the best o f ny Joicwledge and belief and I n a l®
            it knowing th a t i f i t is tendered in e vid e n c e 1 s t a l l be lia b le to
            p ro s e c u tio n i f I have w ilf u lly s ta te d in i t a n y th in g w hich I know
            to be fa ls e o r do n o t b e lie v e to be true.



            QWB3: 080589                                                    .                         0J MARTIN (SIGNED)


            ©
                       I a n Debra Jane MKFIN and I l i v e a t t h e above a d d ress.                           I m

                      s in g le .       % occupation is a t o t a l n u rs e , I an a ls o a S p e c ia l P o lic e

                      C o n stab le number 221 based a t WX3D6EAIIS (E2 S u b -d iv is ic m ) o f South

                      Y o rk s h ire P o li c e .

                      On S a tu rd a y 15 A p r il 1989 (1 5 04 89 ) I p a ra d e d fo r d u ty a t 9.00cm

                      (0 9 0 0 ) a t HILL£3&fOJGH F o o tb a ll sta d iia u w here t h e r e was a b r i e f i n g fo r

                      a l l o ff ic e r s in v o lv ed in t h e s e n d -fiim l betw een LTVHTO X* and

                      MJiriNGffiM FCREST.              The b r i e f i n g was a t 9.45am (0 9 4 5 ).

                      A t 10.20am (1 0 20 ) I r e tu rn e d to t h e gym a t th e fo o tb a ll ground f o r a
            ©         s e p a ra te b r i e f i n g f o r s p e c ia l c o n s ta b le s .

                      A t 10.35am (1035) I l e f t H m S K M X E a s ta d im a t o patrol HMUES ROND

                      SCUM to s to p th e p arkin g o f c a rs by fans on t h e h a rd s h o u ld e rs .                     I

                      d id t h i s w ith S.C                           Vte co n tin u ed to patrol w m i m TOM?

                      SOUTH* w hich is a very lo n g ro a d , u n t il a b o u t                 1.10pm (1 3 10 ) th a t

                      a fta m o o n .       A t th is tin e we had o rd e rs to go t o P B € E S K » RD to cover

                      t r a f f i c o u ts id e t h e main e n tra n c e g a t e s fo r th e M m 5 FOREST fans.

                     A t th is p o i n t I saw about 6 t i c k e t to u ts .                 I saw them s e llin g t i c k e t s

                     and money c h a n g in g hands.               I a ls o saw        imetous    fa n s b o th Liverpool




                                                                                                                                   49




,,,   ...
MAPriN               DCBRA   JM E


fans and Notts Forest, who vere obviously drunk, although at this

stage they were behaving reasonably.

At about 2.45pm (1445) I started to nake ray way to the LEPPINGS LANE

entrance, as I passed what I think is the n&in entrance to the SPIGN

KQP, the turnstiles were shut dcwn.

At about 2.50pn (1450) there was trouble at these turnstiles whan the

Notts Forest fans, realising they were being locked cut, were trying

any way they could to get in, this included paying acney to the

turnstiles stewards and trying to buy tickets from the touts. The

cro*d became very abusive and angry and I had to assist in the

removal of fans frcrt the ground.   I was on the road side and the

police inside were passing fans back out over the turnstiles and

there was a very large number of fans trying to get in still, so much

that mounted officers and their horses were being pushed up against

the wall. Ihe next thing I know is a large blue gate was opened and

a large majority of the crowd pushed their way into the ground.      I

found myself being carried along with the crcwd unable to resist. A

mounted officer grabbed my collar but had to let go, because he would

have been pulled from his horse.    I got pushed to the floor, but I

managed to get back to my feet by pulling myself up a man's beck.        I

then reroarber opening my eyes and finding myself inside the ground,

at the bottom of the Spion Kop and the gates had been shut behind

me.   I asked the steward on the gate to let me out, but at first he

refused, it was only when a mcwnted officer, the same one who had

triad to help me a few moments earlier, put his horse up against tha

gate, he opened it a short way and let me out.

Once outside I found myself surrounded by drunken fans, screaming

abuse, and the area covered by police. An officer used my radio to

try and call for back up but to no avail because the channal was
MAFITN               DEBRA    JM C


full of static, tty radio was handed back to me and I ran to the

Lepoings Lane end of the ground.     Ambulances and police cars were

rushing, to that end of the ground.   When I got to the Leppings Lane

end of the ground I saw a vast crcvd outside the turnstiles trying

to jet in, it nust have been about four times larger than the crowd
                                                   %
I laft at the other end, so that would mean the crowd at the Spion

Kop end numbered about 1000 plus and I would estimate about 4000

outside Leppings Lane aid.

I can't really remember how, but somehow I got inside the ground,

through the large blue gate which was open, and I ended up on the

pit'h.   I did not go through the tunnel.

Ones on the pitch I saw a lot of people who were obviously injured

and I can remember a man ccming up to me shouting, "MERE'S TOO DEAD

YOU BASTARD".   I then saw people who appeared to be dead. People

wera screaming and shouting and ambulances were driving onto the pitch.

I assisted other police officers with dead and injured people and

helped to take them cm stretchers to the gym, and I can remember

seeing officers from E2 (VJOCDSEATS) everywhere.

I took about 6 dead to the gym, as well as many injured and whilst I

was trying to revive a young boy I remember something hitting me on

the back of my head, but I didn't really notice until nuch later when

I found a large swelling.    I could see many bodies being put on the

pitch, same of them appeared to be dying.    I lost count of the number

of bodies I helped carry into the gym.

I halped carry a young boy into the gym from the pitch nearby. He

stepped breathing so I gave him the kiss of life, and heart massage

and a doctor also helped. He started breathing and opened his eyes,

his only word was "MOM' and then he died.

At 4.06pn (1606) Dr CURPEN certified death and I stayed with him.      I
MAFHN                 DEBRA   JANE


vrould describe him as white male, 5'6-5'7, 14-15 yrs, alira build and

brcvn hair, with a cut under his chin.      He had slightly crooked

teeth, there were no other marks on the body.      He was wearing a white

shirt, green sweat shirt, beige trousers, white socks, white Reeboks

and green and white boxer shorts. He had a gold metal chain with a

gold horn, a bus ticket, a train ticket and an entrance ticket.       He

had no identification or money.      I later found out the number given

to this boy was 51.

I stayed with the body and at 5.20am (0520) Sunday 16 April

(160489) an anfculance arrived and I went with thebody togetherwith

DC PONT and GRIFFITHS to the Medico Legal Centre, WATER LAIC,

Sheffield.   I stayed with the body until he was stripped and details

taJcsn fran me.   I finally went off duty at 6.30 (0630) on Sunday

16 April 1989 (160489).

At about 6.30pn (1830) Monday 8 May 1989 (080589) I saw PC's

and          fran West Midlands Police at my hone. PC ? showed to me a

partially ccmpleted report of death form that I identified as being

the form I filled in whilst in charge of the body, details of name

and other personal details are missing because there had been no

identification made by the time I went home. All I can say is this

form relates to body 51.   I now knew this is Kevin David WILLIAMS,

b. 27.5.73 (27051973) o f I f e r s e y s i c t e .
        MAPFIN            DEBRA    JM E



                                           D J MARTIN SIGNED
STATCMa/r iy<EN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:     080589
WITNESS TO SIQ^ATORE:

OFFICERS SI34A1URE:
                                                                      UJ




                                                                                                         so en w

    name*            ream jm e
                     MOTH

ADDRESS:


A 2 / Iffi DF BIRIM: 25'                                    ~ ■

OCCUPATION:          DENIAL NURSE


Who s t a t e s ; - T M s s ta te m e n t c o n s is tin g o f 001 pages* each s ig n e d
by me* is tr u e to t h e t e s t o f ity knowledge and b e lie f and 1
i t to w in g th a t i f i t is ten d ered in evidence I s h a l l b e liable t o
p ro s e c u tio n i f I have w ilf u lly s t a t e d in i t a n y th in g w h ich 1 t a w
to be       fa ls e o r do r o t b e lie v e to be tr u e .



Q fflH )! 120189                                                                   DJ MARTIN (SIGNED)



            F u rth e r to ray p revio us statem ent        dated 8 th May 1989 (080589), on 1 2th

            J u ly 1989 (120789) I was shown a v id e o tape R eferen ce                   Nutter (VRM/2)

            E x h ib it (         ) buy PS/PS              M    KJUOCM o f th e t o t        Midlands
            P o lic e .

            A t ta p e re fe re n c e n u tte r 0249 and 0305 (R eal T in e ) I can i d e n t i f y

            m y s e lf on t h e v id e o lo c a te d in th e c e n tre r ig h t o f th e p ic tu r e .

            A t th is p o i n t I was engaged w ith th e deceased K e v in D a n ie l WHMAJ-fi

            (NA51).

            A lth o u g h th e camera stows a c le a r s h o t o f m y se lf you can n o t s e e t h e

@           dec Based who is o a t o f camera s h o t.           A t th is s ta g e th e b o d y w ould b e

            a t ity fe e t and to th e r i g h t o f th e screen as you le x * a t i t .




                                                                                                                   54
          HAP PIN           DEERA JM m
                                                                 2


                                            D J JftKFIN S IO O
S H W O C O T l^KEN
            PLACE:

            TIME:         DATE;

WITOESS TO SIGNATURE?

OFFICERS SI3NA3URE:     J KILLOCH PS 6818




©
                                                                                                C 3.)




                                                                                                                            s v m    m

                NAht:                    DEBRA JANE


             ADDRESS;


             MJE I DATE             DP    BIRTH: 25

             OCCtJPATICJ'li              PQL SC221          D M IA L MUF6E


             Who s ta te s ? - T h is s ta te m e n t c o n s i s t i n g o f 001 pages, each signed
             by me, is tru e to t h e b e st of ny know ledge and b e lie f and I m ate
             i t J a w in g th a t i f i t is te n d e re d in e v id e n c e I s h a ll be l i a b l e t o
             p ro s e c u tio n i f I have w i lf u l ly s ta te d in i t anything which 1 t o w
             to be fa ls e o r do not b e lie v e t o be tr u e .


             DATED: 050989
                                                                                                        D J MARTIN (SIGNED)


            e
                              F u rth e r to my s ta tem e n t d a te d 8 th May 1989 (0 8 0 5 8 9 ), I w ould l i f e              to

                              a id th a t to d a y I have te e n shown photographs b y W C                           are! W C

                                          f t h e West M id lan d s P o lic e , r e l a t i n g t o t h e H ills b o ro u g h

                              In q u ir y .

                              In   th e p h o to g ra p h s R ef No T T 1/28, T T 1 /3 1 , TT 1/32, T T 1 /3 0 , M l / 4 ,

                          TT 1/29, I am a b le to i d e n t i f y t h e perso n re c e iv in g f i r s t add m the

                          deceased K e v in D aniel WILLIAMS (body 5 1 ) whan I r e f e r to in n y

                          o r ig in a l s ta te m e n t.




            ©             D J MARTIN SC 221 (Sgd)

                                                                                                          D J MARTIN SIGNED

            S M B fO T
                                PLACES

                                TIMEs                      DATE:      050989

            WITNESS ID SIGNATURE:

            OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                   e#
                   ir-


                                                                                                                                         56




■   , ,,,               „ ;
                                                                                                                         •*   .




                                                                                  O)




mm-.                 d e b ra m m
                     MARTIN

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIKfflt 26

OCCUPAIICW:          DEKfflL NURSE         PCL SC221


Who s t a t e s : - IM s s ta ta n a n t c o n s is tin g o f 005 p a g e s , each s i g n e d
by me, is tru e to th e t o t o f n y know ledge and b e lie f and 1 aalaa
i t know ing th a t i f i t is te n d e red in e vid e n c e I s h a l l b e H » M b to
p ro s e c u tio n i f I have w ilf u lly s ta te d in i t a ry tM n g w hich I know
to b e fa ls e o r do n o t b e lie v e to be t r u e .


IM S ) :   170390
                                                                                       D J MARTIN (SIGNED)

©
            R u t t e r to my p revio u s s ta te m e n ts I w ould l i t e t o a d d t h e f o llo w in g ,

            On S aturday 15th A p r il 1989 (150489) I worked in t h e c a p a c i t y o f

            S p e c ia l C onstable a t t h e F .A . S e m i-F in a l f o o t b a l l n a tc h betw een

            L iv s rp o o l F.C . and N ottingham F o re s t W.C. w hich was b e in g p la y e d a t

            th e M lls b o ro u g h S ta d ia a , S h e f f i e l d .

           My re c o lle c tio n o f t h e e ve n ts o f th a t day a re vagu e an d c o n fu s e d .

           As a r e s u lt o f th e d is a s te r I was p re s c rib e d m e d ic a tio n b y a y D o cto r




©                                                                                                  I felt like
           a ’ Zom bie.*

           As a r e s u lt o f t h i s I f e e l th a t n y memory, a y r e c o lle c tio n o f th a t day

           is p o s s ib ly in a c c u r a te .    I am u n s u re o f what tim e I a r r i v e d a t th e

           Lejppings Lane en tran ce to t h e ground o r even tow I c m e t o b e on th e

           p i t c h b u t I d id .

           By tim e I g o t onto th e p i t c h i t seemed t o be mass c o n fu s io n , th e re

           w era p o lic e o f f i c e r s and s u p p o rte rs a l l o v e r th e p l a c e .   I c o u ld s e e

           p e o p le who appeared to be in ju re d and p o s s i b ly dead* l y i n g o n th e




                                                                                                                    57
p itc h ,    1 was in a s ta te o f sh o c k .             I d i d n ' t t e w w hat to do b u t sty

n a t u r a l in s tin c t was to h e lp th e s e p e o p le in t h e b e s t way th a t I c o u ld .

I c a n 't d e s c rib e to you in any d e t a i l n y e x a c t novanents o v e r t h e n e x t

h a lf an to u r o r so.         I Imow th a t I approached s e v e ra l p e o p le l y i n g on

th e p itc h and a s s i s t e d i f p o s s i b l e .      1 d id n o t g iv e any o f t h e s e




Rop end o f t h e ground.



to th e S pion lo p end o f t h e ground and th e n b e in g p la c e d on t h e p i t c h .

I a s s i s t e d to c a r r y a n u tte r o f dead and in ju r e d p e o p le f r t a t h e S pion



te d te e n s e t up.       I was t a l k i n g to s a te o f t h e s e p e o p le , c m fo r tin g

th e n and t r y i n g to re as su re th e n .           I am u n a b le t o d e s c rib e a n y o f

th ese p eo p le i n th e d e t a il.

By th is tin e I r e a lly was in a s ta te o f sh o c k , I c o u l d n 't b e lie v e w hat

I was s e e in g .     I seared to b e on a u to m a tic p i l o t .            My memories a re

v e ry confused and d is to r te d .

I can r e c a ll c a in y in g a youth who 1 now know to b e , le v in D a n ie l

WILLIAMS frcm th e p i t c h to th e qyim asitsn.                   He was t h e la s t p e r s o n t h a t

I a s s i s t e d in c a rry in g .   I f i r s t saw K evin w m J ® S ly in g cm th e p itc h

n e a r to th e g o a l a im . a t t h e S p io n Kbp end o f t h e ground.               A t th a t

s ta g e he w a s n 't on a ho ard ing o r a s tr e tc h e r .

I r a ta r t e r th a t th e re w ere s e v e ra l p e o p le around where he was l y i n g .

I c a n 't r e c a l l anyone g iv in g him m outh t o m outh.               W ith t h e h e l p o f

o t h s r p e o p le , who 1 c a n 't r e c a ll, le v in W H M A J6 was p la c e d o n to a

hoandjjig and c a rrie d In to t h e gym nasitm .                 Someone in s tru c te d me t o

s ta y w ith t h e botfy.




                                                                                                              58
MWRriN                          D®m        jm e



 I d id n 't know what to d o .           I d i d n ' t w i t to b e lie v e th e b o y w as dead.

 1 d id n 't know i f he was dead o r r o t b u t I decided th a t I h a d g o t              to

a tta m p t to re v iv e him .       I s ta r te d to g iv e Mm m outh-to-m outh b u t

sctr-aone, I d o n 't know who, tou ched r e on th e shoulder and t o ld me he

was dead.        % th is t in e ray head had go n e, I w a s n 't aware o f w h a t 1           m s


d o in g o r w hat was r e a l l y h ap p en in g .

A t 16.06 hours        (1606) D o c to r O W E N exam ined K evin W H L IA I6 and

c e r t if ie d him dead.

I ramanber a d e te c tiv e o f f ic e r , EE P aul MMFREDX h e lp in g me to

c a r p le te th e GEN 18 form (sudden d e a th fo rm ),

I stayed w ith th e body u n t i l th e e a r ly to u rs o f Sunday 1 6 th A p r i l

(160489) when I e s c o rte d K e v in KIULIAMS, who a t t h i s s ta g e h a d n o t

been i d e n t i f i e d , to th e M edico L e g a l C e n tre .

I i d e n t i f i e d t h e body b y th e r a n te r a llo c a te d , w hich in th e case m s

PujTber 51.       I had no f u r t h e r d e a lto g s w ith K evin H lU M B .

H u s sta tem e n t i s made to t h e b e s t o f ray r e c o l l e c t i o n and I b e lie v e i t

to be t h e tr u t h .     However, under t h e circum stances I c a n n o t be

p o s i t i v e th a t th e d e ta ils a re a c c u ra te .




I have marked on a p la n o f t h e p i t c h (R eferen ce D .J.M .l) t h e

app roxim ate lo c a tio n w here I f i r s t came in to c o n ta c t w ith t h e

decaased, K evin D aniel WILLIAMS.

D J M a rtin
         MAPTIN             d ebra    ja n e
                                                                  4


                                               D J MARHH SIC3CD
STA'TOIEM ’ fiUCEN
            FLACE:

           TIME:          DATE:      170390

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE;   WPS 7844 APPLETON

0FPXO 2S S13«TO H E:    JULIE APPLEIW




©




                                                                      fin
                                                                       - U-vV * * • J. >4
                                                                               iiCi-;3I‘.4 nXi J‘



/


        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE                                                No; CO-1009-92
        QUEEN'S BENCH D IV IS IO N
        (DIVISIONAL COURT)

                                                                R o y a l C o u r t s o f Justice
                                                                Strand
                                                                London WC2

                                                                Friday, 5th November 1993

    B
                                                     B e f o r e           :

                                               LORD JUSTICE MCGOWAN

                                                            and

                                                MR JUSTICE TURNER




                REGINA v HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                ~            e F ~ p ^ t¥ ~ str jn g e Q [M ~ o to b r F ~

    D



        MR A JONES QC a n d MR E FITZGERALD ( i n s t r u c t e d by Malcolm J
        G re g g & C o . , C e n tu r y B u i l d i n g s , 31 N o rth S t r e e t ,          L iv e rp o o l
        L2 6RG) a p p e a r e d o n b e h a l f o f t h e A p p l i c a n t s .

        MR T COGHLAN QC a n d MR P PRBECE ( i n s t r u c t e d b y Mark W e b s t e r .
        C i t y S o l i c i t o r a n d H ead o f A d m i n i s t r a t i o n , S h e f f i e l d C i t y
        C o u n c i l , Tow n H a l l , S h e f f i e l d , S I 2HH) a p p e a r e d o n b e h a l f o f
        th e R e s p o n d e n t.

        MR M K A L L IP E T IS QC ( i n s t r u c t e d b y D ib b L u p t o n B ro o m h e a d ,
        F o u n t a i n P r e c i n c t , B alm G r e e n , S h e f f i e l d S I 1RZ) a p p e a r e d o n
        b e h a l f o f t h e South Y o r k s h i r e A m b u la n c e S e r v i c e .


                   (Computer A id e d T r a n s c r i p t o f t h e S t e n o g r a p h N o t e s o f
                J o h n L a r k i n g , C h a n c e r y H o u s e , C h a n c e r y L a n e , L o n d o n WC2
                                          T e le p h o n e N o: 071 404 7464
                              O f f i c i a l S h o rth a n d W r ite r s to th e C o u rt)


                                                 J U D G M B N T
                                          (As a p p r o v e d by t h e C o u r t )


                                                1
     I deal next with Kevin Williams.   In his case the

pathologist was Dr Slater and I take up his evidence on page
248B of the applicant’s bundle:


                        21
              ■My examination of Kevin showed that the main
              finding was that of asphyxia. This opinion was
              formed through the extensive blueness on the face
             and upper part of the chest. In addition there
             were small haemorrhages in both the face and
              internal organs, including the brain, heart and
              lungs.         This had also resulted in four
              fractures to the small bones in the actual voice
             b o x ...... the compression of the neck or chest has
             occurred here and unconsciousness occurs very
R            rapidly, certainly within a few seconds, and there
B            is one reported case of it occurring apparently
              instantaneously. Following unconsciousness then
             there is no discomfort and no pain. Death then
             occurs after approximately three to five
             minutes.*


    At G:

             Q. Now the reason why I asked you was this, and I
             want to put this to you because I would like to
             get your view on it, one Officer will be dealing
             with the value of this evidence in a moment but
             she [a Woman Special Constable called Debra
             Martin] says that at a point when this lad was in
D            the gymnasium, in other words he had already been
             moved across the pitch, she says she helped him
             into the gym from the pitch, presumably she
             carried him. He had stopped breathing. She gave
             him the kiss of life, did some heart massage, he
             opened his eyes, said a word and died. Now in the
             light of your pathological findings, is that in
             fact a possibility, do you think?*


    In answer the doctor made several comments, among them

    these:

             *     this was certainly the most severe case of
             traumatic asphyxia that I actually dealt with.



             This case was highly unusual in that in fact it
             had four fractures to the larynx. It was by far
             the most severe case of voice box fractures. Not
             only does this indicate the severity of the
             traumatic asphyxia at the time but it also in fact
             makes it virtually impossible for the person to
             have spoken by virtue of the fact that there were
             fractures to the voice box, sir. So all I can
             say, sir, that scientifically and medically I find

                           22
H              V
          that inconceivable that the person could have
          spoken.■


Then he referred to cortical coning and said:

          ■The coning indicates the severity of the asphyxia
          and again that would have resulted in irreversible
          brain damage which again would totally prohibit
          any form of communication.

          Q. I have thought about this comment as well, of
          course, and there are several explanations (1)
          that it didn't occur and that the observer is
          mistaken but another possibility that has occurred
          to me and I want to put it to you and please
          disagree if it is not either right or you don’t
          accept it; it is possible, is it not, that if a
          person having died is moved air or stomach
          contents might be expelled and might make a sound
          as it escapes, so to speak. Is that a
          possibility?

          A. It is am interesting comment, sir, because it
          is a possibility that I considered also myself and
          that is certainly an explanation for the noise
          which could have been made which may have mimicked
          the word 'mum' but it would not explain the
          opening of the eyes, sir."

He added to the Coroner:

          "But it would explain the noise.*

Then Mr Fraser said:

          "No questions, sir, but thank you very much,
          Dr Slater, for that sympathetic and detailed
          explanation.*

     Then a Police Sergeant Killoch was called by the

Coroner to give the summary in this case.     Among other

things he said this:

          "Derek William Bruder, an off-duty Police
          Constable from the Merseyside Police who was a
          spectator at the match, recalls seeing a person
          lying on the pitch near the Spion Kop/North Stand
          of the ground. The person was having
          convulsions. Mr Bruder went on the pitch and gave
          mouth to mouth resuscitation aided by a St John's
          Ambulanceman who carried out cardiac massage.
          Mr Bruder recalls that a friend of the casualty
          was with him on the pitch.  Resuscitation was
          continued and they were joined by a St John's
          Ambulancewoman who took over from Mr Bruder.
          After a short time the St John's Ambulancemen said
          that the casualty was dead. Mr Bruder then left
          the scene.

          Neither of the St John's Ambulance personnel or
          the friend of the casualty had been identified.
          The person Mr Bruder tried to resuscitate is now
          known to be Kevin.

          Special Constable Debra Martin went on the pitch
          to assist and she helped to carry several deceased
          persons and many injured persons to the
          gymnasium. She assisted to carry one youth who
          she now knows to be Kevin into the gymnasium where
          she remained with him.

          At 16.06 hours Dr Curpen examined Kevin in the
          gymnasium which had been established as a
          temporary mortuary. Dr Curpen certified life
          extinct.•


At page 252D, the Coroner said:

          ■We have already mentioned the evidence of
          Special Constable Martin who said about the lad
          speaking. In no way do I want to run poor Special
          Constable Martin down because she had a very hard
          day but it is right she was obviously from her
          statement very distressed.

          A. I also wouldn't want to criticise WPC Martin
          in any way but I have interviewed her twice, sir,
          and she was particularly upset as indeed many
          people were but it affected her particularly badly
          the events of the day."


    At page 253, Dr Slater was recalled by the Coroner and

asked about Mr Bruder's account of the man lying on the

floor having convulsions.   He said:

         "Unfortunately when people have not got enough
         oxygen in the brain, as I said in my earlier
         evidence, which is really what the word 'asphyxia'
         means, individuals can in fact have fits."
Later he said:

             ■For somebody to have convulsions, this would
             imply that the amount of asphyxia .is such that
             there must be virtually irreversible brain damage
             present and again this would fully support the
             concept that the evidence of opening eyes and
             speaking is not really conceivable, sir.

             THE CORONER:   Does that help, Mr Fraser?

             MR FRASBR: I am sure it does, Dr Slater. It is
             difficult to find the phrase to sum the situation
             up. Kevin at that stage was beyond help. He was
             as good as dead?

             A.   Yes, that is right, absolutely.

             Q.   And would feel nothing and know nothing?

             A.   Absolutely.   He would know nothing."

     A stage came, on 4th May 1990, when the Coroner

recalled Sergeant Killoch and the sergeant dealt with

Mr Bruder's account of the person having convulsions, going

on to say:

             ■I then took his pulse in his neck.    I could feel
             a slight pulse.*


     Then Inspector Sawers was called to give am account,

beginning at page 264, about what contact he had since had

with Mr Bruder:

             ■He goes on to say as a result of feeling
             depressed about the incident he applied of his own
             volition for further first-aid training within
             Merseyside Police."


At page 265B:

             "He has given very careful consideration, sir, to
             the expression he used of having convulsions and
             in the light of his further training and what he
             now knows and thinks about the incident was that
             •convulsions' was not the word that was
             applicable to these circumstances. He refers
               specifically to having seen epileptic fits and
               says that what he originally described as a
               convulsion was not anything like an epileptic
               fit. He goes on to.say later, sir, that if there
               was a part of the body that he saw move it was his
               head and that the word that he best thinks
               describes this movement is that of a twitch."

    At D:

               "On reflection, sir, he feels he would be much
®              more skilful if he were required to perform this
               action again and he cannot discount the
               possibility that he did not feel immediately in
               the right place for the carotid artery."

    At G:
               •      he cannot be categoric it was a pulse.   He
               feels he may well be mistaken in that matter,
               sir."

    At 266B:

               ■In his original statement he referred to vomiting
               and thinking that Kevin had been sick. He has
D              given this matter some further thought and he is
               absolutely satisfied that Kevin was not sick. He
               did not see Kevin vomiting and he did not see
               vomit on the ground or on his clothing."


    At C:

               ■     he does have a clear impression in his mind,
               sir, of a fluid of some sort in the mouth, but he
               cannot discount that that could be spittle or
               phlegm of some sort.■


    Then at page 267E:

               ■It was at this point, sir, that after
               approximately two minutes of the involvement of
               the woman St John's Ambulance Officer that the
               male St John's Ambulance Officer stood up and said
               •He's gone'. He referred to the expression being
               completely grey and would seek to reaffirm that
               choice of words as his description of Kevin at
               that particular moment in time. He says, sir,
               and I quote:

               'There is absolutely no doubt in my mind, both now
               and with the benefit of further training, that

                             26
H
             then at the moment the youth I had tried to save
             was dead, certainly dead, and beyond any further
             help. I and St John's Ambulance personnel would
             not have stopped if there had been any glioxner of
             hope at all. There was none.'"

        Then Mr Praser was given the opportunity of asking

questions but said he had none, but he added this, that

Mr and Mrs Williams "are appreciative both of the efforts

the officer has made and of his visit and they have no

questions.     They have decided not to come today, sir."

        Dr Slater was again recalled and stuck to his original

position.     I do not think it would assist to go through his

evidence.

        The Coroner was not content to leave it there.   He

called Dr Gumpert, a consulting clinical neuro physiologist

and consulting neurologist.     He spoke of the brain stem and

said:

             ■Once this part of the brain is dead, and that
             death occurs, as you heard from Dr Slater, in
             between four and six minutes after deprivation of
             oxygen, then the person is going to die."


At page 279D he said:

             "It seems clear to me, sir, in this case that poor
             Kevin was probably dead before he got out of the
             area in which he was standing. I would agree with
             Dr Slater. I would think consciousness was lost
             probably within ten seconds."

At F:

             ■     after people are brain stem dead, they can
             twitch."


Page 276A:

             ■     feeling the carotid pulse is quite difficult
             in somebody who has got a low blood pressure, as
             would have been here.

     At page 313 In the bundle is to be found a statement by

Debra Martin made on 17th March 1990.     I should read a few

extracts from this.     She said, on the first page:

             ■My recollection of the events of that day are
             vague and confused. As a result of the disaster I
             was prescribed medication by my Doctor to assist
             me to sleep.  I was really upset by the whole
             incident and was on medication for about a week.
             The result being that I was in state of what I can
             only describe as a state of semi-consciousness.  I
             felt like a 'Zombie.'"


She went on say that she can recall carrying a youth who she

now knows to be Kevin Williams from the pitch to the

gymnasium.     At the top of page 315:

             ■I didn't want   to believe the boy wasdead. I
             didn't know if he was dead or not butI decided
             that I had got to attempt to revive him. I
             started to give him mouth-to-mouth but someone, I
             don't know who, touched me on the shoulder and
             told me he was   dead. By this time my head had
             gone, I wasn't aware of what I was doing or what
             was really happening.



                  under the circumstances I cannot be positive
             that the details are accurate. I have been quite
             badly affected by the whole incident and I am
             trying to erase it frcwi my memory. ■

     It is to be noted that when a specific piece of

evidence, or pieces of evidence, arose which might suggest

that one of the deceased might have been alive after

3.15 pm, the Coroner showed flexibility by going into it.

     We were told that some while after, Mrs Williams, the

deceased's mother, made contact with Police Constable Bruder

and Woman Police Constable Martin, and they alleged that
they had been pressurised into changing their stories and

that they now stuck by their original versions.          Where does

the truth lie?     I see no fault in the Coroner in this

matter.     He made full inquiry.    He was not asked by the

applicant's representative to do more.       There was

overwhelming medical evidence that the deceased was in fact

dead by 3.15 pm.     In my judgment it would not be right to

quash the verdicts and order a new inquest on the strength

of these allegations made against the investigating police

officers.

     Before leaving this deceased, however, it would be

convenient to deal with a further point made by Mr Jones

which concerns this deceased.       This Court agreed to look de

bene esse at a letter written to the relative's solicitors

by a pathologist. Dr West.     It is dated 29th October 1993.

At their request he had looked at the post mortem reports

and photographs.     This was the first time he had seen them,

some four and a half years after the deaths.      He had not

been present at the post mortems or seen the bodies.         No

request had been made to the Coroner either at the mini or

main inquest to call him.     On the strength of a sight of the

reports and photographs, he doubts Dr Clark's diagnosis.          He

thinks there was substantial damage to the neck, possibly

caused by being crushed under people's feet.      This type of

injury, he says, is amenable to an emergency tracheotomy and

there was a realistic possibility that this young nan was

still alive after 3.15 pm, though unlikely to have spoken
the word 'Mum1 if he had suffered convulsions.

     As I have indicated, no question arises of the Coroner

having refused to hear this witness.      He is in no way at

fault in this respect.     If the Attorney General's fiat had

been given, the discovery of new facts or evidence could,

under section 13(1) of the 1988 Act, have been held to make

it necessary or desirable in the interests of justice that a

new inquest be held.     I have grave doubts, however, whether

there is any power to look at fresh evidence of this nature

and in these circumstances in an application for judicial

review.   But, in any event, I find it of far too tenuous a

nature to justify ordering a new inquest.      I note that in R

v the Coroner for Inner North London, ex parte Linnane 155

JP 343, where the Coroner was held to have been wrong to

have refused the applicant's request to call a particular

doctor, the Divisional Court refused to order a new inquest,

or even to quash the verdict of the one that had occurred,

on the ground that it was   21   months since it had occurred

and the resolution of complex medical issues was not so

important as to overcome the other considerations against

holding a new inquest.

     As to Ian Glover, in the Coroner's documents volume       1

at page 249 is to be found the evidence of Professor Usher,

the pathologist in this case.     He said:

          "I give the cause of death as traumatic asphyxia.
          That means he died because his chest wall was
          compressed so it could not move in and out. When
          that happens you are not able to breathe properly
          and you die really in that way. Mercifully,
          anyone caught in that position once the chest
                                                       MO   7 .iZ .c t0




                        for   SOUTH Yo r k s h i r e
                                               .
                                                            15
    imxmsts   ihto the de a t h s o f t h i

 VICTIMS Of THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
           STADIUM DISASTER

        ON TUI 15111 APRIL, 1989




                 Before

S.L. POPPER. LL.B, B.MED.Scl, BN, BS, HRCGP
        (Iter Majesty ’s Coroner!




                   At

           The Town Hall,
             Sheffield.

                  On
         7th December, 1990




      TRANSCRIPT OF PROCKKnTWrtg




fro* the Notes of J.L. Marphaa, Ltd.
     Official Shorthand Writers,
 55, Queen Street, sbeffield si 2DX
                       INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                  Eais
     R.H. SALT Sworn

          By The Coroner                           1
          Cross-Exaained by   Mr. Payne           13
          Cross-Exaained by   Mr. Manning         1.4
          Cross-Exaained by   Mr. Kin*            1?

     S, FRY Sworn
          By The Coroner                          18
          Cross-Exaained by Mr. Payne             32
          Cross-Exaained by Mr. Manning           34
          Cross-Exaained by Mr. King              37
          Cross-Exaained by Mr. Catchpole         44
          Cross-Exaained by Mrs. McBrien          45
          Further by The Coroner                  50
          Further Cross-Exasined by Mr. King      S3
          Further Cross-Exasined by Mr. Manning   55

STATEMENT BY MISS SINCLAIR                        S7
VIDEO SHOWN TO JURY                               58
In a sense that is t h e risk you are taking but I have n o
objection at all to you consulting with my O f f i c e r s * keeping
a watch on t h e lists, assessing the w i t n e s s e s as to whether
or n o t you should be present. We w i l l do whatever we can
by supplying the same information as we have supplied up to
now to you or to your instructing solicitors. I hope that
helps.

      HISS SINCLAIR! Sir, I am very grateful andI w o u l d
say again that it is not in the least our wish to delay the
Court by an adjournment and we are planning various means
of keeping an eye on what is going on. Thank y o u .

      THE CORONER: Is there anything you want to say in
the absence of the jury so that you don't have to wait until
we have finished with the video. If there were I would send
them out and deal with it now?

      MR. MANNING: Witnesses for Monday* sir?

      MR. JONES: It is intended P.C. Grunhillf Sergeant Smith;
subject to his fitness to return to duty Inspector Hand-Davisj
Sergeant Thomas and Police Constable Wilson is also warned
as well sir.

      THE CORONER: These are all* I think* mounted Officers
of one sort or another.

                         (Short adjournment)


      THE CORONER: Right, we are going to watch the
compilation tape, as it is known. You will remember it
is split in two. We will watch to the end of the first
section.

              (Compilation video sh o w n t o the jury)
      T IE CORONER:  Can you j u s t pause there for a Minute?
The Jury have asked whether a particular gate i s opened.
They, have given me a little drawing. In fact it is the gap
in a wall within the concourse area. I t i s not in this
picture. That was n o t actually a gate. There was a gate
there but it was a gap in the wall so you could get
through.

               (CoiiPi.la.tlo.il. aidctt-HM-gegiMMd)
                                              TKAr*4%cJijL>r
                                               &rz> H+>il.Ao




HSR MAJESTY *S CORONgR FOR SOOTH VORg«3JTPf
              (WIST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THI DEATHS OF THE

 VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BH, BS, MHOGP

        (Her Majesty*» Coronerl




                  At

            The Town Hall.
              Sheffield.

                  On

         14th December, 1990




       TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDING^




Fro« the Notes of J.L. Harphaa, Ltd.,
     Official Shorthand Hrlters,
 55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                                     Emms.
     L. PROCTOR Sworn

            By The Coroner                                                I
            Cross-Exaained by Mr. Hale                                 9
            Cross-Exaained by Mr. Payne                               10
            C r o s s - I x a * i n e d by Mr. Coughlin              14
            Cross-Exaained by Mr. King                               14
            C r o s s - E x a a i n e d by Mr. Catchpole             18
            Cross-Exaained by Mrs. McBrien                           22
            Further by The Coroner                                   27
            Further Cross-Exaained by Mr. Kale                       29
            F u r t h e r C r o s s - E x a m i n e d b y Mr. King   30
            Further Cross-Exaained by Mr. Payne                      30

     D.M.   SCHOLEY Sworn

            By The C o r o n e r                                     32
            C r o s s - E x a a i n e d by M r . Payne               38
            Cross-Exaained by Mr. King                               39
            C r o s s - E x a a i n e d by Mrs. McBrien              40

     A. J. TAYLOR Sworn

            By The Coroner                                           42
            CroBS-Examined         by M r . P a y n e                49
            Cross-Exaained         by Mr. King                       SO
            Cross-Exaained         by Miss Addleaann                 SI
            Further by The         Coroner                           52
VIDEO FILM SHOWN TO JURY                                             53




                                                                      «i
                                                                              54




                                              A. J ,    TAYLOR


     Is there anything t h a t y o u want to say to me
without the Jury b e i n g present, because we could do
this now to s a v e you t i n e ?

     MR. PAYNE: I do not mind if the Jury are here.   I
would like to just mention the question of exhibits.
You did say earlier that the deadline for the
introduction of further photographs or exhibits would
be at the adjournment of the Court next Wednesday.

      THE CORONER: I think you misunderstood me, Mr.
Payne. What I meant was the deadline - and even then
I put a caveat in - was for nominations for further
witnesses whom you wished roe to consider, not
exhibits, because exhibits we might well want to
introduce as we go along. So there is no deadline on
that because we do not know what we might need. What
I was trying to do was get you to compile, if you have
any additional names, those names so that I can
consider them. I think I did say - I intended to say
- that even if we have past the deadline, if something
crops up and there is a witness who is considered by
any of you as really vital, then I will look at that,
but I do not want to get dozens of then in January
time.

     HR. PAYNE:          Thank you very much.

         THE CORONER: We will go and have coffee then and
we will be back in quarter-of-an-hour. I think that
s e e m s to be quite a good time. I do not think we can
do it in much less time really.

  (After a short adjournment the Jury were shown
              the“"compil¥t ion "Vrdeo)

  ( The   I n q u e s t s w ere a d j o u r n e d u n t i l 1 0 .3 0 a .m .
                  M onday, l ? t h D ecem ber 1 9 9 0 )
 sr frmrnmy lebmAM
                  (f)




                                             r _ 5 -7 9
1.   I ANTHONY JAMES EDWARDS will sayf                 I was born on



2.   I work as an ambulance man on day work.                  I joined SYMAS in

     September 1988.      I started part tine and was promoted to day

     work   on    6th March     1989.       I had     previously been in the

     ambulance     service     in    1973   in Liverpool      arid had received

     qualified status.         I had done further training which lead to

     me   being    admit ted   as     a   Fellow of    the Ambulance Service

     Institute.         This    is    a   qualification       above   the normal

     standard but it is not a paramedics course although it is an

     introduction to it.            I left the service in 1982 and went to

     Sheffield Polytechnic to do social               studies.        I worked in

     adult education until I rejoined the service.



3.   On Thursday and Friday I worked a shift of 0800 hours to

     1630 hours.



4.   On Saturday I was to work from 0900 hours to 1730 hours.                  I

     was with                       who is a qualified ambulance man and

     was acting as driver.



5.   The first I remember about the Hillsborough incident is when

     we were taking a patient to the Northern General Hospital.

     We heard control telling a crew from Rotherham to go to the

     gym at Hillsborough where they would be met by a station

     officer.      I thought that it would be some form of a fight

     going on.      Our radio was on the day frequency which I think



                                                          *
is channel           We stayed on the channel all the way through

the   day.      We    did         change       to    IRC   a*— ‘ry   nticp O



It was about 1510 to 1515 hours when we were on our way to

the Northern General         Hospital.          Wm    arrived at Northern

General about 5 ainutes later.             There were various messages

coming over the radio but I was concentrating on the patient

in the ambulance.       We took the patient into the hospital and

it was sometime before 1530 hours when we got back to the

ambulance and started to clean up.              We then gave the call to

control that we were clear.             I made the call on channel

Control then told us to go to Hillsborough gym entrance
where we would be net by an ambulance officer.                   We did not

know which side the gym entrance was on and I was going to

use the radio to try and find out where the entrance was.

We went down to the traffic island on Berries Road which is
about   one and      a half miles       away.        Control    then gave   a

message to all mobiles.           They repeated that it was for all

mobiles   and   said that        they   were    to    proceed   to the gym

entrance at Hillsborough as they had notification of some

fatalities.     I think this was around 1530 hours.              We arrived

at the ground at about 1532 hours.                  There were no problems

In approaching the ground until we reached the junction of

Berries Road,        South and    Penistone     Road.      There were two

ambulances in front of us and a police officer was directing

us to park behind them.            A short time later, probably no

more than a minute we were moved into the entrance while the
next ambulance was sent to the further gate.                        X saw

       standing outside the first entrance and pointing for us

to go into it.         The police officer shouted to us that if we

went to the second entrance then we would be able to get out

via the first entrance.                   said no and that he wanted us

to go into the first entrance.                We did so.         We were net by

Mr.Hopkins       the     Assistant           Chief       Aabulance       Officer.

Mr.Higgins was also there.                Higgins told us to drive up

behind an ambulance which was already parked and almost at

the same time Hopkins told us to go on to the field.                             At

this    stage    there      were      rows    of    police       with    vans   and

stretchers coming out of the entrance chi to the pitch.                          It

was clear that there were dead bodies on at least two of the

stretchers.      I would say the time was about 1535 hours.



We were stopped by a police officer at the entrance to the

corridor to the pitch.             The officer at the front of the

ambulance said that we could not get through.                           Spectators

were shouting at us about a body on a stretcher.                        We stopped

and Hopkins came up to the ambulance and opened the door.                         I

said   that   the police officer             said    that we could not go

through and he         replied     that      he    wanted   us    on    the pitch

immediately.         He said that there were casualties at the far

end of the ground and he needed us on the pitch and that we

were not to stop for anyone until we got to the far end of

the ground.          He told us       to put our two tones on and go

through.        We    did   as   we    were       told    and    went   past    the
             policemen.    It was slow progress getting on to the pitch but
             we certainly did not get stuck.           On the pitch lie saw five to

             si* boards being used as stretchers                with bodies       thereon

             being carried by fans.        We drove past then while they were

             screaming at    us   to     stop.       The   St.John's     ambulance      was

             leaving the pitch as we case             through the entrance.              it

             waited until we were out of the way before going off the

             pitch.    We were the only ambulance on the plteti by this

             stage.    We drove up to the 18 yard box in front of the west

             stand.    There were people everywhere.           My driver was looking

             for an officer but we could not find one anywhere.                       There

             were fans bashing on the ambulance wanting us to stop and

             help their friends.       We were approached by a woman and she

             shouted    through    the     window      and    said     that     she    had

             resuscitated a casualty.        I got out of the vehicle with a

             bag, mask and airways, and went to a body which was lying in

             front of the goal in the 18 yard area.              Someone was giving

             mouth to mouth resuscitation.           I noticed the colour of the

             patient and was doubtful whether the patient had in fact

             been revived.   All the time there were people shouting at me

             for oxygen and all I could remember shouting was "one at a

             time."     I knelt   down    over   a    male    casualty    and    someone

             deliberately kicked me In the back and said "what about my

Or    ojo»i?f daughter."   I continued to look after the boy on the floor.

Vui          j decided that we needed to move him.               I told the people

             around me to pick him up and I shouted to someone to bring                  a
             girl that I had also briefly seen.              I would say It was now




                                                                                 #•
about 1540 hours.         I looked for *y driver and he had driven

over to the other side of the goal towards the c o m e r flag.

We carried the bodies over to the ambulance and- Z was being

followed by people carrying other bodies.                 When I got to the

ambulance I saw that someone had already opened the back

doors.      I asked a police officer to stay with wm to look

after me after I was kicked.               He put the young boy on the

left hand side         and the girl        on the right hand side and

someone else put another body on the floor down the middle.

Then someone tried to get another person into the ambulance.

I shouted to the policeman to take the person off and he did

so.



When   I turned round again              the ambulance was packed with

people and so I asked the police to clear the ambulance.

The doors were closed but I could hear people kicking the

back doors and wanting attention.                  In the ambulance there

were     now   three     bodies,     a    nurse,    two   policemen,      two

spectators,     my driver and me.            One of the spectators was

trying    to    revive    the   young      boy.     The   nurse    was   from

Nottingham.     She had been a spectator who had volunteered to

help during the chaos on the pitch.               She was using a bag and

mask correctly.        The other spectator was holding the head of

the girl.      I told|               ~^to get going.              put on the

lights and horns and drove off the pitch.                  I have no idea

what time it was by now.           I assume that the man on the floor

was dead.      I tended to the girl and showed how to do mouth
      to mouth    resuscitation while     the   spectator       did cardiac

      compressions.    I was very upset by this stage.             I cannot

      remember anything about getting out of the ground and I do

      not know what    time   It was.     I remember   nothing of the
      journey up to the Northern General Hospital.



9.    We took the three bodies into casualty and X assisted the

      doctor for a few minutes.     We then loaded trolleys back on

      to the ambulance.    Z asked the spectator nurse to c a m back
      with us and she agreed.     I cannot remember any instructions

      as to what we were to do next.       We drove back down to the

      ground and I could hear conversations on the radio to do

      with Hillsborough but I was not really taking then In.



10.   There were no problems in the approach to the ground, with

      police cars everywhere.      This   tine we went          through the

      second entrance.    There were a couple of ambulances ahead of

      us.    I also saw a West Yorkshire ambulance.    I said to

               that I would report to an officer to see what wanted

      to be done.     I went to an ambulance officer in the yard

      although I do not know his name.      He said that

      was to stay with his vehicle and that I was to help as much

      as I could.     I went back to the ambulance to tell              to

      stay with his vehicle but discovered that he had gone.             I

      went to the next ambulance and helped styself to a first aid

      box.   Just then a casualty on a trolley was brought up.          He

      appeared asthmatic and semi-conscious.       I put him on the



                                                        % v.'
      second     ambulance.       Then   the   attendant   on   the   second

      ambulance,                   arrived with another casualty.       Once

      they were loaded, •that ambulance set off to the hospital.



11.   I then met another officer whoa I did not know.           He told me

      to help some of the casualties out and pointed towards the

      gym.   I did not realise before this that the casualties were

      in the gya.         1 went into the gym and met Station Officer

      Higgins.        He said that I was to assist priorities.        I then

      helped with trolleys and directed arriving ambulance men to

      priority casualties.       Each time 1 loaded a priority onto a

      trolley I went back to the senior officer in the yard to

      tell him what I had done and asked for more instructions.

      He would then tell me to go looking for priorities again.



12.   At one stage I offered to be a runner because there appeared

      to be no communication system between the officers at the

      ground as the radios were not working.        Within a short space

      of time we did not need trolleys and were onto the walking

      wounded.        By this time I felt exhausted and explained to

      Station Officer Higgins that I had been kicked.           He told me

      that I had to go to casualty.        I did not want to.     He said

      that there was a vehicle going to Hallamshire Hospital and

      said that I should go with it.



13.   I was at the Hallamshire for about 20 minutes.

      then arrived with some doctors who were needed at casualty.




                 tr
      it was quite by accident that we net up at the Hallamshire.



14.   The control officer on the radio told us to have a drink at

      the Hallamshire.           We did so and we took two transfers to

      King Edward Hospital.             We finished at Ring Edwards at about

      1900 and then control told us that we were finished.                    We

      went back to the station, cleaned the ambulance and went off

      shift.



15.   I was not aware that there was any Hillsborough plan or of

      the role that the gym was the play in it.            I did not realise

      that     the   gym   was    the    casualty   clearing   centre   or   the

      temporary mortuary until I was told by one of the officers.

      I was aware of the major incident plan prior to this.



Dated the             t          day of                        1989

ANTHONY JAMES EDUARDS
                                                        Sr                £i&
                                                        Pr^ACi £W/8_                 i.\




                                                                                                                                       ^    a    f W       f r


                                                                                                                                                                              WG412
                                                                                                                                                                                • •71
     •teat o u t e « m                                                                W»it Midlands PoQci
   WITNcn M T AVULUU
                -L                                                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
 ' I 15 22 29;    1 I 15 22 2*                                IC J. Act 1967. s.9; M.C. Act 1980. s.102. M.C. K M * 1981. f.70l
 2 9 16 33 xj     2 I 16 23 301
 3 10 17 24 3
 « 11 II 25 .
 5 12 If 26
                  3 10 17.24 31 f
                  4 11 1« 25
                  5 12 1* 26
                                  Name                       a                                     Slrr>^s>.                          l ^ o S
 e 13 20 27       6 13 20 27      Age                             (yrs)                x) ate of Birth
 7 14 21 21       7 14 21 21
                                  Occupation......................................... •
1 • 15 22 2* 1 I 15 22 2)1 Home or business address
2 I II 23 X 2 I II 23 xl and telephone number
3 10 17 24 31 3 10 17 24 31|
4 ii iin      4 11 II 2S
* 12 1* 26    I 12 II 26
I 13 20 27    I 13 X 27                                                                                                     .......................
y14 ji m      7 14 21 M

1 I 15 22 29     1 I 15 22 2* This statement, consisting of     J_      p ^ U ) e a c h « wgnedbyfrw. i,mietotN»best of rwknowtarfo.
2 I 16 23 X      2 I 16 23 XI and belief and I make it knowing that, if h is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to oroseeutionlf!
3 10 17 24 31    3 10 17 24 31 have wilfuRy stated in it anything which I know to be fetee or do n o tW i< £
4 11 II 28       4 11 II 25
5 121126         5 12II2<
I 13 20 27       I 13 X 27       Dated the              X %(JL                day of
> 14 21 21       7 14 21 21                                                                                                            19              *


         VMMTB
TO M AVM 0S                      Sign#                                                                         Signature witnessed by . . 0 \ :

                                                                                                               Officer's Name . . .

                                                                                                               Rank                             No.
                                   ......                                 * c . ... ,4i<?.               .o v a ....
                                               < 0 >...                              n A , .. A w                 0. .tt.Vl .j..V ..                           .< = U U s
                                                                      . . .   K yy^        —       \
                                                                                                   9.<^v L ^ * - - .Vv\ .


                                   ............... ..    .... .   f                        t                   . • . ,(?V . .
                                  V                                                 .V.w-.vjr                                         .\
                                  Y r ^ k & . ...&*. ..                                            ....*%.. \ ..                            .. .Vs^vA.^
                                  tfOyyv..... .ov?^y  .
                                              .o\r£?P..                        . . , .iryc^A'.
                                                                                      irv<v^A'. ..U
                                                                                                  .0 .C^uv*i^«A-V                                                   ^



                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                 \           fci.^Zcet ../rvJQk--*:.. <■<Ac.4-r.-fr*>'.**- ..'!*??.
                                 vA-C<5t*..                                                                     ^                                                       C
                                                                                .              .    .      .                        ;;;;;;;;;;
                                                                                                   •V .-                        . V s 7.                   .. ^5*r. .Jijs
                                                                                                   ..   W7v5»... <-1^                 4~c * ^                  .W   w    jJr^
  *V

                              [Signed
                                Jigned                                              [............... Signature witnessed by                                             ^ Ik /j .
                               ’(Witsh *{>f*caM(.
                                                                                                                                    (AmandMM7)
                                              West Midlands Pollca
                                     STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                           (C.J Act 1967, 1.9; M.C. Act 1980. f.102; M C Ru<«s 1981, r.70l


 Continuation of statement o f               ^ r'T\5^-1xrvyrv                          0 £Vr»*             .

 O T .       Vyvf). . .                   $ r . . . v ...... Q                ..............................
             \            W JJ                            ^ .£-. . ..TVr6i3^.'^T ,..^jnTO-r^r .
                                              c*u-r?<v>. ..*Vv?
 a^ X     .... \ ....                     ..?.u k *— -**..                                        .sfeJr...A...S u ..» y tk
           . . . ^To...                 ..                                                                                ....       ........
 .CvVe>r***A^C’           .W'i                             vflNr-. ■    ■ ■   :V*...^SbKoJk. ...                                  . ...
 . yjr-.v^. *r*3r.*...............................................

             V ?V               ....r-pr^T. .                  ....                                            ..,\ ...                         *.
                      ... .w.                   .... Ct^v-'S^r-. ..                          •• rVvV- ••             ' ••— •
                                 . . j . .& > * h ^ . . . .           . . . \ . . .             . . . V.                           .Sifc-^TV*
 .tX^X           .''V...Sfe tV ....CAA^-. ..\                     .

 Asr. .C^>.^. ....A^At. ..<7^ ...SSb,»r. ..
 ................\ rv ____^'r*y?V • • • JUtr&rr&- • •                         ___a W ^ v A V . . . e£>... 2t*xc^-?.
                               ..y ..^ r &     v * ^r& .    ...
 . W V TT^r. r      \ . .. .                      u k ^ v> 7C . . . f t ? . . . rW 'W V vk flsV . . Jb*C en<<V 2. . . V .1____              0
 .   >w*v6.. . ?WkA:... r^3.. V.             .o r r ^ i         \ __________                         4 y i$ k & r l\   _c*..
                    .. tifc: kvcs .) .oJi>. .. C\s ..                                 .. 0                                       .*.....




Sign*                                                           Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                          TT
                                            & i*Jxui&£r
                                       NiLLiAH^ J4-g'<b



                                                          $   5S7
   HER M A J E S T Y ’ S COP.OffER FOR SOUTH YQRKSHrftF
                        ( WEST D I S T R I C T )




         INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                  STADIUM DISASTER

              ON THE 15TH APRIL% 1989



            INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

               KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS




                        Before

DR. S.L. POPPER. LL.B, B.MED.Sci. BM, BS, MRCGP

              (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                          At

            The Medico-Legal Centre.
                 Watery Street,
                   Sheffield.

                          On

                    2nd May 1990



            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers.
      55. Ocfeen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                          1007
                                 INDEX
                                   \

DR.' DAVID NEIL SLATER - Called

  By THE CORONER   .....................................


DETECTIVE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCH        Called

  Ey THE CORONER   .................................


DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Recalled

 By THE CORONER .....................................
 Cross-exami ned by MR. F R A S ER ..............


DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

 By THE C O R O i i E R ........................... .
 Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB ........................
 Cross-Examined by HP. CATCHPOLE...............




                            --oo--oo--




                                                           1008
2nd Mav 1990

           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS    *

       HR. FRASER:   Sir, you will now hear evidence relating
  to Kevin Daniel Williams.  Kevin's mum and d ad are in Court
  with the social worker from Merseyside who has been
  assisting them.  The solicitors for Kevin's mu» and dad are
  members of my Croup and I therefore appear in the usual
  guise as their agent to the Steering Committee.

        THE CORONER:    Good morging, Hr. and Mrs. Williams.
  ‘Before we begin I am going to expla in to you the general
   format of the Inquest because you weren't here a fortnight
   ago, were you, and even if you wer e you might have
   forgotten.  We will start in a moment or two by me reading
   to you what was said, on 18th April 1989 which is when I
   opened the Inquest i~t this very room.   Then if there are any
   amendments which need to be made, if we have got some of the
   facts wrong, we will sort that out.    I will then tell you
   what the blood alcohol levels were, as measured by
   Dr. Forrest, and then we will turn to Dr. Slater, who is .the
   Pathologist sitting up there behind you.    He will give us
   the pathological evidence.   I think I can safely say that
   if, after this Inquest over, you feel you would like to talk
   to Dr. Slater privately he is quite happy to do that if it
   would be-of any help to you.   When Dr. Slater has finished
   the West Midlands Police Officers have prepared a summary
   for me and he will deal with that and tell me about it.

       Then we will hear from Inspector Layton, another West
  Midlands Police Officer, who will deal with the visual
  evidence.  He will first of all tell me all about the plans
  and so on and that is sometimes a bit confusing because
  there are a lot of references given- but when he has finished
  talking about it he comes over and shows us on these big
  plans so that all of us, that is me, you, the Jury and
  everybody else can follow it.  Then when that is done we
  conclude and take no further evidence at thi^ stage.   Is
  that reasonably clear?  I like to tell you so that you know
  what to expect.  Otherwise you don't know what is coming.

       This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened on
  1 8 th
       April 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin,
  Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

           "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
           identified, to PC 1269 Glave of the South Yorkshire
           Police as that of Kevin Daniel' Williams by James
           Stephen Williams, his father.   He was 15 years of age
           having been born on 27th May 1973 at Southport.. He
           lived at |                             Merseyside.  He
           was a schoolboy by occupation.   He died at Hillsborough
           Football Ground following an incident there on


                *V                |



                                                             1009
                                                 DR.   DAVID WE I L SLATER



     Saturday, iSth April 1989.   PC Glave caused the body to
     be removed to the Medico Legal Centre and there he
     identified it to Detective Constable Simon Wei gold who
     subsequently identified the same body to Dr. Slater.
     It' is the family wish that the body should be
     cremated.“

      I adjourned the Inquest at that point.     I wrote to you
 shortly afterwards and you, Hr. Williams, very kindly signed
 it on 1st Hay 1989 and I checked with you the details and
 you confirmed the name, that we h a d got it right, date of
 birth 27-5.73, that is right, i s n ’t it, and the place of
.birth which was Southport w a s n ’t it? Me typed it into the
'wrong spot in your case but you spotted that.

     Dr. Forrest did the alcohol levels for many of the
people who died, including Kevin, and the level in respect
of Kevin was 56 milligrammes per 100 mils.

              DR. DAVID NEIL S LATER - Called

                        Bv THE C O R O W E R :

Dr. Slater. - A. Sir, my name is Dr. David Neil Slater.     I
am a Consultant Hiscopathologist a n d a Fellow of the Royal
College of Pathologists.

     THE CORONER:   Before I go on, Hr. Williams, you are
true dad of this lad.

     M R . WILLIAMS:    Stepfather.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much.   You are mum, yes.
Mr. Fraser, so that we get the. record right.  Is this an
informal or a proper adoption because obviously the lad
carries the same surname?

     HR. FRASER:   There is no formal             adoption but it is a
twelve years plus.

     THE CORONER:      Pardon?

     HR. FRASER:   There has been no formal adoption by
Mr. Williams as such but the relationship is more than
twelve years old.

     THE CORONER:   I am very sorry. Dr. Slater, to have
interrupted you.  Just remind us of your name because I have
forgotten where.we were up to?  Just start again? - A. My
name is Dr. David Neil Slater, Consultant Histopathologist,
sir.

Dr. Slater, in the usual way you are satisfied that the
evidence you are going to give me in this case relates to


                                 2

                                                                     1010
                                            E 3 . DAVID WEIL SLATER



    Kevin Daniel Williams who w j s also identified as No. 51,        is
    that right? - A. That is correct, sir.

 Q. Identification was done by Inspector Timms so far as y<ju are
    concerned? - A. That was the initial identification.

 Q. But there is no. doubt   in your min d about the identity? -
 A. Ho.

Q. There were various marks on the body itself to identify ic?
A. Sir, Kevin was clearly labelled both by number and by name.

Q. Or. Slater, would you be ki n d enough then to take me through
  ‘the post mortem? - A. My examin a t i o n of Kevin showed that
   the main finding was that o f asphyxia.       This opinion was
   formed through the extensive blueness on the face and upper
   part of the chest.   In add ition there were small
   haemorrhages in both the face a nd internal organs including
   the brain, heart and lungs.     T h i s asphyxia had clearly
   resulted from compression o f the neck and chest and this
   opinion was supported by the presence of three small
   scratches over the left side of the neck and also over the
   front of the voice box.   Th i s h a d also resulted in four
   fractures to the small bones in the actual voice box.        In
   addition there was evidence of bruising to the lungs, again
   supporting compression of the chest.

         My. autopsy showed that Kevin was a normally developed,
   fit, healthy, young male with no evidence of any natural
   disease which could have contributed towards death and it
   was my opinion that Kevin had a normal life expectancy.    In
   terms of the mode of death the compression of the neck or
   chest has occurred here and unconsciousness occurs very
   rapidly, certainly within a few seconds, and there is one
   reported case of it occurring apparently instantaneously.
   Following unconsciousness then there is no discomfort and no
   pain.   Death then occurs after approximately three to five
   minutes, sir.

Q. So because when we say asphyxia people think .of agony for
   ages and ages.  What you are saying is that the person
   himself would very rapidly not know anything at all about
   what was happening? - A. I s houl d say the word "asphyxia" is
   unfortunate in that scient i f ical ly it partly includes simply
   that there is not enough oxygen in the blood.      It doesn't
   imply actual suffocation and prolonged death.

Q. Did you say there were four fractures to the voice box? -
A. Yes, there are two bones in the voice box, as you know, sir,
   and both these showed two fractures each:

Q. Now the reason why I asked you w a s this, and I want to put
   this to you because I would like to get your view on it, one
   Officer will be dealing with the value of this evidence in a

                              3

                                                            1011
                                                 PR.   DAVID H E I L SLATER



       moment but she s a y s that at a point when this lad was in the
       gymnasium, in o t h e r words he had already been moved across
       >.he pitch, she say s she helped h i m into the gym from the
      pitch, presumably she carried him-             He stopped breathing.
      Sh'S gave him the k i s s o f life, d i d some heart massage, he
      opened his eyes s a i d a word and died.          Now in the light of
      your pathological findings, is that in fact a possibility,
      do you think? - A. Well, sir, I was aware of this statement
      and therefore I h a v e c l e a rly g i v e n this matter considerable
      thought, sir.         I t h i n k there are several comments to make
      but the moderately large number o f autopsies I did from this
      incident, sir, t h i s was certainly the most severe case of
      traumatic asphyxia that I actual ly dealt with.            This was
     >both in terms of b l u e n e s s of the face and also the area of
      pallor of whiteness a r o u n d the mouth.        Sir, it was a very
      very severe form o f asphy xia and I do not think that
      unconsciousness w o u l d have been quicker than three or five
      seconds.    1 have n o r eason to al t e r what I have already said
      on that a s p e c t .

          The other ve r y significant thing about this, and it also
     supports the sever i t y o f this case, is that again of the
     autopsies I did a p p r o x i m a t e l y 15 per cent had some sort of
     fracture to the v o i c e box, the larynx.          This case was highly
     unusual in that in fact it had fou r fractures to the larynx.
     It was by far the most severe cas e of voice box fractures^
     Not only does this indicate the severity of the traumatic
     asphyxia at the t i m e but it also in fact makes it virtually
     impossible for the p e r s o n to have spoken by virtue of the
     fact that there w e r e fractures t o the voice box, sir.          So
     all I can say, sir, that scientifically and medically I find
     that inconceivable that the person could have spoken.

0- The other thing I n o t i c e is that you show in this particular
   case extensive c o n g e s t i o n of the cerebral veins and
   cerebellum and cortical coning and .if a person speaks his
   neurons are working, aren't they? - A. That is right.

Q. That evidence would indicate there had been extensive brain
   damage and he couldn't really communicate.         Would that be
   right?  I don't want to put words in your mouth but I want
   to be sure about t h a t ? - A. The coning indicates the
   severity of the a s p h y x i a and again that would have resulted
   in irreversible b r a i n damage which again would totally
   prohibit any form o f communication.

Q.   I have thought about thi s comment as well, of course, and
     there are several explanations (1) that it didn't occur and
     that the observer is mistaken but another possibility that
     has occurred to me and I want to put it to you and please
     disagree if it is not ei ther right or you don't accept it;
     it is possible, is it not, that if a person having died is
     moved air or s t o mach contents might be expelled and might
     make a sound as it escapes, so to speak?     Is that a


                                     4


                                                                    1012
                                                      P-s. JOHHrTMATW

   possibi 1 icy? - A. It is an intere sting comment, sir, because
   it is a possibility I c o n s i d e r e d also myself and that is
   certainly an e xpla nation to the noise which could have been
   made which may have m i m i c k e d the word ■'mum" but it would not
   explain the opening of the eyes, sir.

Ci. no.   - A- Eut   it would e x p l a i n the noise-

        HR. FRASER:        No questions, sir, but thank you very
   much, Dr. Slater,      for that s y m p a t h e t i c and detailed
   explanation.

        THE CORONER:   Any o t h e r %que s t i o n s for Dr. Slater?
   Thank-you very much, Dr. Slater.         He spent a lot o f time
   thinking about this s e n t e n c e because it was difficult.       I
   didn't think it was poss i b l e fr o m what I knew of the
   evidence but, on the o t h e r hand, we didn't want you to feel
   that we weren't telling you what was in the statements.              He
   felt it was better for you t o h e a r it and have it explained
   rather than for us to kee p it u n d e r wraps, so to speak, and
   you might possibly find out s o m e other time.          I hope I have
   taken the right decision.         I don't know.      The only person
   who knows that is you.     He d i d spend a lot of time thinking
   about it wondering what to d o for the best.

               POLICE SERGEANT JO H N K l L L O C H *> .Called

                             Bv THE C O R O N E R :

Q. Yes. - A. Police Sergeant J o h n Killoch,, sir, of the Hest
   Midlands Police.  I have p r e v i o u s l y taken the Oath.

Q. Could you then please, if y o u would, take me through the
   statement? - A . At 0700 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1939,
   Mr. Janies Stephen Williams saw his son, Kevin Daniel
   Williams, leave the family h o m e with the intention of
   travelling to Sheffield.   He w a s to travel by train with a
   number of friends to watch the Semi Final football match at
   Hillsborough Stadium.   Kevin h a d a ticket for the match.

        Andrew Duncan travelled to Sheffield with Kevin, Thomas
   James Nickson and G r e g o r y Fagen.      They travelled by train,
   arriving at Sheffield at 1040 hours.            Gregory Fagen left the
   others at the station.        The o t h e r three youths caught a bus
   from the station to Hills b o r o u g h Stadium where Thomas
   Nickson left them.

        Andrew Duncan entered t h e stadium with Kevin at about
   1330 hours via the Leppings Lan e turnstiles.   They initially
   stood together in Enclosure 4 but shortly after they moved
   to Enclosure 3.  At about 1445 hours Andrew Duncan saw other
   friends on the terraces, including Anthony Haxwell Grier and
   Stuart Thompson.  Stuart, of course, also lost his life at
   Hillsborough.


                                                                        <»

                                                                   1013
                                         F -J L - JOHN   K Ii m fH




       At about 1455 hours Andrew Duncan w as still with Kevin
3r.d although the croud in the enclosure was tightly packed
he w a s not too concerned at that stage.   A s the match
.started he uis pushed forward down the terrace and did not
3'=ii Kevin again.

     Following the severe crushing in the Uest Stand
terracing Police Constable Michael John Craighill went into
Enclosure 3 and assisted a number of casualties.  Police
Constable Craighill assisted to carry a youth, he now
believes to be Kevin, from the%gate in the perimeter fence
of Enclosure 3 an d on to the pitch. The Officer attempted
resuscitation but without success.

     Derek William Bruder, an off-duty Police Constable from
the Merseyside Police who was a spectator at the match,
recalls seeing a person lying on the pitch near the Spion
Kop/North Stand of the ground.   The person  as having
convulsions-  Mr- Bruder went on to the pitch and gave mouth
to mouth re&uscitation aided by a St. Johns Ambulanceman who
carried out cardiac massage.   Hr. Bruder recalls that a
friend of the casualty was with him on the pitch.
Resuscitation was continued and they were joined b y a St.
Johns Ambulancewoman who took over from Mr. Bruder.   After a
short time the St. Johns Ambulanceman said that the casualty
was dead.  Mr. Bruder then left the scene.

     Neither of the St. Johns Ambulance personnel or the
friend of the casualty have been identified.  The person
Mr- Bruder tried to resuscitate is now known to be Kevin.

     Special Constable Debra Martin went on to the pitch to
assist and she helped to carry several deceased persons and
many injured persons to the gymnasium.  She assisted to
carry one youth who she now knows to be Kevin into the
gymnasium where she remained with him.

     At 1606 hours Dr. Curpen examined Kevin in the
gymnasium which had been established as a temporary
mortuary.  Dr. Curpen certified life extinct.

     Special Constable Martin later escorted Kevin's body to
the Medico Legal Centre and she confirmed the identification
by reference number to DC Wei gold.

     On Sunday, 16th April 1989, Mr. James Stephen Williams
identified the body of his son to Police Constable Scott
Glave.           •

     On Sunday, 16th April, following identification by
Detective Constable tfeigold. Dr- David Slater carried out an
autopsy and submitted a report giving the cause of death.
                                             P S-   JOHN gfLLO.CH



     Evidence is included regarding die analysis of a blood
sample taken from Kevin where the presence of ethanol wa.s
detected.  The witnesses proving continuity of the blood
sample are Detective Constable Green, Detective Sergeant
Turner and Detective Sergeant Fletcher.  Dr. Alexander
Robert Forrest carried out the analysis.

     Found in Kevin's personal effects was a ticket
counterfoil which is consistent with his entry to the
stadium via a turnstile.  That concludes my evidence, sir.
There is visual evidence.
                                   >

I think I am right in saying, am 1 not, that Mr. Bruder (1
■am looking at page 47) identifies Kevin from clothing, is
that right? * A. He has been shown photographs which show
Kevin which Hr. Layton will deal with later and one of the
photographs I believe does show Mr. Bruder actually giving
first aid.

So there is no doubt about      it that Hr. Cruder was involved?
Ko.

His personal recollection isn't as strong? - A. No, but what
he does recollect is corroborated by the visual evidence.

Ue have already mentioned the evidence of Special Constable
Martin who said about the lad speaking.   In no way do I want
to run poor Special Constable Hart in down because she had a
very hard day but it is right she was obviously from her
statements very distressed? - A. I also wouldn't want to
criticise MPC Martin in any way but I have interviewed her
twice, sir, and she was particularly upset as indeed many
psople were but it affected her particularly badly the
events of that day.

     THE CORONER:   Well,    I won't ask you to draw a
conclusion.  Mr. Fraser.

     MR. FRASER:   There is a matter arising out of what the
Officer says which may perhaps leave a doubt in Kevin's
parents' minds.  Can I ask you to ask Dr. Slater to deal
with the point that was made in paragraph six of the
summary, sir?

     THE CORONER:    About the convulsions?

     MR. FRASER:    Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I will do that.      I will ask
Dr- Slater to come down in a moment.

     MR. FRASER:    Thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:    Is there anything else you want to ask?



                                                           1015
                                                DR. DAVID HEIL SLATER
                                                D •I • MICHAEL LAYTON



     MR. FRASER:    No, thank you,        sir.

     THE CORONER:     I will    recall    Dr. Slater.

            DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Recalled

                       Ev THE C O R O N E R :

Dr. Slater, the point that is being made, of course, you
have got to remember that Kr.^Bruder was at theSpion   Kop
end, the bottom end and not the top, and he says, "Isaw
this man lying on the floor having convulsions".   Can you
help us about that? What does that add or not to your
pathological opinion? - A. It is obviously very distressing.
Unfortunately when people have not got enough oxygen in the
brain, as I said in my earlier evidence, which is really
what the word "asphyxia" means, individuals can in fact have
fits.  This is one of the mechanisms that leads towards
death and makes the asphyxia worse.  This does, however,
only occur when the individual is totally unconscious.    It
does not mean there will be any pain or discomfort.   The
person will not know they are fitting and actually I have to
accept that some individuals do have convulsions and it is
one of the mechanisms leading to death in traumatic
asphyxia, sir.

Does it make you feel the other evidence about the lad
breathing and speaking either more or less likely because
obviously this would be much closer in time to Special
Constable Martin's evidence than what had happened on the
terrace? - A. Yes.  For somebody to have convulsions, this
would imply that the amount of asphyxia is such that there
must be virtually irreversible brain damage present and
again this would fully support the concept that the evidence
of opening eyes and speaking is not really conceivable, sir.

     THE CORONER:    Does that help, Hr. Fraser.

              Cross-Examined by HR. F R A S E R :

     MR. FRASER:   I am sure it does. Dr. Slater.  It is
difficult to find the phrase to sum the situation up.  Kevin
at that stage was beyond help.  He was as good as dead? - A.
Yes, that is right, absolutely.

And would feel nothing and know nothing? - A. Absolutely.
He would know nothing.

      DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                      Bv THE C O R O N E R :

Inspector Layton. - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
Inspector in the West Midlands Police.




                                                                 1016
                                                                      P.r. MICHAEL LAYTON



                                       Sir, an Examination has o-aen mad* of video film and
                               photographic <2 vid<2 nc*a and K-svin has fc<2 en identified in
                               im.ioiur.r :;o. 3, also, s i r, b-sing carried ocrosi the pitch
                               •sn<i <3t-xiie ipion Kop end of the ground.
                                                                                         • •

                                    On   photograph referenced I>AC3/1 Kevin is shown
                               apparently unconscious near the perimeter fencing In
                               Enclosure No. 3.  On a BBC video tape, referenced MAP 7,
                               timed at 1523:33:22 this shows him being removed from the
                           B   terraces via Gate No. 3.

                                     PC Craighill has signed a plan of the pitch showing
                               ulcere he first came into contact with Kevin and where in
                               fact he laid him on the ground and that plan, sir, is
                               referenced MJC2.   The Officer has identified himself on
                               video, again a BBC video tape, HAP 7, timed at 1528:43:24
                               carrying a youth who he knows to be Kevin - that is a typing
                               error there-   It says Keith in the sum/nary but it should be
                               Kevin - from Gate 3 imd on to the pitch.    The Officer did
                               not know the identity of the youth and at first in fact
                               believed it to be another of the deceased but that has been
                               clari fied.

                                    Photograph referenced PR5/32 and PR5/33 which are both
                               timed at 1532 show Kevin being carried across the pitch on a
                           D   temporary stretcher by a number of spectators and two Police
                               Officers.  PC Hayes has confirmed his identification on
                               those photographs.  The Officer assisted to carry two people
                               on temporary stretchers, both of whom were deceased, but he
                               couldn't recall any other details and he didn't know the
                               identity of the persons he carried.  He merely, as it were,
                               assisted in carrying.  Ue have mentioned that before.   It is
                               not an unusual feature that people's recollections weren't
                               i£XdC I -

                                    A number of photographs, including a photograph
                               referenced TT1/30 show Kevin being given mouth to mouth
                               resuscitation on the pitch by PC Bruder who confirmed his
                               identification.  Sir, you mentioned this Officer earlier.
                               In fact, it is true to say Hr. and Hrs. Williams have
                               previously seen visual evidence,  ’’’hey have in fact seen
                               some of that visual evidence again today and I think I am
                               right in saying they have confirmed that Kevin is shown on
                               that photograph so, as it were, PC Bruder is confirmed as
                               having given mouth to mouth resuscitation to Kevin.

                               The reason I asked is because it refers to a friend and
                               there doesn't seem to be any other evidence of that? -
                               No, that is right:  It i s true to say the initial
                               identification was from clothing but it has subsequently
                               been confirmed.

                                    Sir-, can I refer you to a plan which has been given the
                               reference J1WJL40 which is a plan of the terraces?


                           H
                                                                                          1017
J. I . H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                   S . I . HICHAEL LAYTOH




Ci ■    i'S-3, C20i. - And M ’
                             JJL41   which is -4 pi ar, of   th.» pitch.
Q.      M.JCC are th - s y the same markings? - A. I would s a y , sir, that
       in fact a 1';hough there are two markings the reference., to KAP
       7 on the previous plan actually would deal with PC Craighill
       on that occasion.

Q. So HUJL41 we make C202.     Let us include that one as well
   MJC2 will be C203. - A. Which is P C Craighill *s plan.
   (movfrd to p la n ) Sir, if w« can deal with the plan MifJL40,
   which is the plan o f the terraces, the first photograph
   DAC3/1 referred to in this summary indicates the position
   here (indicac i ng) and this indicates Enclosure Ho. 3 and it
   is at this point here (indicat ing) that Kevin is shown quite
   close to the p e rim eter fence.

            The second identification, WAP 7, the BBC tape', refers
       to the identification by PC Craighill and the point at which
       we sea Kevin is approximately here ( indicat i ng) and it is
       prior to his removal via Gate 3.

             Then, sir, in respect of PC Craighill's plan, HJC2, it
       is a terrace plan he refers to but he actually indicates a
       position here (i nd icating) in front of Gate 3 and a further
       position which is shown just off the plan but it is hire.
       It i=. just on to the pitch.

3- It is diogr«i!»rricit ic? - A. Yes.

3- Certainly the second location c a n ‘t be taken as giving us
   any sense of distance? - A. No, but factually the next'plan
   will do that.  1 think, sir, just to correct myself I should
   have been pointing there.

5- Yes. - A. Sir, in respect of MWJL41, the video reference on
   BBC tape, MAP 7, indicates a position here (indicating)
   which accords with PC Craighill's recollection.   There is
   also photographic identification o n PR5/32 which is where
   Kevin is being carried across the pitch and the location
   referred to is there < indicat ing).

       Remind me, do we know the time for that one? - A. Yes, 1
       t)iink it is 1532, sir. Yes, 1532.  A further photograph,
       sir, TT1/30, which I think refers to PC Bruder, the location
       of that is approximately this position here (indicating)
       which is towards the Spion Kop end of the pitch.

           THE CORONER:      Mr. Fraser.

            MR. FRASER:     No questions.




                                      10

                                                                           1018
                     Cross-Examined by MR. LI H E :

Q. Usi the photograph with tivs re f^renc-a LAC3/1 a timed
   photograph? - A. Mo, sir.

               Cross-Examined by HR. CATCHPOLE:

Q. Andrew Duncan, did he show any visual evidence or did ha
   give a plan showing where he last saw Kevin, when they
   parted company? - A. 1 don't believe so. Can you just give
   me a moment? The answer is we don't have a plan from
   Hr. Duncan.                  *
  »


         THE CORONER:    If I can help you a little bit on that
  one, what Andrew Ouncan says is, "Ue stood up and were
  .standing about two to two and a quarter yards from the
  perimeter fence around the pitch.     He were waiting for the
  game to start. At about 1445 or so a group of friends were
  standing behind me, Stuart Thompson and Tony Grier*     I was
  standing with Kevin Williams".     Then he describes the people
  coming out and he says, "When the game kicked off I was
  pushed forward down the terrace about two yards. After this
  push I lost Kevin and did not see him again". His final
  remark is that he saw Kevin for the last time on the terrace
  just before the crush started.     "The last time I saw Kevin
  was on the terrace just before the crush started. After
  tiiia. I did not see him again". That is his statement, just
       that we know what it is which one we are talking about,
  dated 17.5.89. Anything els«t, Mr. Fraser, you want to ask?

       OR. FRASER:      No, sir.

       THE CORONER:     Mr. and Mrs. Williams, that is the
 evidence we are going to take. - As I said to you in the
 middle of the hearing we spent quite a lot of time wondering
 what we should do for the best. Obviously we knew Kevin
  lost his life and we were worried about upsetting you in
 Court but I think on balance we have done the right thing
 because you have heard within the limits of what we are
 doing and summarising the evidence what happened and what
 went on. Fortunately, Dr. Slater has been able to be here
 and he has been able to give you his        opinion as to what
 happened in his view and what in his        view is possible andI
 think I am sure     that will help you -not to come to terms
 with the loss of your son but it is very difficult to come
 to terms with that loss at all but just to appreciate in the
 stress situation in which people found themselves
 recol lect ions jtend sometimes to be mistaken and indeed there
 are lots of mistaken recollections not only in relation to
 Kevin but also in relation to many of the other people of
 which we have heard. That is not at all uncommon and occurs
 in normal fatal incidents as well.     It is exceedingly
 difficult when you are suddenly confronted with a situation
 to then recount exactly what happened.


                                11



                                                             1019
                                I realise Kevin was a young boy, just fifteen, which i-
                         vex’*/ Vtfiy young of course <nd J would like you to know how
                         vety iOri y w« arc that he should have lost hi*, life at such
                         in oitly        in this tragedy. The Jury have had to deal
                         with many cases but today, at this moment, we are just
                         dealing with yours -and so far as we are able we would like
                         you to know we are conscious of that. Thank you for being
                         here.
                     B
                              Ladies and gentlemen, we rise for a moment or two and
                         then we proceed to deal with our next Inquest.
                         «


                             (The Inquest into the death of Kevin Daniel Williams
                                    wits adjourned until a date to be fixed)




                     D




                     H

                                                                                    1020
. H a rp h im L td
                                                     1     £ifr O f (ti&uZsr
                                                     Kejstj w/U/i^vw( U'&jo

^V- S;V^V*-                       '      MV?-
                                                               *»*   *   0   9




         HER MAJESTY*S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      (WEST DISTRICT)



               INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

           VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                      STADIUM DISASTER

     A             ON THE 15TH APRIL* 1989



                  INOUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                    KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS
                         (Further)




                           Before

     DR. S.L. POPPER. LL.B, B.MED.Sci. BM. BS. MRCGP

                   (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                             At

                  The Medico-Legal Centre.
                       Watery Street,
                         Sheffield.

                             On

                         i»th May 1990




                  TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




           From the Notes of J.L. Harphaa, Ltd.,
                Official Shorthand Writers,
              55, Oueen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX                         1021
                                  INDEX

                                              Page


OPENR Z BY THE CORONER

SERCEANT JOHN KILLOCH Recalled

            THE CORONER

INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS Called

      Q f y THE CORONER

DR. DAVID SLATER Recalled

       Bk THE CORONER                         10.
       Qross-Examined by MR. LIMB             13.

DR.        M EST JOHN WALLACE GUHPERT Sworn
      ■§
        Ii y THE CORONER                      15.
        Cross-Examined by M   R* LIMB         18.
           urther by THE CORONER              19.




      F




      G
       *'




      H
                                                     1022
                    FURTHER EVIDENCE IN

             THE INOUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                  KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS


      THE CORONER:        Now you'may* remeraber on Wednesday I
ke{jt you. l a t e . ; I said I had to go out and do a l i t t l e
bit of thinking, and that is what we are going to deal
with this afternoon.

      What we were thinking about was that one of the
inquests which we had done rela t e d to Kevin Daniel
Williams.           I will remind you of t h i s inquest. This
was the case of another young man, in fact he was only
15.     The problem in that case was that the evidence
was d i f f i c u l t to unravel as to when he died and what
had happened when he was being taken across the pitch
and had he said something in the temporary mortuary and
so on.

        After the inquest was concluded my attention was
(irawn by some of my legal colleagues, and very
rightlybecause they were r ea lised i t was a sensitive
problem and did not want to upset the family, so they
brought i t to ay attention p rivate ly f i r s t .   The point
which they were bringing to my a t t e n t i o n was that one
of the witnesses appeared to s a y . t h a t when he came to
this young man at the Spion Kop end, more or less,, of
the ground, he had convulsions and he'also said he
could feel a pulse.       We knew from the visual evidence
- we are going to repeat a l l the relevant evidence in a
moment - we knew that he was being taken across the
pitch and we had a timing at 1532.          Assuming tjhat was
rig h t , this convulsion or whatever i t was, was
happening after that point of time.          The question was:
what on earth was going on?

     I agreed that this was a valid point.      I think we
were so concerned about the event which happened a f te r
that, namely, what happened in the gymnasium, did he
speak or did he not speak - t his was the lad with the
fractured voice box - that we may not have.put quite
enough concentration and thought into the e a r l i e r
evidence, but we are going to do i t now. W   e are going
to sort i t out so that we know, as f a r as we are able,
so that we understand, i f we can, what happened.

     I think i f Sergeant Killoch could come back.
                           SKKflEANT JOHN KILLOCH R e c a l l e d

                                    By THE CORONErt:

                   Till-: WITNESS: Sergeant John         Killoch    from the
              West Midlands Police.

           ). Sergeant Killoch, i f you read - we are not going to
       B      read the whole summary again because we don t need to -
              but I think paragraph 5 which is where somebody s t a r t s
              describing helping him from the t e r r a c e s . - A.
              Following the severe crushing in the Vest Stand
              terracing Police Constable Michael John Craighill went
              into enclosure 3 and a s s i s t e d a number of c a su a ltie s .
              Police Constable C r a i g h i l l a s s i s t e d to carry a young
              man he now believes to be Kevin Daniel Williams from
              the gate in the perimeter fencing of enclosure 3 and on
              to tlie pitch.

             The officer attempted r e s u s c i t a t i o n but without
             success.

             Derek William Bruder is a Police Constable with               the
       D     Merseyside Police who was off-duty at the match               that
             day.   ile was a spectator in the North Stand.                lie
             recalls seeing a person lying on the pitch near               the
             Spion Kop and North Standing and d e s c r i b e s . that     person
             as having convulsions.

             Mr. Bruder went on to the pitch and gave mouth to mouth
             resuscitation, aided by a St. John's Ambulanceman who
             carried out cardiac massage.    Mr. Bruder re c al l s that
             a friend of the casualty was with him on the pitch.
             Resuscitation was continued and they were joined by a
             St. John's Ambulancewoman who took over from Mr. Bruder
             and after a short time by a St. John's Ambulanceman.

             The St. John's Ambulanceman said the casualty was dead
             and Hr. Bruder then l e f t the scene.

             Neither of the St. John's Ambulance personnel or the
             friend of the casualty have been i d e n t i f i e d .

             The person Mr. Bruder tried to r e su sc i tat e is known to
             be Kevin Daniel Williams and there is visual evidence
             to show that, s i r .

             Then the next paragraph deals with the lady police
             officer.    Just read that next paragraph as well. - A.
             Special Constable Debra Jane Martin went on to the
             pitch to a s s i s t and helped to carry several deceased
             and many injured to the gymnasium.        She assisted to
             carry one young boy, now known to be Kevin, into the
             gymnasium and she remained with him.
V *.   H                              -    -

                                                                                    ^024
                                    t. '                            »-V-
                                                                   V,   - *
                                  —
                                  V#
                                                                                                 V




                           Ac.   Now what she S3id we are not going to deal with because
                                 that was s a t i s f a c t o r i l y explained. What we are
                                 interested in is that b it which has been read.             If we
                                 turn to page 41, I think I am r i g h t in saying that «hafc.
                                 Mr. Hru<ier says - he says he saw a person about a
                                 quarter of the pitch length away from the Spion Kop? -
                                 A. Yes.

                           Be. He was lying on the ground or thereabouts? - A. That is
                               correct, s i r .

                                 He says he can remember this because he recollects an
                                 ambulance going past which locates i t in his mind and '
                                 in fact he tried to flag i t down? - A. Yes.

    O                      C<- Then    he says:

   ©                                   "I saw this man lying on the floor having
                                       convuls ions.M

                                 - A. That is his exact wording.

                                 Then i f we turn over the page and pick out the bits
                                 that are relevant.    He says he went down and he went
                                 up to this man:

                                       "...and than went to the man having convulsions.”

                                 - A. Yes, s ir .

                                 Then he says:
                           E
                                       "I was joined by a St. John’s Ambulanceman."

      )                          - A. Yes.

   ©                                   "That chap said, 'You do mouth to mouth and I will
                                       do heart massage'

                           F     - A. That is correct.

                                 He goes on to say:

                                       "I then took his pulse in his neck.        I could feel
                                       a slight pulse."

                                 - A. Yes, s i r .   -- .
                           G
                                 He then tried to resuscitate him, mouth to mouth, and
                                 undressed him so he could do i t more conveniently
                                 probably. - A. Yes.

                                 Then he says:

                           H


J. I . H s rp h a m L td
                                                                                        ---t




                                    "Ue continued to work on the man hut a f t e r about
                                    five minutes he went grey and his face was
                                    withdrawn."

                             - A. That is r i g h t ,   sir.

                        ). Ue talks about the man vomiting and being sick and
                           having a peculiar smell - a t l e a s t , the/breathi..
                    B      Well, his mouth had a peculiar smell?
                                        ■■■'           "•* _      ■'*’              '
                        ). He also noticed there, was something unusualfabout his
                           rib cage: ' ' -           '        v *V.--
                             *                      ' ■                             '
                                "As I did h ea r t massage his ribis were unnaturally
                                prominent."                                 V^v':^-
   o                         - A.   Yes.

                        }. Then eventually another St. John's Ambulance person
                           came and he l e f t the man? - A. That is right.

                        ).   This whole thing took quite a few minutes? - A. Yes,
                             obviously the o f f i c e r had no conception of time.
                    D
                        3. Can you remind me about the visual evidence?                   I t is
                           just to make sure I have got i t right that there is
                           v i s u a l evidence, both of Mr. Bruder... - A.. One
                           photographic p ri n t was mentioned, s i r , and was given
                           t h e reference number TT.1/30.                That is a photograph
                           which s hows Kevin lying on the pitch.                  The person has
                           b e e n i d e n t i f i e d by Kevin's parents.       Shown about to
                           g i v e mouth t o mouth re su scitation of Kevin is a man who
                           h a s b e e n identified as Police Constable Bruder.               PC
                           B r u d e r h a s i d e n t i fi e d himself on that.photograph.

                        ). Then there is another timed p ri n t , is i t PR.5/32 or
                           PR.5/33, showing Kevin being carried across, paragraph
                           18? - A. There are two photographs, s i r :    PR.5/A/32,
                           which is timed at 1532 and PR.5/A/33.        That is -also
                           timed at 1532.

                        1.        THE CORONER:   Inspector Layton, just show us
                             where those photographs are.

                                   INSPECTOR LAYTON:      Yes, s i r .   They are referred
                             to in the plan MUJL.42.        PR.5/32 is approximately at
                             this position he-re on the pitch.         That is the timed
                             photograph, s i r . TT.130 is not timed, but^I believe
                             i t is somewhere in t h i s area here.      From recollection
                             1 think I did that a c tu a ll y from what Hr. Bruder says
                             in his statement, about the positioning on the pitch.




                H                                       -   4   -

                                                                                                    1026
J. I. H»rph»m Ltd
     THE COi’OUER:  Now Inspector Sawers went to see
Mr. Bruder because we wanted to be sure we had the
facts.

           INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS Called

                         By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   Matthew Robert Sawers, Inspector,
West Midlands Police.                .                v-
                                             r. * -n- ■■■ - • . 1-
I believe you went to see him'yesterday? --'AY:Yes, s i r
   *   *                            .       -*'          ?V       •   ...

In fact i t was Mr. Bruder s day off but he very~-
willingly gave his time? - A. Ue did.      . ^

Now can you summarise for me what he says? - A.' Yes,
sir.         Ue s t a r t s off by referring and identifying his
two previous             statements to us, s i r , the f i r s t of which
was approximately a fortnight a f t e r the disaster
i t s e l f , and a second statement in August of l a s t year
was a very short statement in which he merely
identifies himself on the photographs that you have
heard reference to, s i r .

He goes on to say that I had shown him a number of
documents and plans, from which he was able to refresh
his memory.     He refers to the fact he had made some
notes on the   day a f t e r thed is as t er but that they did
not refer specifically to his dealings with this
casualty.

He refers, s i r , to joining Merseyside Constabulary in
1987 and receiving basic f i r s t - a i d instruction during
his i n i t i a l training.     That was both in theory and
practical application.            He refers, s i r , following the
incident and his dealings with this youth, to feeling
he was inadequately trained in his own confidence,
although i t is also true to say that he is absolutely
satisfied that the f i r s t aid he rendered on the day was
the very best he could do and he f e l t he could do no
more.       He goes on to say as a result of feeling
depressed about the incident he applied of his own
volition for further f i r s t - a i d training within
Merseyside Police.          Indeed, he attended a full week,
Monday to Friday course, leading to a further
qualification and much greater confidence in his own
ability.         However, with the benefit of th^t training,
s i r , he is able to r e f l e c t on his actions of the day
and he is s t i l l absolutely s a t i s f i e d that the f i r s t aid
he rendered in terms of mouth to mouth and heart
massage were correct and he could have done no more for
Kevin.
He goes on then, s i r , to deal with specific matters
that I referred him to in his original statement.
Specifically, s i r , from the transcript and police file*
he deals with page 41 of the police f i l e statements,
which is page 6 of his original statement in April l a s t
year.        He refers and confirms seeing Kevin 'a quarter
of-; the-length of the pitch, from the Spion Kop end? of
the?ground.        He refers to his being on thefloor^and*
c la ri f ie s that as on. the g ra s s . surface of th'e!pitcH‘:. :- "

He has given very careful consideration,;Jsiri^t^th«T,j.jl‘‘
expression that he used of having convulsions.^an^in_^- .
the. light of his further training and what^fie.*5no«’knows
and thinks about the incident was that ''cbnyulsiVnsV?’--.
was not the word that was applicable to these                  :
circumstances.      He refers specifically to having seen
epileptic f i t s and says that what he originally
described as a convulsion was not anything like an
epileptic f i t .   He goes on to say l a t e r , s i r , that i f
there was a part of the body that he saw aove i t was
his head and that the word that he best thinks
describes this movement is that of a twitch.

He refers to comments he made originally about
approaching the body, the body that was convulsing.
Having specifically considered i t again, s i r , he does
say that the body was not convulsing as he approached
it.   He referred originally, s i r , to feeling for a
carotid pulse and originally he thought he had detected
a slight pulse.    On reflection, s i r , he feels he would
be much more skilful i f he were required to perform
this action again and he cannot discount the
possibility that he did not feel immediately in the
right place for the carotid artery.       He certainly f e l t
in the neck   region where he thought he would find the
artery buthe cannot say he    would have gone to i t
directly.
                                                            •

I put to him, s i r , the specific point I believe Dr.
Slater made       in his evidence about this inquest a couple
of days ago       and PCBruder specifically discounts having
f e l t for the carotid artery with his thumb.      He refers
to the f i r s t two fingers of his l e f t hand.

He says in dealing with the carotid pulse that he may
have touched other areas around   the neck region,
including the Adam's apple and that whatever he f e l t
there he cannot be categoric i t  was a pulse.   Ue feels
he may well be mistaken in that matter, sir.

Later in his statement of April l a s t year, s i r , he
referred to the face of Kevin Williams going grey and
being withdrawn.   lie wanted you to know, s i r , th a t he
cannot specifically say he saw the face change from a
  normal pallor, or colour, to grey.       He mentioned i t in
  his statement, s i r , in the sequencethat i t occurred   to
  him that he was now noticing that he was grey.        Me may,
  have been grey as he approached hira before he mentioned
  i t , or it may have occurred as he noticed i t .

  In his original statement he referred to vomiting and
  thinking that Kevin had been sick.        lie has given this
  matter some f ur t he r thought and he i s absolutely
  satisfied that Kevin was not sick.         He did not see
  Kevin vomiting and he did not see vomit on the ground
  or #on his clothing.

. Does he s t i l l confirm that there was    a   d is ti nc t iv e .
  smell? - A. Yes, he does, s i r .

 To finish with the vomiting aspect o f his original
 statement, he does have a clear impression in his mind,
 s i r , of a fluid of some sort in the mouth, but he
 cannot discount that that could be s p i t t l e or phlegm of
 some sort.

 He referred in his original statement to the original
 resuscitation attempts whereby he gave mouth to mouth
 resuscitation and the St. John's Ambulanceman commenced
 heart compressions.        His original thoug ht ,-s ir , was
 that that was for approximately seven minutes and, give
 or take, he is happy with that time and thinks i t is
 reasonably accurate.         He then l a t e r referred to
 swopping over with the St. John's Ambulanceman and PC
 Derek Bruder was then involved in external heart
 compressions and this was when he.noticed the unusual
 rib cage and he had e a r l i e r referred, s i r , to
 unbuttoning his s h i r t , I believe.        He referred to
 unzipping his trousers and noticing some striped boxer
 shorts that you will see in the photographs that have
 been referred to, TT.1/31 and 32 respectively.

 I have put to him the apparent d i f f i c u l t i e s in the time
 sequence of the action that he describes near the Spion
 Kop end of the ground and his specific reference to an
 ambulance and asking the St. John's Ambulance colleague
 who was assisting him and who has not been identified,
 to stop the ambulance because he was considering
 utilising i t , s i r .

 I have drawn his -attention to the problems in relation
 to the known timing of ambulances a rriv in g on the
 pitch, both of St. John's and of the South Yorkshire
 Metropolitan Ambulance Service and I have drawn his
 attention to the apparent discrepancy in relation to
 the time shown on photographs PR.5/A* 32 and 3, s i r .




                                                                        1029
The point is that the ambulances were known to arrive
a t about 1515 and 1517 or thereabouts7 - A. Yes, s i r .

And the photograph, PR.5/A/32 and so on,                  is    timed at       ''
15327 - A. That,is c o r r e c t , s i r .

We are saying he was^dealing with this young boy a f t e r
that? - A. That is c o r r e c t .

In fact I put the”wrong;'tinjes to you.       I t is 1515 on
the pitch for .theVSt^rJohn's Ambulance and 1520 for the
fifcst South Yorkshire’; ' . ^ - A. That is correct, s i r ,
irrespective of whichvVv1
                                                            ■   •••
It is s t i l l e a r l i e r . . . r A. I t is s t i l l e a r l i e r than
1532, s i r , and that "point has been put spe c if i c a ll y to
Mr. Bruder and try as he may he is siaply ur. .ble to
reconcile those differences.                 I have put to him, s i r ,
was i t for instance a question of one of those
ambulances actually exi t in g the stadium across the
pitch rather than entering the stadiua.                      He has
considered that point and try as he may his
recollection is s t i l l of i t being an ambulance that
entered the stadium.

lie refers then to being joined by the woman St. John's
Ambulance Officer, who he refers to pushing him out of
the way to become involved as a trained f i r s t aider and
recollects this was approximately six minutes a f t e r he
changed places with the male ambulance o f f i c e r .  for
that reason, with the o ri g i n a l seven minutes mouth to
mouth resuscitation, PC Bruder feels that that t o t a l of
thirteen minutes he could amend to a period of time of
between ten and f ifteen minutes of sustained attempts
to resuscitate Kevin.

It was at this point, s i r , that a f t e r approximately two
minutes of the involvement of the woman St. John's
Ambulance Officer, that the male St. John's Ambulance
Officer stood up and s aid, "He's gone."          He referred
to the expression being completely grey and would seek
to reaffirm that choice of words as his description of
Kevin at that particular moment in tiae.          He says,
s i r , and I quote:

      "There is absolutely no doubt in my mind, both now
      and with the .benefit of further training, that
      then at the moment the youth I had tried to save
      was dead, certainly dead, and beyond any further
      help.   I and St. John's Ambulance personnel would
      not have stopped i f there had been any glimmer of
      hope at a l l . There was none."
 He refers to the personal description of Kevin again,
 sir'', and refers to the fact he is rbs olutely satisfied,
 i t was Kevin Williams that he was attempting to
 resuscitate.

      THE CORONER:     I jus t want to make i t crystal
clear that tho.re is no suggestion in any of this of any
critibism of PC Bruder.     ■*I -think he did absolutely
valiantly{and did his best.^y'Not}-qnly did he do his
best^orir the,'day, he is doing" his/tjest today as .veil/
thrjough5jnspector Sawers, to try'Vnd help us understand
what^heyremembers and I want that c l e a r l y understood by
everybody.      I don't want you t o ' t h i n k we are knocking
him.   Ue are not.    All I am trying to do is finding out
what happened.

      Mr. Fraser, any questions of t h i s o ff i ce r on this
part?       I had better t e l l you who e ls e I am going to be
calling.        Dr. Slater and Dr. Curapert, whom I will t e l l
you about when he comes.          He is a neuro physiologist,
a cli n ic i an , and an expert on this s o r t of thing.

      MR. FRASER:     No, s i r , I have no specific
questions, save to say that I understand, Officer, you
have spoken to Mr. and Mrs. Williams, having spoken to
the officer?    I r i s e because I appear for Mr. and Mrs.
Williams and obviously have their i n t e r e s t s at heart.

     THE WITNESS:      I did go and v i s i t Mr. and Mrs.
Williams, s i r , yesterday evening, having seen PC Bruder
and I have outlined briefly to them the contents of PC
Bruder's further thoughts and recollections for Kevin
on the day.

     MR. FRASER:       Sir, I understand they are
appreciative, both of the e f fo r t s the offic e r has made
and of his v i s i t and they have no questions.      They
have decided not to come today, s i r , for reasons*which
I am sure you will understand but they are fully aware
of exactly what is going on on t h e i r behalf.

     THE CORONER:      Thank you.     Have you got any
quest ions?

     MR. LIMB:      No, thank you.

     MR. CATCHPOhE;       No, thank you,   sir.

          THE CORONER:      When we have heard the re st of the
evidence I am quite prepared to r e c a l l any of these
o f f i c e r s , or, indeed, any of these witnesses because I
want us to understand i t .

     Dr. Slater.
                 DR.   DAVID SLATER R e c a l l e d

                        By THE CORONER?

Dr. Slater, you have, of course, already dealt with
this case a couple of days ago.            . I f I remember, rightly
you said, among other things, that'-(a).';-this lad^hadia
broken voice box. ' I t was broken'^ii£four placesV^^s^
Also (b) he was, ■ o f “a l l i t h e cases^you'dealt WithV^-c^- =
perhaps the most asphyxiated, i f one'[can j u d g ^ t n a t ’.by-
cyanosis and so on.          Would that be 'a corrget
recollection? - A. That i s absolutely correc^^sirilr Of
a l l the cases I d e a l t "with Kevin/showed really^the?^?
worst injuries to the neck'in that there were four?v:;
fractures to the voice box.             In addition there were
three very large scratches to-the neck.               In addition
to the normal signs of asphyxia, the blueness and the
hemorrhages which were v e r y marked, there is no doubt
this was a very, very severe case of asphyxia and
probably the worst one I d e a l t with, s i r .

We established to everybody's satisfaction what had
happened in the gymnasium and the account, we dealt
with that as to whether t h i s lad could have spoken and
so on, so we don't need to be concerned about that.
What we are i n t e r e s t e d in t h i s afternoon is the
evidence r e la tin g to Mr. Bruder.            I will also remind
you that in general that what has been said is that a
person becomes unconscious in an asphyxial situation
within anything from zero to twenty to thirty seconds.
There is a s l i g h t variation amongst pathologists, but
quickly.      Then that death usual .supervenes within four
to six minutes or thereabouts.               The problem i s , as you
have already heard, that whichever way you look at I t ,
Mr. Bruder was dealing with this young man quite a few
minutes a f t e r he had been taken out from the Leppings
Lane terraces.

In the light of the evidence can you help us as to what
you think was going on on? - A. Yes, s ir . I will deal
with this in three general areas and then Dr. Guropert
certainly will come and enlarge on these and help us
out further.

Firstly, and I apologise i f this is an emotive area, I
think I need j u s t to spend t h i r t y seconds in explaining
what death i s . - - . D e a t h i s a sequence of eve.nts.  It is
not one set event and the sequence I will put to you is
an individual becoming unconscious;             whilst they are
unconscious they quickly lose a l l sensation of pain and
discomfort;     then there i s a period of various tissues
in the body which are susceptible to a lack of oxygen,
dying.   The most important one of these i s , of course,
the brain, and a f t e r about three to six minutes the
brain undergoes i rrev ersible brain damage.           There Is
then a point which we c a l l brain death.        This is a
d i f f i c u l t concept, but by this I am implying that the '
brain is irre v e rs i bl y damaged.     The brain is no longer*
able to control respiration and in fact that person,
for effective purposes, is dead, irreversibly.                 That
is a medico legal d ef initio n, at l ea s t one medico legal
d e f i n i ti o n , . of death.                    • v . - :-

The problem now comes that I have not mentioned, other
tissues in the body.   For example, ;the^'heart]^a'very
embtive organ.   When somebody is brainVdead i t ^ i s /.
quite possible that the heart is s t i l l alive'and s t i l l
beating and this can go on for a few minutes or'longer,
perhaps even half an hour.

Then we come to the point where the brain is dead, not
controlling respiration, and finally the heart stops
and that is r ea ll y the point of whole body death and
that is really what the lay person understands by
death.  A doctor going up, putting the stethoscope on
the chest, no heart beat, no respiration, then that
person is unequivocally dead.

I hasten to add there that although the person is truly
medico legally dead, in fact even then there are
tissues in the body that are s t i l l alive.       The skin is
s t i l l living.   The kidneys are s t i l l living.   This is
how we can then transplant them.          In fact i t is an
emotive area and although that person is dead, there
are s t i l l tissues living.   I t then takes another six
to twelve hours for a l l the tissues in the body to die.

Really, when we use the word "death” we have to be
very, very careful we are not talking about one set
event at one point in time.   We are talking about a
whole continuum of events that go on.

I mentioned that some tissues do not die as rapidly as
the brain and this includes both nerves and muscle.
In fact one can have a situation of somebody being
brain dead but the muscles and the nerves in what we
call the peripheral nervous system - not the brain -
are s t i l l living and in fact these can occasionally
function in some way.

Sir,   that is a -general comment on death.

In relation to the Hillsborough incident, the sequence
that myself has given, and although I have not heard
the other pathologists I understand they have given a
very similar sequence of events, has been a rapid loss
of consciousness, perhaps five to ten seconds.   I
understand I have been the nearest by quoting a paper



                                                                  1033
     1                        *      . ■   * '.1   *.   }-•»   -V   • / *•




    where unconsciousness can be instantaneous.                That is
    the rapid loss of consciousness.

    As soon as that person becomes unconscious I have sairf
    several, times that pain modalities, discomfort, again
    disappear very, very quickly, perhaps within a second
    or five seconds.                                  ■>;??.

B   In .very general terms, c e r t a i n l y myself - and I . Have
    tried to keep i t general - I then said that death - and
    I have used the word very broadly, as you w i l l ‘<
    appreciate in my previous evidence - that death occurs
    five, ten perhaps f if t e e n minutes a f t e r . . I purposely
    kept that very open because human beings are very
    variable.    You cannot say that somebody is going to
    die in fifteen minutes, and-not in fifteen rinutes.

    I am trying to put the concept that although I have
    talked about averages, very occasionally you are going
    to have additional extremes.      I think Kevin was one of
    these extremes that did not f a l l into this five, ten or
    fifteen minute sequence of somatic death, whole body
    death, but in fact this was extended.

^   Having said that, Kevin had extremely severe asphyxia.
    I have no doubt in my own mind that he had'suffered
    irrecoverable brain damage and death within the three
    to six minutes that I said.      Therefore, I am quite
    confident at that time that Kevin was dead and there is
    nothing that anybody on this earth could have done for
    him a f te r that time, including PC Bruder and any
    ambulance people who arrived.

    Again, you will appreciate from what I have said to you
    that although Kevin was brain dead I have not said that
    other tissues in the body may not have been living -
    the heart, muscles, nerves.    In fact I know Dr.
    Gumpert will explain in a minute that in fact there are
    mechanisms whereby when somebody i s brain dead in fact
    the muscles in the body can twitch.      This will come as
    a surprise, and I apologise i f i t i s emotive, this can
    even happen to somebody who hasn't got a head.      That
    person is clearly dead, they haven't got a head, but
    those persons can actually have twitches in their
    muscles.   This is what happened to Kevin.      He died
    early - brain death - but unfortunately in this
    particular instance we are talking about an extreme
    case where perhaps the heart beating went on for a bit
    longer and we noticed these twitches, a t least PC.
    Bruder noticed these twitches in the body.

    I f e e l th is i s what happened in the case of Kevin.


                            - 12 -                                           1034
From the description - in fact i t is only f a i r to say
you also had a word with PC Bruder because you were
concerned, you wanted to be quite sure that you
understood his evidence personally, so to speak? - A#~
Yes, sir.

In the light of what you heard and what we have heard .
now, da you feel that this lad died, i f you like, in -V
the totality sense, I don't meant that his skin was^r'
deadj' ljut-in lay terms at the point in timewhenMr.
Bruder vas vith him? - A. Yes, s i r , ’ I an quite
confident of t h a t . When one'speaks to lay peopleVwhoJT
have experienced people dying, a word which
recurrent in these descriptions of death is the:way
that individuals turn grey.     In fact I was very
impressed by the content in -PC Bruder's statement of
the word "grey", recurring several times*        To me as a
doctor that implied that that was the point of whole
body death.     In fact I feel that i t was probably
around that time that Kevin's whole body died.        His
brain had died twenty/twenty five minutes before that
at the time of the crushing, but his whole body died at
the time PC Bruder was with him.                         ‘   t
                                                            /
We have mentioned these twitches and I think sometimes
they are referred to as spinal reflexes? - A. that is
correct, s ir.

     THE CORONER:    Now, Mr. Fraser,   is that reasonably
clear?

     M R. FRASER:   Even to me, s i r , thank you, and I am
sure i t will be clear to the family.

     THE CORONER:    Any questions?

             Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:

Doctor, i t is an emotive subject.  I remember* in your
evidence about Kevin you described death in terms of a
process rather than as a moment? - A. Yes.

1 would like to ask you a few questions about the
process following unconsciousness.      As I understand
i t , in the cases of these victims, unconsciousness has
come ten to twenty seconds a f t e r compression of the
chest? - A. Yes«~. .

That is as a r e s u l t of oxygen to blood mix leading to
unconsciousness? - A. Yes.        There are various...   W e
are now not talking about the actual cause of death,
but mechanisms.       One very profound view that has been
put forward of crush asphyxia, traumatic asphyxia, i t
is not simply only the reduction of oxygen going to the
brain, but the fact that in fact there cannot be
circulation through the brain.           The pressure from the
chest is reflected up into the brain so in fact
effectively the cerebral c ir c u l a t i o n stops, so i t comes
up against a dead end and i t cannot cir c u la t e round.
But, yes, your concept then is r i g h t .

following unconsciousness, that i s to say, twenty
seconds, say, after the s t a r t of the crush becoming
f a t a l , is the body capable of f a c i a l expressions or
does i t have a neutral expression? - A. F i r s t of a l l
the word "unconscious" i t s e l f is a very vague term, as
you probably appreciate.         There are varying degrees of
unconsciousness - su p e rf i c ia l unconsciousness, perhaps
a sort of sleeping...        You are unconscious, really,
when you are sleeping, and then, of course,
unconsciousness becomes deeper and deeper and deeper.
The deeper bit is when one truly loses pain sensations
and in fact in this p a r t i c u l a r instance having spoken
both to Or. Gumpert and, indeed, a consultant
anaesthetist, everybody 1 have spoken to i s confident
that pain modalities have disappeared very quickly,
perhaps within one or two seconds, five seconds is the
longest I have heard somebody express.

As I understand your evidence, following that short
period of five, ten, twenty seconds at the most, there
is profound unconsciousness rather than, say, the
unconsciousness of sleep.   Is the face then of the
unconscious person, the profoundly unconscious person,
capable of expression of any s o r t , or is there a
neutral expression? - A. I think I prefer to leave that
to Dr. Gunpert because you are into a c l i n i c a l area
there of what we call reflexes.       I am not trying to
avoid the question.   I think he will be able to give
you a very expert professional witness reply to that.
Would that be reasonable to you?

     HR. LIMB:   Certainly.        Sir, may I pursue that
matter with Mr. Gurapert?

     THE CORONER:   Certainly.          I want to be as
helpful as I can.   I t is a d i f f i c u l t subject and in a
sense we are slotting i t into the inquest of this poor
boy, but i t is a more general topic and i t will, of
course, apply in a sense to everybody, but I don't see
how we can avoid doing i t .   Please do pursue i t with
Dr. Gumpert.

     Thank you, Dr. Slater.
         DK.   ERNEST JOHN WALLACE GUHPEKT S w o rn

                      By THE CORONER;

Dr. Gumpert, could you f i r s t of a l l give us your f u l l
names, qualifications and .appointment? - A. Ernest John
Wallace Gumpert.   I am a Bachelor of Medicine of the
University at Cambridge, Bachelor of Surgery of the
University of Cambridge.      A Member of the Royal
College of Surgeons and a Fellow of the Royal College
of Physicians of London.       I am consulting c linical
neuro physiologist and consulting neurologist to the
Sheffield Area Health Authority, Teaching.

Dr. Gumpert, although you are a Sheffield man
professionally, I dragged you back from Cambridge
today? - A. Yes, s i r .

Where I tracked you down!       I very much appreciate the
 fact you dropped a l l your other arrangements in order
 to be here.     Thank you very much.    Dr. Guinpert, you,
of course, had nothing whatever to do with this case.
I think you dealt with quite a lot of the injured
 following Hillsborough and indeed you may well know one
or two people I will be referring to l a t e r , but this
particular case was not one you came across.         You have
heard the evidence which has been put regarding this
young man.      What I would like you to do now is to give
us a short explanation, as you see death, in the f i r s t
instance and then we will try and r e l a t e i t to this
young man and p articularly Hr. Bruder's evidence
relating to him. - A. In about 1979 or 1980 when i t
became possible to carry out renal transplantations or
kidney transplantations, i t became very inportant that
the supply of kidneys of people who had died acutely,
usually in accidents, could be increased because the
l i f e of a patient who has had a kidney transplant is
completely different to the l i f e of a patient who has
to have dialysis three times a week.       They can go back
to normal l ife.

A hypothesis of brain death was then discussed, agreed
and published.      This consisted of certain examinations
of the back part of the brain, the part we call the
brain stem.    If you imagine the brain as being like a
walnut, and i t i s , i t is like having a carrot stuck
underneath the walnut, and i t is the carrot that
matters.    This is where blood pressure, pulse,
respiration and a whole variety of other functions are
controlled.    Once this part of the brain is dead, and
this death occurs, as you heard from Dr. Slater, in
between four and six minutes a f t e r deprivation of
oxygen, then the person i s going to die.      They can be
  kept alive by a r t i f i c i a l means and some of you may
  remember the case in America which was kept alive for
  thirteen and a h alf years.

  Some of us were concerned that the guidelines that were
  drawn up were not s t r i c t enough and that there was no
  call for them to be repeated a f t e r a passage of time.
  Perhaps unwisely we said this and this resulted in a
  BBC "Panorama" programme one night at ten o'clock when
  the medical profession for once actually debated i t ,
  eight of us.    As a r e s u l t of that debate the
  regulations were hardened.             They had to be carried out
  by senior people who were used to doing i t and they had
  to be repeated.    A s a t i s f a c t o r y outcome from my
  personal point of view, although I don't know whether
  the anguish was worth i t r e a l l y .

 As a consequence of that I suppose in the next three
 years I had to go through this rather unpleasant
 procedure many times.          I t was part of my professional
 duty but s t i l l to t h i s day I cannot certify someone
 dead without being disturbed by i t s t i l l .

 From this I suppose I have gained a great deal of
 experience of brain death and brain damage*      I t seems
 clear to me, s i r , in this case that poor Kevin was
 probably dead before he was got out of the area in
 which he was standing.      I would agree with Dr. Slater.
 I would think consciousness was l o s t probably within
 ten seconds.     I would say loss of pain would be almost
 instantaneous - not quite, but almost.

 I cannot explain the Liverpool Police Constable's terra
 "convulsion because to me a convulsion is a major
 epileptic attack and he has quite clearly said he does
 not mean t hat, so I don't know what he does mean.   I
 think i t would be wrong for me to try and guess what he
 means.    I think we could accept that he does not mean
 any significant movement.

 Unfortunately, a f t e r people are brain stem dead, they
 can twitch and very unnerving i t i s too.        This is
 really due to a spinal reflex.        What we think happens
 in anoxia - lack of oxygen - is that the brain stem
 dies f i r s t .   The cortex, that is the thinking part of
 the brain, your walnut, probably goes on quite a bit
 longer and the-peripheral nervous system probably quite
 a b i t long s t i l l and I think that i s the explanation of
 what has been described by the Liverpool officer.

. I know the Liverpool off ic er in his supplemental
  statement when he was discussing the question of a
  pulse says he may have been mistaken, but l e t us
  hypothesise that in fact he wasn't and he had f e l t a

                          - 16 -
                                                                      1038
pulse when he approached this young man on the pitch,
would that f i t in with your understanding...               Is that
a possibility? - A. I t is a p o s s i b i l i t y , s i r . I would
like just to observe that feeling the carotid pulse is
quite d i f f i c u l t in somebody who has got a low blood
pressure, as would have been here.             In fact i t can be
so d if f icu lt i t i s impossible and you have to put an
electrocardiogram on to know whether the heart has
stopped or not.

I would also like to say something about resuscitation.
I vas very fortunate when I qualified t ha t I became
house surgeon of a famous heart surgeon called Lord
Brock at Guy's Hospital.           That was in the days when we
did open cardiac massage.           In other words, i f somebody
died you opened t h e i r chest and you massaged their
heart between your hands.           A terrifying experience.
It was while I was working for him that one day three
of us were doing i t one morning, that he stopped i t ,
and that was the s t a r t of external cardiac massage.
Even to somebody l i k e roe who has been doing i t for
twenty-five years, i t is s t i l l very d i f f i c u l t .    The
last time I tried to do i t I failed completely.                 Even
to a trained person i t is d i f f i c u l t . Indeed, vhen
junior doctors are examined for t his now, as they are,
a significant number f a i l rather than pass.               It is
quite d i f f i c u l t and for the lay person i t must be
incredibly d i f f i c u l t .

You heard Dr. S l a t e r ' s account of death, shall we say.
U’ould you go along with that? - A. I thought i t was
eloquent.    I f e l t quite nervous!

You mentioned this point about unconsciousness and the
loss of pain and I think you distinguish slightly
there.  Can you give me any idea that i f a person
becomes unconscious, can he feel pain, and                for howlong
can he feel pain, in your judgment? - A. Again, Dc.
Slater put i t very clearly.         You a l l read in the
newspapers about patients - particularly when they have
had caesarean sections, the ladies as usual - being
able to t e l l what the doctors were talking about during
the operation.       Again I have experienced this at f i r s t
hand when I was doing heart surgery because then i t was
often very important not to depress the s ta te of
consciousness too far because things were pretty tricky
anyhow.    W  herv we, used to re su sc i ta t e the patients we
used to give them an e l e c t r i c shock.       Lord Brock used
to always shout, "Give i t two f a s t ones."          The patient
would then ask you the following morning two fast ones
were.   Then you would ask, "Did you hear anything
else?" and they d i d n ' t , so i t is a l l very much a
question of degree.


                         - 17 - *..                          ■;    --<
                                                                    1039
                     I think slipping from s li g h t unconsciousness to deep
                     unconsciousness in this circumstance, one, because of
                     the compression and two because of the asphyxia and
                     three because as Dr. Slater again explained everything
                     is shoved up into the head and so there is nothing
                     moving around, i t would have been very quick, almost as
                     quick as a rabbit punch I would have thought.

              B           THE CORONER:       Hr. Fraser?

                          MR. FRASER:       No questions,    sir.

                                   Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:

                   , Dr. Gumpert you have spoken in terms of passing in a
                     very quick space of time from s l i g h t unconsciousness to
                     deep unconsciousness.     Following deep unconsciousness,
                     do the eyelids remain open or are they closed? * A.
                     Either may occur.    There i s no particular rule.     The
                     thing we a i l see on the cinema of the person going to
                     close the dead person's eyes.      I don't think I have
                     had to do that more than two or three times in my l i f e .
                     Host of the people I have seen die have died with their
              D      eyes shut.

                  Q. Deep unconsciousness i s associated with no longer
                     feeling any pain or discomfort*    Is then the face of
                     the person who is profoundly unconscious capable of
                     grimaces or expressions which might be taken as showing-
                     pain or discomfort? - A. Not in ray view, s ir.

                  0. Is i t in fact capable of any fa c ia l expression? - A ,
                     Not in my view.

                  Q. Following profound unconsciousness, is i t right that
                     the face will become discoloured towards the next stage
                     of the sequence of events, namely, brain damage and
                     thereafter brain death?

                          THE CORONER:       Could you repeat that question?

                           MR. LIMB:    I am referring back to the process, or
                     the sequences of events as outlined by Dr. Slater, s ir .
                     F irstly , unconsciousness, thereafter brain damage and
                     thereafter again brain death.     The nature of my
                     inquiry was as to whether following profound
                     unconsciousness,, although there may be no outward
                     expressions there is this change that the face becomes
                     discoloured?

                          THE CORONER:       The greyness you are driving at?

                          UR. LIMB:       Sir,    that is right.


              H                     «**          - 18 -
                                                                                    1040
J   l   Ltd
     THE WITNESS:      Are you asking me to say when I
think the greyness came on or just the way i t changed7I
cannot t e l l you when i t came an.  I think probably i t
came on during the unconscious stage and I don't think
the face would change when the moment of death came,
total somatic death, 1 don't think there would be any
change.

     HR. LIMB:   Doctor, I am asking whether i t happens
following the entry into unconsciousness towards the
next stage in the sequence, namely, brain damage? - A.
I don't think there is a change of f a c ia l expression at
the time of brain damage necessarily*      This change of
expression will be a gradually evolving process from
the minute the crush started.

        HR. LIMB:      Thank you, s i r .

     THE WITNESS:   Sir, you cannot t e l l by looking at
a person that they are dead or unconscious, at least I
can't.   You can by feeling them but you c a n ' t by
looking at them.

                    Further by THE CORONER:

If a person has been, shall we say, somatically dead
for long enough, would you accept or would you agree
that sometimes the face goes paler? - A. Oh, i t goes
paler, and becomes rigid and takes on a s ta re.  Yes,
that is quite d if f e r e n t .

        THE CORONER:      Anything else you wanted to ask on
that?

        MR. LIMB:      No, thank you, s i r .

        HR. CATCHPOLE:       No questions, s i r .

     THE CORONER:   Is there anything else we want to
ask Dr. Slater?   (No)

     Ladies and gentlemen, I will give you a chance.
It is emotive but i t is also very interesting.  Is
there anything else while we have two experts here?
You have understood i t as far as one is able to
understand it?

        THE FOREMAN:'     Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Dr. Gumpert and Dr. Slater, may I
say to both of you, you have done remarkably well in
explaining what is clearly a very (a) emotive and (b)
difficult subject, succinctly and clearly to a ll of us
and I very much appreciate your help.   Dr. Slater has
                              had to come as well, but not quite so far, and I am
                              very grateful to you for taking the trouble and the
                              time to come and I am sure i t will be of benefit not
                              just to Kevin's family, but tb other people who of
                              course are involved in this tragedy as well.    Thank
                              you very much indeed.

                                   MR. FRASER:      Sir, I will ce rta i n l y make sure that
                          B   Kevin’s family have the opportunity to see the
                              transcript of what the doctors have said and I am sure
                              they will feel some benefit from that when they feel
                              able to look at i t .    Thank you,' s i r .
                                A



  o
  <&



                          D




                          H                            20 -
                                                                                                1042
J. L. H « rp h » m L td
       6   JUN     94   9:06   FROM   HCi   OPS                           PAGE. 002




 6/06/94 09:04 HAA HA691
.P:HA1                                             HAA HA691
*ec By: T       Serial: 969     Ident:HA691      2059    03/06/94
?hone:
location OPERATIONS ROOM ,SHEFFIELD
Type:     97D                   Ras Ref:HA0O/OO/OQ     INFO                Sub DivrHA
Source:

Detail:          INFO RE HILLSBRO   RE COOK REPORT LAST NIGHT. __________ CALLED TO SAY
                  THAT THERE IS A MRS WILLIAMS IN LIVERPOOL, WHO BELIEVES HER SON DIED
                 AT 4.00P.M.. HOWEVER            AND A FRIEND WERE NEXT TO THE LAD AND

POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                       AC




                                     INCIDENT LOG                        PAGE 1 OF
2104 HA69I         THE SPEC CONSTABLE ON THE PITCH AT THE TIME.   HE IS ADAMANT
                   THAT THE LAD WAS DEAD PRIOR TO 3.40 P.M.

                   HE WISHES TO REMAIN OUT OF ANY PUBLICITY, BUT IS AGREEABLE TO
                   BE CONTACTED IP NECESSARY.
2104   HA691       MA:AS I AM UNAWARE OF WHO IF ANYONE IS DEALING WITH THESE
2105   HA691       MA:FURTHER ALLEGATIONS, OTHER THA WHAT I READ IN THE STAR
2105   HA691       KA:THIS INCIDENT TO BE DEFERRED UNTIL MONDAY 6/6
2106   HA691       MA:FOR FURTHER ENQS.
2106   HA691       DE:0900:6




                                                        C-
                2 l - ‘+ ~ % ai   ^



                                                                           STKTIGN

NAME:           DEFER WILLIAM
                BRUDER

ADORESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIKIH: 23

OCCUPATION:   POL PC7808


Who states:- This statement consisting of 012 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ay knowledge and belief and I Make
i t knowing that if i t is tendered in evidence I shall be       to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in i t anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 270489                                                DW   HRUDER (SIGNED)



        I ama serving Police Officer with Merseyside Police, on Saturday 15th

        April 1989 (150489) I was off duty and wait to support Liverpool in

        the match against Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Football Ground.

        I want to the game in ny am car with my friend

                                      He had bought our tickets for seats in the

        North Stand for #14.00, fran Liverpool football club supporters club I

        think.

        We drove to the ground via Huddersfield where I dropped                   off

        at Polytechnic and then carried on to Hillsborough.       On the way to the

        ground there was a short delay at the Manchester Interchange on the

        M62 with roadworks.

        Aftar vre arrived at Sheffield I went with                  to the Gateway

        store on the continuation of Halifax Road.      This being were we parked

        the car at about 1.10pm (1310).      At the Gateway store there were

        betitfeen 200-300 Liverpool fans.    We stayed with them and were allowed

        into the store in small numbers to buy drinks.             and I bought

        four cans of lager between us and then want outside and sat on a

        grass verge together with the other 200-300 fans and we drank two cans




                                                                                        36
BRUDER                DEREK WILLIAM                                       2


each. The group of fans was well behaved and I didn't see any

drunkeness.    We were supervised by a Merseyside and South Yorkshire

Police Officer who were sat on two horses outside the Const

Superstore.

Whilst I was sat on this verge everyone was happy and amenable and at

one point I 8aw a uniform Superintendent and Chief Inspector NNLK past

us. Between 1.45pn and 2pm (1345) (1400) the two mounted police

officers came over and told us it was getting on and        to sake our

way to the ground. The whole crowd moved on without any problems at

all. I remember it was the Merseyside Officer who actually spoke to

the crowd.

We talked to the ground and when we got into Leppings Lane itself it

was packed with people even half a mile from the ground itself.

Because of the crowd ay friend asked a policenan for directions to

the ground, he was manning a junction either two or three roads tg>

frou the ground off Leppings Lane. He then directed us to go back the

way we had cone and round to the Spion Kop end.   I didn't think that

was right but followed his directions and walked back the way we had

care and to the Spion Kop. This was about 2.20pm (1420).

We then went to the Spion Kop but three quarters of the way round on

Penistore Road I realised we were going totally the wrong way and we

walked back.

The time was getting on new and the walk round was long because a lot

of the connecting roads between Leppings Lane and Penistone Road were

blocked by Police. Because of the time I approached a police officer

on one of the barriers and he allowed us to take this short cut when I

explained what had happened and showed him sy police warrant card. Wb

arrived back at Leppings Lane at 2.30pm (1430). When        and I

arrived back at the turnstiles there were no queues whatsoever and a
BRUOER                 DEREK WIIXJAM                                      3

larje mass of people all trying to get through the turnstiles and into

the ground.   It had reached the point of every nan for themselves in

ordar to get to the turnstiles..

I made for and entered the far left hand side turnstile of turnstiles

1-16. Ttere was no police officer by my turnstile.    Over to wy far

right I saw a number of police officers on horses.   I could not see

any police officers on foot but could not say whether this was

because there were none or they were blocked from my view by the

crcad.

Qjtside the ground my friend had both our tickets and to try and stay

together I had hold of his jeans.   However, the pushing of the

people was that much that we were pushed apart and separated.

Once we were apart I decided to make for the turnstile on ay own.

       had got in before me and once I reached the turnstile he handed

my ticket out to me and I was allowed inside.   I handed ny ticket into

the turnstile operator and retained the stub of the ticket.

I had difficulty in finding the entry point only by the misdirection

of the police officer, but once I got back into Leppings Lane, I found

the turnstile but had difficulties getting in because of the sheer

number of people. At the time of my entry I saw no gates open other

than the turnstiles.   I did not see any of the gates open.

As I was trying to get to the turnstiles I saw about five or six

teenagers climb over a concertina gate immediately to the left of the

turnstiles. After the first five or six went over I saw a nurter of

others climb to the top of this gate but then drop back into the crowd

outside as if there was someone in authority on the inside telling

then to get back.

Once        ind I had got into the ground I saw a police sergeant and

four constables immediately behind the concertina gate where I had
 BRL'OER                DEREK WILLIAM                                         t


 seen the teenagers climb over.     I approached   the sergeant and said

sarathing along the lines of "I an a Police Officer frcm Merseyside,

the res a huge crowd outside and they're pushing to get in, can you cb

scrrathing about i t or get something done?".      At this tine, I was with

         xit I did not produce ray warrant card or formally identify

nysalf.     He made no reply to me and by this time i t was cicee to

kick off time so I le ft i t at that.

Orica inside the ground I saw no direction signs to ay seat In the

North stand and had difficulty in finding i t because the sections of

seating were given letters of the alphabet, however, the letters did

not follow alphabetical order ie ABFDGCM, though I can't             r the

exart order.

I entered the North Stand through a tunnel, there was no crowd within

this tunnel and no problems at a ll.    I saw no Police within the

tunnel and only a few stewards right at the beginning.

Ones inside the ground I saw no alcohol being drunk at all.

I took my seat along with          |ust as the two teams case cut onto

the pitch.     This was about 2.57 pn (1457).   Once through the

tunnel and up the stairs, I went to the section of my seats wtere two

stewards directed us to our particular seats.      These were right by the

entrance to this section of seating.     People continued to enter after

me and after about ten minutes between ten and twenty people arrived

at this entrance and didn't appear to have tickets for this stand.       I

actually saw two people holding tickets which were for the Hast

Stand.     This was after the incident in pens 3 and 4 and people had

started to ccme out onto the pitch.     Everyone started to rflanma what

was going on and these two men said that they should be in those pens

and showed the tickets which were complete without the counterfoil

being removed.
BRUDER                  DEREK   W IUJAM                                      5


I experienced no personal crori crush within the ground only that

out3ide which was about 2.45 pn (1445).      I did not see any crowd

surge within the ground and was not injured.

At about the time these men had appeared at the entrance to ny section

of seating which was three quarters of the way along the North Stand

nearest to the Spion Kop about ten rowB frcm the front, I saw people

clintoing over the fences from pens three and four of the Leppings tjmto

stand frcm kick off but in itially they were directed behind hoardings

and sat near to the pitch.      I could not see whether they were directed

by stewards or Police.

Aftar about five minutes a Police officer ran on to the pitch and

8topped the game.     People then began to climb over the front fencing

onto the pitch at will and I could also see people pulled up into the

seating area above.    At no point did I see any gates opened to allow

escape from the pens.

Once play had been stopped the Nottingham Forest fans in the Spion Kop

began to taunt the Liverpool Supporters.

A fan then ran onto the pitch and then ran up to the Spion Kop and

began shouting and making 'V' signs with two fingers at the Forest

supporters.   Myself and other fans in the North stand began to shout

telling him to go away because we could see there was something wrong

in the Leppings Lane end.    This man who was in his early twenties with

long hair and a black capped sleeve T shirt was then turned back by

either stewards or Police and ran back towards Leppings Lane but was

detained by Police before he got back.

Another older man then ran up to the Spion Kop and then began to wave

his hands at the Forest fans.     He wasn't taunting, he was signalling

for them to calm down and trying to te ll them there was something

wrong. Shortly after this the Police formed a cordon across the
BRLC6R                 CEH3C   W IU JA K                                   6
halfway line.   I'm not sure if this was after the first or second nan.

People in the Leppings Lane end then ripped down advertising hoardings

and began to carry people on them up towards the corner formed by the

SpiDn Kop and the North Stand.      I could see that seme of than were

presumed dead as they had coats over their faces and one nan in

particular had a juqper pulled back to cover his face. These people

were then rolled onto the pitch and the carriers went back far more

people or bodies.

The police then formed a further cordon in front of the North stand.

Around the sane time a nurriber of people wearing tracksuit trousers and

sweatshirts came fran the direction of the players tunnel and went to

the Spion Kop end. They then pulled down more hoardings hare and went

to help carry more people up frcra Leppings lane.

A nunber of people were also carried up to the comer in front of me

bodily. There were a large number of people in this comer either

laid out behind the police on the pitch or sitting with their heads in

their hands.

I did not see any of the Police in the cordon in front of the North

Stand break ranks to assist these people.

I saw one person on the pitch about a quarter of the pitch length away

frou the Spion Kop about twenty feet from the hoardings in front of

the North stand.    I distinctly remember this because later on as I

will describe an ambulance drove directly past us and a St John's

Anfculance nan who was with me tried to flag it down but it carried on.

I a.it not sure if this man had been carried on a hoarding or by his

frisnd who was with him.    I saw this roan lying on the floor having

convulsions.

The Police cordon in front of the North Stand appeared unconcerned and

'smarmy', this agitated the supporters in the stand who were shouting
BRUDER                DEFEX WILLIAM


for them to go and help the people on the pitch. None of the Police

officers left the cordon.

I was very close to the pitch so I wait down the aisle, over a small

five foot wall with hoardings on, I vralked through the cordon without

being challenged at all and then went to the man having convulsions.

Alirost immediately I was joined by a St John's Anfculance nan.     I

identified myself to the St Johns nan as an off duty Police Officer.

He then said to ne " You do mouth to mouth and I'll do heart Massage*.

I then took his pulse in his neck.       I could feel a slight pulse.   I

then ccrmenced mouth to mouth resuscitation and the St John's nan

started heart massage.       I undid two buttons on the top of the nan's

shirt.    If I remember rightly the bottcm of the shirt appeared

ripped.

We continued to work on the man but after about five minutes he went

grey and his face was withdrawn. As I had approached the man his head

had moved as if he was being sick. When I got to him I cleared his

mouth and the back of his throat of vomit before ccmmancing mouth to

mouth resuscitation. There was no blood in the vcndt. After about

five minutes when the man wait grey, a very distinctive smell cane

from his mouth. I can still remember it new but could not describe

it.

After about seven minutes I swapped places with the St John's

Ambulance nan and he ccmrenced mouth to mcuth and I heart massage. As
                         /
I did heart massage his ribs were unnaturally prominent in the whole

of his rib cage even though he was only thinly built. His stomach

was depressed and abnormally lewer than his ribcage.

After a short time I undid the button on his trousers and ripped open

the zip.    I then continued heart massage.

Shortly afterwards an ambulance entered the ground. It appeared to be
BRUDER                 DE&SC WILLIAM


a Health Authority arobulance as opposed to St Johns.    It began to

drive down towards Leppings Lane.    I then told the St John's man to

try and stop it. He tried to flag it down but it continued on as if .

it had been ordered not to stop in the top corner but to go to the

Leppings Lane end.

The St John's man then rejoined me and continued to give nouth to

mouth resuscitation.

Shortly after this we were joined by one of the men I described

earlier in the tracksuit trousers and I think green sweatshirt.     He

asked me if I was all right and knew what I was doing.

I said "I'm an off duty bobby, I'm all right", with that he left as if

to go somewhere where he could be of more use with other injured

persons.

Shortly after this man, which must have been about six minutes since I

had changed places with the St Johns man, a female St Johns Aobulanoe

officer came over and pushed me out of the way and took over from me.

I then stood up and watched as she was obviously better trained in

First Aid than me.

I then stood by the injured man together with his friend who had been

there all along, telling us to keep going and not to let his Bate die.

Within two minutes of this, the St Johns Ambulance man told the St

Johns flnbulance varan, "He's gone", and stood up.   I looked at the

nan's friend who was standing by his head, he was ccnpletely grey.

By this time, I felt ill myself and just turned away as there was

nothing else I could do.

I would describe the man who died as:- between 17 and 20 years of age,

approx 5'8 - 5'9 tall, short sandy or reddish coloured hair, slia

build, no facial hair, white european, I could see no cuts or

abrasions on him.    I seen to remember freckles on his cheeks, but I'*
BPL'DER              DERQC W n U A M                                           9


not sure if it could have been vomit, I'm almost positive it was

freckles. As I said previously he had an unusually prominent rib cage

and depressed stomach.

He *as wearing a light, possibly white button up shirt, light grey or

beige cotton trousers, light coloured boxer shorts.         I noticed no

jewallery or footwear.

His friend I would describe as 21 or 22 years of age, dark brown hair,

shortish hair, about 5'9 tall.    I cannot remember m c h of his clothing

but he appeared quite plump with a slight beer belly. He had no

facial hair nor glasses.

1)18 St John's man was in uniform, the only thing I can remember was

that he had dark hair and was thirty plus years of age.

Hie St John's woman was in uniform again very slimly built and no

oldar than 18 years of age.

Aftar the St John's man had said the man was dead I'd seen enough,

I fait ill and had to get out of the ground.       I knew        rtxild have

stayed where he was because he knows no First Aid.      I went over to the

wall where I had cliirbed in. As I got there I saw a photografter

kneeling down with an orange tabard he was taking photographs of the

injured and dying.

A fan who was already on the pitch went over to hist and said "Fuck

off, you're taking pictures of ay injured mates".

Tfte photographer carried on taking pictures so the fan started pushing

him. Hie photographer stood up and the fan then pushed him back to

the wall and tried to take the camera frcra him. The camera then swung

and smashed into the wall.    I then climbed over the wall using the

photographers case as a step.    I then rejoined

He said to roe "Cane on vre're going*, and we both then left.      I cannot

say what time this was.
                                           ..’I*
BRUDER                DEREK WUXIAM


Whilst at Hillsborough the only criminal offences were of a minor

public order nature ie, the fans climbing over the gates etc. Aftar

the disaster within the stand, I saw a number of instances such as

the photographer'8 camera and sausage rolls thrown at the cordon in

frcnt of the North Stand and one old nan who threw a cup of tea at an

officer in the cordon.

This was caused purely by agitation amongst the crowd by the apparent

callousness of the photographer and apparent inactivity of the polios

with regard to the injured and dying.

I witnessed no serious offences.

There were a number of factors which I believe contributed to the

nunber of deaths and injuries.

Outside the ground there appeared to be a lack of co-ordination

between the mounted and foot police officers.   The approach roads to

the ground were well manned with Police officers at junctions and

outside pubs and off licences.   Hcwever, I made a content about being

misdirected by the police officer to another officer and he said it

was understandable because a lot of the officers were drafted in from

outside stations and had poor local knowledge of the area. This may

have contributed to the build up cutside the ground which caused the

initial crush outside.

Inside the ground once the disaster had occurred there appeared a lack

of co-ordination between senior police officers and lower ranks on the

pitch.   The actual scale of the incident wasn't appreciated

immediately which resulted in a delay in the response and personnel

being despatched to deal with it.

Fro* ray own personal experience I and most Police officers have only

basic First Aid knowledge. What I administered first aid to the nan I

felt totally inadequate on reflection. However with that particular
        BRL'DBR              DEREK W ILLIAM                                     11


        man, I don't think more knowledge would have helped but it might have
        in others.

        I would also like to add that though the Police in the cordon did not

        assist the injured and dying I saw a number of other officers who did.

        In particular two snail policewoman who tried to help a very large aan

        but couldn't carry him until helped by fans.




                                                          D W BKUDER SIGNED
          TftKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           EAlEt   270489
WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SI3®TORE*
                                  C2>




                                                                         STWICN
NAME:           DEREK WILLIAM
                ERUDER

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 23

OCCUPATION:   PCL PC7808


Who states:- Ihis statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I mate
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be        to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 170889                                                  D BHUCER (SIGNED)



        Further to ray previous statement dated 27 April 1989 (270489).

        On 17th August 1989 (170889)/ I was shown photographs taken at the

        Hillsborough Stadiun, Sheffield on 15th April 1989 (150489) by WEC

        _____ and PC            [ can identify myself on Photographs

        (Ref. Ho. TT1/28) (Ex. No.

        (Ref. No. TT1/29) (Ex. No.

        (Ref. No. TT1/30) (Ex. No.

        (Ref. No. TT1/31) (Ex. No.

        (Ref. No. TT1/32) (Ex. No.

        (Ref. No. DM1.4)   (Ex. NO.

        On the above mentioned photographs I an administering first aid to an

        unknown male, I cannot remember his face but I remanfeer the striped
        fcoxar shorts he was wearing.

        I have also been shown a photograph of Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS, NO. 51,

        but I am unable to say if this is the person I am treating, as I can
        only remember the clothing.



        D ERIDER




                                                                                   47
        BRUDER            DEREK WILLIAM




                                          D BRUDER SI<HED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   170889

WITNESS TO SIQttHJRE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                      C £>




                                                                           STATION
NAME!            DEREK WILLIAM
                 BRUDER

ADDRESS:


AGE / O W E OF BIROT: 23

OCCUPATION:   POLICE OFFICER MERSEYSIDE POL


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each sioed
by me, is true to the best of toy knowledge and belief and I m*w>
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be n » M f > to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DftlEDi 030590                                                D BHUCCR (SIGNED)



        Further to my previous statement* of 27 April 1989 (270489) and 17

        August 1989 (170889), I have been asked to think about a muter of the

        points which are raised in the statement I made nearly a fortnight

        after the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 15 April 1989 (150489).

        Before clarifying a number of these points I would point out that I

        have today been shown a number of photographs, plans and docuoents by

        Inspector SAWERS of West Midlands Police which I have viewed to refresh

        ny memory.    It's also fair to say that ay first statement (27.4.89)

        (270489) was the first occasion that involvenent with the disaster was

        set down in any detail, in writing, although I did make sotb hrief

        notes myself on Sunday 16 April 1989 (160489).    I retain these in ny

        possession and would say that they do no relate to   ay   dealings with any
        deceased casualty that day.

        I am a single man and joined Merseyside Police on 27 October 1987

        (271087).    Curing initial training at Bruoe District Training Centre,

        Warrington, I received basic first aid instruction in both

        theoretical and practical application.    I obtained a pass and was

        issued with an identifying card qualifying me for, I think 2 or 3
BRUDER               DEREK WILLIAM                                        2

years. On 15 April 1989 (150489) I had received no further instruction

or refresher training in basic first aid. However, as a direct result

of the situation I found myself in on the day of the disaster I

personally felt inadequately equipped in either theory oar

practise of first aid. I am absolutely satisfied that the first aid

I rendered in terms of mouth to mouth resuscitation and heart

were correct and that I could have done no more, but nevertheless, I

felt I didn't know enough and regretted not having taken that aspect

of initial training seriously enough.

For these reasons, I applied on my own iniative for further first aid

training in the form of a one week full time course leading to

qualification as a first aid public order trained officer.   I undertook

the course in June last year, which means I now have a special role

within public order deployments to treat casualties either of members

of the public or police officers as injuries occur.

As a result of that course, I feel confident and much better equipped

to deal with injured people whether those injuries be minor or life

threatening.   It also confirms that in fact, my actions were right an

the day and my attaints at resuscitation, although unsuccessful were

properly administered.

I will new deal with a number of specific points from ay original

statement (27.4.89) (270489), using the page nunbers of that statement.

I understand that the nunbers I will use in brackets are those of the

file of statements contained in respect of Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS,

prepared by West Midlands Police under the deceased reference number

51.

On page 6 (File page 41) I first refer to the youth I now know to be

Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS lying a 1/4 length of the pitch from the Spicn

Kop.   I refer to him been "on the floor", meaning the pitch surface,
BRUDER                  DEREK WILLIAM                                      3

and "having convulsions". I have thought about this carefully today

and with the added benefit of my training I can say that this was rut a

process that lasted for any time.    It certainly wasn't anything similar

to an epileptic fit, for exarple.    It was an inpression that I had

which I originally associated with the lad vcmitting.    I will say that

I did not see the casualty vcmit nor did I see any sick on the body or

grassed area around him.    I will correct further references to vcmit as

they occur in ny original statement.

On page 7 (42) I describe approaching the body. He was not convulsing

as I did so (line 5).

I refer to feeling for a carotid pulse in the neck and said originally

that I thought I could detect a slight pulse however I now feel that I

ant able to correct this.   I felt for the pulse with ny first two

fingers of ray left hand, I believe, to the carotid artery I cannot say

absolutely that I felt for the pulse before I started south to south or

after, nor indeed whether I did both simultaneously. Whilst I would

ncv have much more skill, on the day I cannot say with absolute

certainty that I vent, accurately, straight to the carotid artery.

For all these reasons, I can say that I felt for a pulse in the region

of the carotid artery, but I nay have also touched the area of the

"Adams Apple" or felt something in the neck region which I originally

thought was a pulse but may have been mistaken.

I refer to the face going "grey" and his "face was withdrawn." I

cannot say specifically that this was a change frcm normal paHer to

grey, or what I now knew to be cynoeis or blueness.   I mentioned it in

the sequence of when I became aware of it.

I refer to approaching the lad and having the iiqpression that his head

moved and associating this with his being sick.   I am now absolutely

satisfied that he was not sick, or certainly I did not see vomitting or
BRUOER                  DEREK WIIUAM                                      4


varit. Hie movement of the head, if that* what it was, I would say its

beet described as a 'twitch'.

I refer to clearing his mouth before resuscitation, by that I mean to

say I checked that his airway was clear before expressing air into his

mouth. There was a fluid of sane description but I aooept readily that

this could have been spittle or phlecpn.

I refer to the man going grey after about 5 minutes and a very

distinctive smell caning fran his mouth.   This was again not vanit but

its true to say I can still remember it now as it caused me to heave

and feel sick myself.

I refer to performing mouth to mouth whilst the St John ambulancenan

did heart ccnpression for about 7 minutes. Whilst this is purely

recollection I believe it to reasonably accurate.

Having changed places with the St Johns Arribulance nan I refer to

feeling what I thought was an unusual rib cage and abdcman.    A

photograph I have been shown at post mortem appears to suggest this.

I refer to unzipping the lads trousers at this point and in ay second

statement recollect the striped boxer shorts which I have seen in

photographs (Ref No TT1/31 and TTl/32).

I have been shewn documents which purport to give timings of the

arrived on the pitch of the 1st anbulanoe (St Johns Aabulanoe) and the

2nd ambulance (being the 1st SYMAS ambulance). I have considered this

information (referred to as MAP 1 15.15-33 and RJH2 15.17-08) in

comparison with the photographs PR5/A/32 and FR5/A/33 which purport to

show the casualty being carried cm a stretcher at 15.32 (1532) and

which I understand would be before I saw and assisted to resuscitate

hirr at the Spion Kop end of the ground. I cannot reconcile the time

sequences and I am still sure that I did see an anbulance, distinguish

in ny own mind that it was not of St Johns but Health Authority and
BRUDER               DEREX WILLIAM                                         5


that I told the St Johns man with me to stop the ambulance.      I have

considered that what I referred to may have been this anbulance

exiting fran the stadiun but I don't think it was. My recollection is

still that it was entering the stadium. I refer to being joined by a

varan St Johns anbulance officer who pushed me out of the way.         I

recollected this to have been about   6   minutes after I had changed

places with the male St Johns officer.      That makes a total, from

recollection of 13 minutes joint resuscitation with the St Johns nale.

I would standby these estimates only in as much as I feel we attenpted

resuscitation for between 10 and 15 minutes.

Within a further two minutes of both St Johns people working together,

the man declared "He's gone" and stood up.     I referred to and re-affirm

that he was "completely grey" and there is absolutely no doubt in ny

mind, both new with the benefit of further training, and then at that

mcrrent that the youth I had tried to save was dead, certainly dead and

beyond any further help.   I and the St Johns personnel would not have

stopped if there had been any glimmer of hope at all - there was none.

I describe the body of the youth on P8 k 9 (43 & 44) and believe the

distinguishing features I referred to 12 months ago are plain to see on
photographs.

I have seen injuries shewn on photographs of the neck area, however I

did not see than or notice then on the day.
D Eruder

H Sauers Inspector
        BRUOER              DEREK WILUAM


                                                    D BRUDER SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE*

          TIME:           DAIEs

WITNESS TO SIOttTUREj

OFFICERS SIGNATURE i    M R SAWERS INSPECTOR 3451
     West Midlands Police
  Evidence Continuity Chart
               For
      DR STEFAN POPPER
             Coroner
South Yorkshire (West D istrict)
        HILLSBOROUGH
      DISASTER INQUIRY
    Saturday 15 A pril 1989
               By
           J M JONES
   A ssistant Chief Constable
     West Midlands Police


 Deceased Reference No 5 1
 Name     WILLIAMS Kevin Daniel
         L a b e l la y o u t




T im #




              I n fo r m a tio n



                       Vltrws* fWMn#

                      Dal* | Tim# ^




           Loss of continuity
15 APRIL 1989



                                    0650

                                           I




                                               lw * * 9 < r i n 9 t o |» |F . A .o u p
      My stapson K*vtn Dan1*l              »«ri final at S&fWtW. On tv
     VUIAMS*ftM#r*ay*id#                    morning o f th* matoh Kavln
   to traval by train to ShafflaW
                                           VStLlAMS, Thom a* NCKSOW
   to m tha F.A. oup wml final.             Gragory FAGEN and my#alf
     Ha want with
                                             wafcad fr o m my housa to
                                             Formby r a ilw a y station.

       I      Mr.J.S.VtXIAMS                      |        1 Andraw DUNCAN
   . S 291    13.4.891                     L S i441        115.4.09         0650
)7 2 °                                   1040




          V# got • train from Formby
                                                Th# train arrived at Sheffield.    Onoe we got to the ground      Kevin end I deoided to go frt<
         to Liverpool o#ntra1, wa*#d                                                                              the flround. At the tum stite
         to lim e Str##t station vh#re          Ve were put on a ooaoh by the       Tommy NICKSON beoame
                                                 poWee. The ooaoh took us to       separated from Kevin and         v # were s*erohed by th#
          v# oaught another train to                                                                               polio#, Aft#r going trough
                                                .eppings Lane. Gregory FAOEN      myself. V# vent to the shops
         Nanohester vh*n we ohenged                                                                                the tunnel v #         into tht
                                                  cna not o«me on our ooaoh.        and had * walk round th#
              trains for Sh#fft#W.                                                                                 pen on the left Q%n # ), w#
                                                                                            ground.
                                                                                                                  did not lfee it in this pen, ve
                    Andrew DUNCAN                                                                                   then moved into th# right
                                                             Andrew DUNCAN                   Andrew DUNCAN              hand pen (Pen 3).
          81441     13.4.891 0720                 81441    13.4 # 9 | 1040apo      S1441    13.4.89 1130app                             DUNCAN
                    Thom#* NICKSON                          Thom** NICKSON                                        81441     113.4.891 1S30
                                                                                             Thom** NICKSON |
                    13.4.89                       S3160                           ^S3160    13.4.89|          J
                                 1415




B»twMfi 2 p.m, and 2.15 p.m.
tb* p m starttd to fin up, but
     thtrt was no ©rush.
 V* w*rt standing about 2 to
   2 1/4 yards from th*
       p*r1m*t*r ftnoo.

    I     | Androw PUNCAN

l 8144I   115.4.89 H O O ^ .
                                                                 1 K1c
                                                                          k O ff




1445                                                       1 4 5 9 :3 0




                                                                                    Vh*n th* gam* Jdolc*d off 1
           1N V a group of frt*nds                                                  was pusb*d forward down
          standing behind m*# 1was                                                  th* t*rrao* about 2 yards.
       itandlng with K*vin WILLIAMS.                                                Aft*r this push 1lost K*v*»
         Th* atmosptwr* was hippy,                                                   and did not s h him again.
           «■> A A   *4* » - — *«■*^   Mill'«« ■■I m .a*
             ptopit w trt SwvQffig.                                                 1took*d around for him but
                                                                                   oould not s** him anywhor*.

           (           I Andr*w DUNCAN                                                I Andrew DUNCAN
       . SI 441 |l 5.4,89 |l 443app                                                        15.4.891
                                                                                   Ls141 -
                                  1 5 2 7 :5 0
                                                                            1

i




    w'Tnxfj'iwv^
    VUIAM  8 In dtetr*s* K*y(»
                         at th*
        front o f P m S.
                                                 VW*o *tfll showing K*vin
                                                 WILLIAMS at th* front of
     PostfcW W*ntff§oatton by
                                                          P*n 3.
        lnsp*otor UYTQN.
                                                 Possfcl* W*ntifk)atkm by
               PHOTON    APH                        lr»p*ctor LAYTCftf.
    OAC.1.4 «3.4^1
                                                            VIDEO STILL
                            1 5 2 8 :4 3




VMt© Sim showing Kovln
WILLIAMS bring passed out
       of Oat* 3.

PosslbW Mtntlfioatton by
   Irwptotor LAYTON.

  I    I   VPEO STIX
#1w as assisting p*opW on ttwX
  pitch and I assisted a youth      Photograph showing Kovln
  who i now (mow to b* K*vfc*        VS.LIAMS b*tog oarrfed
   OanfclViitiAMSfromth*            across th# pitch by polio*
  gat*way of p«n 3 and triad        offlotrs and supporters.
   to rosusoltat* him on th*
 pitoh.l was unsuooassAil and       Possfel* 1d*nt1f1oat1on by
         Vft Mm th*r*._______          lnsp*otor LAYTON.
     I P.C 1TOCRABHHUL**                        PHOTOGRAPH
LS1816j |lS»Ct9                   PR5.AJ2 II 5 .4 4 9 1 1332

   Vfdto still showing Korin        t assist*^ to oarry at Wast
  VHUAMS b*1ng pUo*d on            two p*op1* *oro*s th* pltoh
 th* pitch by * polio* offto*r.   On* of th*s* I ©an b* s»*n wltfi
                                   on photograph and I am told
   Possibl* identification by        that this p#rson is K*v1n
      inspector LAYTON,                Dankl VLIAMSB 51.

              VP£0 STH-L               I    | P.C 437 HAYES

  MAP 7     15.4 JS9 j 1528:43^
;l
                                                                            I




     • «n a potto* ©ffio«r with the
     M irwyiW t Potto*. I went to      ■mouth to mouth, tht i t . Johns
      th* F.A. oup s*m1 flu*]as *      I *«•«» <1Wheart massage. Aft*r
     *P*ctator. I m w • p*rson on      I abut 7 minutes w* changed
     th* pitoh, about * 1 /4 o f th*   I ov*r. Eventually a f*mak St
     P«oh Wogth away from Spion        I *-Johns offio*r took ov*r from
     Ko§», «bout 20 f**t from th*      I « • . Vtthtn 2 minutes h* safe!
      North stand, h* was having       ■to h*r “He's gon*". Ith*n 1*ft.
             oonvulslons.                            Mr4>.VJRUDER
                 H r.D .V ^W >0*

                19.4.891
                                         P h otograp h sTT1 /2 8 ,2 9 , 1
                                        «0*»1 ,32 an* DMI/4 showing
                                        MrJ>.V3«UD£R attempting to
                                          r*susottat* a young maW.
                                          MrD.VJRUDCR WentlfWd
                                              himself (SI 222A )
                                        Th* young mat* Identified by            V
                                         S.C. 221 MARTN as being
                                          K*v1n VLLIAMS (S621B)

                                                     PHOTOGRAPHS
                                                   15.4.89
                               1600   1606




 I V*J assisting In oarrytng                 r                            1
                                                 1was In th# gymnasium.
bodbt from th# pitoh to th#
    gymnasium ,0n# of th#                      1was ask#d to confirm            I stay#d with th# body, ht
bodi*» I oarritd was that of                   <J#aths ©f parsons 1n th#       was a1tooat*d body r*f#r#no#
a young boy who was lat#r                    gymnasium. 1o#rtifi#d d#ath               numb#r 3^.
 a11oo*t#4 body numb#r 31.                        on s#v#ra1 bodi#s.                            V.

           S.C. 221 MARTIN                        |      Dootor CURPEN                   8.C. 221 MARTIN
 S   621   13.4.89                               S 36   13.4.89j           i    8 621    13.4,891

                                                        S.C. 221 MARTIN
                                                                                                                      I
16 APRIL 1989                                                                                                         I




                                                        In th* pr*s*no* of D*t*otiv*   With my v1f* I o*m* to th*
           I *ooomp*nt*d body r*f*r*no*                 insp#etor TIMMS I 1d*ntift*d   M*dtoo 1*9*1 C*ntr*, th*f* I
              mjmb*r 51 to th* Medico                    body r#f#r«MK» numbtf 51       1d*ntif1*d th* body of my
                                                          to th* {Mthologist Doctor    st*pson K*vin WILLIAMS to
                   1*9*1 Ctntr*.
                                                                   SLATER                   P.C. 1269GLAVE.


                         S.C. 221 MARTIN                          D.C.638 WEIGOLD                Mr.J.S.WMIAMS

            S 621        16.4J     0520                 S1280AW 16.4.89


            AMBULANCE LOG j
                                                                                       Mr J*m*s St*ph*n WILLIAMS
 I d 854    I 6 .4 j f | 045?    J                                                      id*ntifl*d body r*f*r*no*
                                                                                        r*imb*r 51 to rm *s b*ing
                                                                                         th*t of hi# st*pson K*vin
                        »tw#*n 15.4.89 *nd 16.4.89                                              WI.LIAMS.
                        I v u toting i t * r*o*<vir»g
                        offtatr *t th# M#dk»o 1*9*1
                        C*ntr*. During thi* p*rtod
                                                                                                  P C. 1269 GLAVE
                        body r*f*r*nc* number 51
                          was id*ntifi*d to rm by                                       S 801    16.4.89
                             8.C. 221 MARTIN.

                                   D C.63Q VEIGOLD
                    SI 280AW 16.4.89
                    V       —
I carried ou t* post mortem
ex«nVwt1on on the body of
   Kevin Daniel VILLI AMS
body reftrenoe number 31»



          Dootor SLATER
S2763K   16.4.891   **1.
                                                                                    ftepoer or
                                                                                    C£u c.o.ee^J
                                                                                      U'iFsfi.


                                                                                                          WQ 602
                                                                                                           (2.88)

 STAPLE
 ATTACHMENTS
                                                              Wett Midlands Polica
 HERE
                                                             FAX        M E S S A G E

 FOR THE ATTENTION OF:           CVA S O P T                        l~X>iOc.
                                    “S O O T H                     ^O e tC S


                               f. x n c :   0   7 - 4 .2 .      £ > 2 . 3 'S S S


 FROM                          West Midlands Police                                Date: &   ‘ (o

                '<;Ci          Department:         O C X M

                               Telephone No: O c ^            <o       SCC O       Extension: c5. 3 1 ^

                               Fax No:      O c U            Q 2 . Q      5^00-4*



 Total number of pages including this page



 Remarks/Action required:




Authorised by
                                            of Department
Mr D G IBBS i ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE
( INSPECTORATE)


CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT D G T GREENE I
COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE DEPARTMENT



KENNETH DANIEL WILLIAMS                                         OA,02,93



Further to the recent correspondence, I draw your attention to page 5 of the
transcript of proceedings of the inquest on the k May 1990, paragraph ‘A'.
It is clear that inspector SAWYERS was directed to see PC BRUDER as a
result of an enquiry from the Coroner. I also draw your attention to the
other transcript in respect of proceedings on the 2 May 1990 at page 8 ,
paragraph 'E'. Dr SLATER, when recalled, makes it clear that the concept
that the evidence of 'opening eyes and speaking1 is not really conceivable,

It is evident from all these circumstances that the distressed condition of
the Woman Special Constable was sufficient to produce an inaccurate account
of the facts as they were not possible in view of the medical opinion and
clearly conflict with the evidence by PC BRUDER.

At 11.45 am today I had a telephone conversation with Derek William
BRUDER, Police Constable 7808 of the Merseyside Police, who confirms that
his second statement (unpaglnated - but taken on the 3 May 1990 by
Inspectors SAWYERS) was made entirely voluntarily and without any
pressure, duress or other persuasion by Inspector SAWYERS.

It was interesting during the conversation with PC BRUDER that he also
indicated that a solicitor, on behalf of the relatives, had interviewed hia
and suggested the possibility that his second statement could have been
furnished as a result of cajolery or other improper action by the West
Midlands Police. Additionally, PC BRUDER was challenged by the solicitor
as to whether his contact with the Coroner was construed by him as undue
pressure. PC BRUDER maintains that he has made it clear to the solicitor
that this was NOT the case.

In all the circumstances it would seeo clear that the conflict in the
evidence was factual on the accounts given by the various witnesses, namely
PC BRUDER and Woman Special Constable MARTIN, but all of the evidence
supports the account given by PC BRUDER.

CONCLUSION i

There was no improper conduct by Inspector SAWYERS in re-taking the
statement from Police Constable BRUDERj he was merely clarifying a request
                   ice the transcript at page 5 of the 4 May 1 9 9 2 ,




      superintendent
■ ■ y -
    %

                                IN.IHE HIGH COURT OF JUSTlCf;


        Applicant’s Reference       Notice of Application for
        Number
                                                                Crown Office Reference
                                    Leave to Apply for          Number
                                    Judicial Review
                    This form must be read together with Notes for Guidance
                               Obtainable from the Crown Office
                                To the Master of the Crown Office
                                     Royal Courts of Justice
                                             Strand
                                       London WC2A 2LL
        Name, Address and Description     (1)     Sandra Stringer A Donna Carlile, the
        of Applicants                             mother and sister of Paul Carlile,
                                                  deceased,

                                         (2)      John A Theresa Glover, the father
                                                  and mother of Ian Glover, deceased.

                                         (3)      Joan Sinclair, the sister of Michael
                                                  Kelly, deceased.

                                         (4)      Leslie A Doreen Jones, the father and
                                                  mother of Richard Jones, deceased.

                                         (5)      Peter A Joan Tootle, the father and
                                                  mother of Peter Tootle, deceased.

                                         (6)     James Stephen A Anne Williams, the
                                                 father and mother of Kevin Williams,
                                                 deceased.                          ’
        Judgment, Order, Decision or     (1)     Various decisions of Her Majesty’s
        Other Proceedings in Respect             Coroner for S**lfc Yorkshire in the
        of Which Relief is Sought.               course of the inquest held between
                                                 the 18th day of April 1989 and the
                                                 28th day of March 1991 into the
                                                 deaths of the deceased hereinbefore
                                                 mentioned and others at the
                                                 Hillsborough Stadium on 15th April
                                                 1989.                            p

                                        (2)     Conclusion or verdict recorded by the
                                                Coroner’s jury at the end of the said
                                                inquest that these were cases of
                                                “Accidental Death*.

«
Kevin Williams' Mini-Inquest



At Kevin Williams* mini-inquest on 2nd May Dr. Slater, the pathologist, gave
        /


evidence that death was due to asphyxia and that his injuries were likely to

have resutted in unconsciousness within seconds and in death within three to

five minutes (page 3B-E). However, evidence was then read out, in the

course of the summary, from two police officers which suggested that he might

still have been alive for some considerable time after he sustained his original

injuries and capable of being saved. The evidence took the following form:



(i)      There was first a statement from a PC Bruder which was referred to

         in the summary in which he stated that he had come upon Kevin

         Williams lying on the ground of the pitch having convulsions (the

         rest of his statement in which he referred to Kevin Williams’

         vomiting and to him having a pulse was not read out at this hearing

         though this clearly provided further evidence that he was still alive).

         Clearly this evidence suggested that Kevin Williams was still alive

         and moving a considerable time after his original injuries and even

         after being moved onto the pitch. This raised the question of :
whether he could have been resuscitated though PC Bruder stated

that his own attempts at resuscitation eventually failed and that

Kevin Williams went grey.



However, a further statem ent was then referred to from a Special

Constable Deborah M artin who had made a statement to the effect

that Kevin Williams was alive and had been briefly resuscitated as

late as about 4pm. In the original, statement she made which was

not read out at the inquest but merely referred to, she said:



"He stopped breathing so I gave him the loss of life, and heart

massage and a doctor also helped. He started breathing and opened

his eyes, his only word was “Mom* and then he died*.



This statement was referred to with some scepticism (page 6F of

transcript and page 7D-E). But deariy it once again raises the

possibility of survival long after 3.15pm (as late as 4pm) and the

question of whether death might have been prevented by more

timely medical intervention. The Coroner was sufficiently concerned

about this evidence to call further evidence on the matter on 4th

May at a resumed mini-inquest into the death of Kevin Williams.
 Kevin William* (the resumed mini-inquest



 When the mini-inquest was resumed on 4th May the Coroner called further

 evidence which was undoubtedly intended to discredit the suggestion that

 Kevin Williams had survived for some considerable tim e after sustaining his

crush injuries and to reassure the family by qualifying and undermining the

testimony of PC Bruder and Special Constable M artin. The further evidence

took the following form:



(i)      An Inspector Robert Sawers was called who stated that he had re­

         interviewed PC Bruder on 3rd May and that, in the light of the

         further questions put to him, PC Bruder now accepted that his

         description of the deceased as 'having convulsions* should be altered

         and the ‘movement’ was best described as a ‘twitch* (6C). He also

         reported that PC Bnider had now qualified his claim to have ‘"felt

         a slight pulse” and that he now accepted that "whatever he felt there

         he cannot be categoric it was a pulse" (page 6G ). He further reports

         that PC Braden now accepted that he had not witnessed Kevin

         Williams being sick (page 7b).



(ii)     Dr. David Slater, the pathologist, was then recalled. His evidence

        was that Kevin Williams* death was caused by a "very very severe

        case of asphyxia" and that there "was four fractures to the voice box".

         In his view unconsciousness would h^ye resulted from the crush
         injuries within seconds and irrecoverable brain damage d eath would

         have occurred within three to six minutes thereafter but whole body

         death may not have resulted until sometime thereafter (pagers 10-

         12). This might explain the apparent twitches some considerable

         time after he had been taken from the terraces. But he was sure

         that Kevin Williams had died before Special Constable M artin

         arrived on the scene.



(iii)    In addition, a Dr. Ernest Gumpert was called to explain further-the

         distinctions between brain death and whole body death and to record

         his view that Kevin Williams was brain dead before he got out of the

         area where he was standing, when he lost consciousness.



Subsequent Developments Regarding WilliamsMnqucst



Subsequent investigations have revealed that considerable pressure was put

on both Special Constable Martin and PC Bnider to retract or qualify their

evidence as to the signs of life they described in Kevin Wiliams. These are

set out more fully in the statement of Kevin Williams* mother, appended

herewith. But the manner in which the very significant evidence of these two

witnesses was presented to the mini-inquest was highly unsatisfactory. Clearly

the jury and the family should have had the benefit of hearing oral evidence

rather than somewhat misleading second-hand accounts of their original

statements and of the qualifications they had subsequently been persuaded to*'
make «o their original evidence. And clearly the edited version of their

evidence actually presented was, „ the very .east, no, a complete picture of
their eye-witness accounts.
                                                                                              ££pe fCf
                                                                                              OP




                          DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                   GUY'S HOSPITAL
                                             (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

 Dr I E WEST, MJB, Ch_B., F-R.C-Ptth.. D .M J
 Dr R.T. SHEPHERD B.Sc« M.B.. B .S . M.R.CJ'aih, D.M.J.           I'M reD M EPICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
 Direct Telephone Law 071 -407 0378                               GUTS AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
                                                                  LONDON BRIDGE, SEl 9RT
 (Fix: 071-403 7292)
                                                                  TELEPHONE. 071-955 5000 Em: 3118/3119

  SCO:21/92/IEW
                                                                               29th October 1993


 5 .& I,                              ^
 photographs together with th. original post ,orte»' repSSS.
                                                                                        K.ny, ,.t.r       th*


 i f S § e lower
 right     n
           ot n i ^limbs,
                    ! o r i „ if ? f ^ i s . o^  s <,lb^
                                              ooaies.  Names vers          r
                                                              were inscribed upon the


                                                                i-*.                        . „ sult „ f
 and chin consistent with being crushed in the*incident* °n “ * for*he<1<1
 The photographs of Richard Jones confirm the ri*cc{r «<«,. .^ .                                          .
 ? h ™ e They
 chest.   v tha
              elsh0elconfirm
              also    „ r    the Vith *v of inhaled
                                 presence     of constrlction aroun^the
                                                    vomit in the airway!
 The photographs of Ian Glover reveal more minor chanaes of acnhvYi* uifw
 cyanosis of the face but no overt swelling  ^ e re w S fa b ra sio n fv f^ i^
 on the undersurface of the chin and on the left a ! * £

From Professor Usher's report it was clear that vomit was present in th*
deceased s air passages.   Inhalation of vomit may occur durina H f *

l d V - r i r a c ^ r ^ n                                 ssrst'ii&fL f&ss's
resuscitation^or^when t ^ U y ^ L T ^ o v Z . ^                                    °f “ t M p t * at

J»2r-f1YLt? ra?hs °f- Peter ?00tl* are not particularly helpful in that
the lumbar° reafon^f "t-h* *h S    The photo^rdphs reveal abrasions over
to
ww  t h ^ spine
          s>pme.  The              °V®r as
                  m e facial features,  tt° reviewed
                                             Upper chest re? ion
                                                      in the  fun« * j ^ n t
photograph, do not suggest the classic features of traumatic asnhvxia
nor can I see any evidence of substantial blunt trau/a ” the fac«T '


                                                                  -    s   s   l    s   u     s   s   f

                                                 s- e s r a v y s s s s s a ^ s
t ^ c a i aoblsltv w % t ^ aSed/1?' a-”an’ 167C" ln hsi^ht-showing^oderate
                      • eavy tattooln9 on both arms. The deceased in this
that t h a w         *w^ns     severe traumatic asphyxia. 1 do not believe
that 1 haveseen the correct photographs in this case.
                        DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                           G U Y 'S H O S P IT A L
                                         (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

Dr. I.E. WEST,                                                   UNTIED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
Dr R.T. SHEPHERD B.Sc, M J , B.S„ M.R.CJ>«h., DM.3.              GUVS AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
Direct Ttleptone Lin* 071-407 0378                               LONDON BRIDGE. SEl 9RT
(F u : 071-403 7292)                                             TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 E*l: 3118 / 3119


 The photographs of Kevin Williams appear to show the correct bod/* They
 do not indicate the classic signs of traumatic asphyxia.     There is no
 swelling of the face although there is some cyanosis. The most prominent
 findings that can be seen on the photographs are the injuries over the
 undersurface of the chin and left javline just below the prominence of
 the larynx (Adam's apple). The photographs indicate one long abrasion
 under the right side of the chin and an abrasion under the left jawline
 and two abrasions over the region of the larynx. An additional abrasion
 is visible just outside the left eye. There also appears to be deformity
 of the neck in the region of the larynx.

In ay opinion there has been substantial damage to the front of Mr.
Williams neck as the result of compression of the neck possibly caused
by his neck being crushed under the feet of individuals in the crowd or
caused by his neck being crushed against some rigid object.           The
deformity seen in the photographs and the fractures, found by Dr. Slater
during his post mortem examination, strongly suggest that damage to ths
upper airway was an important contributory factor in the death of Kevin
Williams. Damage to the airway at this level may lead to obstruction and
swelling of the lining of the larynx which reduces the amount of air that
can reach the deceased's lungs. As I have stated in my previous report
I do not believe that this type of injury would lead to unconsciousness
within a few seconds.    Whilst death may occur rapdily following such
laryngeal injuries this is not inevitably the case and death may be
delayed for a considerable period. This type of injury is amenable to
treatment in the form      of an emergency tracheostomy or a crico-
thyroidotomy.   Whilst an emergency tracheostomy is a relatively major
procedure, crico-thyroidotomy is a simpler procedure which involves the
passage of a tube through the membrane between the thyroid and cricoid
cartilages.   It is possible that if one of these procedures had been
carried out at the scene then hewould not have suffered from the fatal
asphyxia which led to his death.

Both cricothyroidotomy and emergency tracheotomy can be performed in the
field although, in the latter instance, with difficulties owing to an
increased likelihood of haemorrahge at the operation site.
I could find nothing,from the post mortem report           or from the
photographs, to refute the realistic possibility that this young man was
still alive after 3.15 pm on the day.   I do accept, however, that he is
unlikely to have spoken the word "Mum" if he had already suffered
convulsions due to lack of oxygen. In my opinion, the primary cause of
death in this instance is damage to his neck which would not have been
inevitably rapidly fatal.
                        DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                            G U Y ’S H O S P IT A L
                                          (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

Dr. 1£. WEST, M.B.. Ch.B, FJt.CPtih.. D.MJ.                       UNTTED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
Dr. R.T. SHEPHERD B.Sc, M B , B S , M.RC-Puh., D.M.J.             GUTS AND ST. THOMAS’S HOSPITAL
Direct Telephone Line 071-407 0378                                LONDON BRIDGE. SEl 9RT
(Fix: 071 -403 7292)                                              TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Ext JUS /3119


 In relation to the individuals who have died of traumatic asphyxia; it
 is possible to say that, with sustained compression of the trunk# death
 could have occurred prior to 3.15 pm and that they were liXely to have
 been quite rapidly rendered unconscious. There is no way, however, that
 one can state with any certainty that death occurred within that period.
 If the compression of the chest had been intermittent they could well
 have survived well beyond 3.15 pa. ,




 Iain Eric West, M.B., Ch.B., F.R.C.Path., D.M.J.,
 Consultant Forensic Pathologist,
 Director, Department of Forensic Medicine,
 United Medical Schools of Guy's and St. Thomas',
 Guy’s Hospital,
 London, SEl 9RT.
                       ~r S7&#e-tj           ha #x
                        4ssr



                                                                                                                                                f ' 7    f t
                                                                                                                                                                      1412
                                                                                                                                                                      ***
      HOC* OVt M T U                                                           W««t Midlands Poilei
  W I T M M HOT 1 V U A I U
                                                                      STATEMENT OF WITNESS
   • II22 29 1 •ii22 a                                     (C J. Act 1M 7. • »; M.C. Act 1M 0. t.10% M.C.                              1M 1. r.70l
   • ita 10 2 »It32a
  10 17 24 11 2 W 17 24 21
  11 It2t       4   iitta     Name . . ............................................ . S * 5 T . . . . V W t . . ...........................
  12 It2t       1 12 it a
  122027        siia 27       Ago . .                        (yrt)                Otto of Birth .        J                             . . .. . . ..
  1421 a        7 i4ii a
                              Occupation............... ..................................................... ........................................
    IllUa 1 tit a a Homo or business address
    tit a a 2 titaa and telephone numbor
  t o n 2*21 2 1017a 21
  11 it a    4 n ita
  12 It21 i12 ita
  14 a 27    t 12a 27
  M 21 a     71421 a
                          This statement, consisting of                                iv j ■!>«, W u w w i n uni vi iny xnowfedlgt
   t it22 a 1 i is a a and belief and I mak* K knowing that, if It it tendered in evidence, I shel be Keble to prosecution VI
   t It2)30 2 t ita »
  10 172421 2 10 17 24 21 have wBfuffy stated in it anything whicfe I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
 it ita        4 ii ita
 12 ita        i 12 ita
 122027        t iia 27       Dated the                                 day of       M
 m 21 a        714 21 a                                                                                                                            *
ttrm     w mo m t u           Signed
T O M AVOHX0                                                                                              Signature witnested by

                                                                                                          Officer'* Nam*

                                                                                                          Rank .                        .        No.

                                      L flsfco.; .                 .. ? e & r . . .V tar.vy. . . a . . m a r r i e d
                               .w\ jOot\ .. \i y IvriQ.. o i . t t j a . . o J b c v e , . . . o c k U e s s . . . ...............
                                             \ ...O m                it*...W w g q p c c A ..f*.C•..
                                Wcvxt9, .bG C ivx..£ = * :.. O . . X Y ^ v k x e /:.. c ? ^ .                                                            A .Q A * ..
                               cxi^o.. c s .. .?easo v N . A\ck.eJr. Xx>)dcx. .a t. .YV&. .dUta...
                                           D.vx..<S c^ v« 3. qv a. .                                                      \.. B 2 S . ..I.. fekvdtaid
                                Ire.. .+V&-... .H                                                     ..-i^cv.Wik. . a ^ T x i ..                              ......
                                                             ..t o . .                              .: V W , .. s^ocvx-V^ki\Al. .boiufiaKv
                               Uv.enpciSV.. a * \ 6 . .                                                               .fefe&V.w..............
                                          V ..                                .. t a . . H a ) . . N N N ^ & J ts s . .W x H > ..                               ...


                               u * o ^ . .. . W e d .. . ^ m v x .. h A e r s e ^ . .. & a s e s ;..U'MSjrpsst
                               \ V . . . a*>. .             .        .       parhj\ . >. ip ^ V ..cx.....
                               Qpuvsp. .c^. .. .^ w v d s ^ i.. J . .. . a p t . .coper.. .r\£ k eh .........
                               v W . . .c v .. . ^ c^                  ncV .      . u A \ o . . . .o J d -R 'A ck ri< . V t a . .. C cv m jn d ..

                               v\m .. \heXLX\or.. cajv. .a t...                                                                                .hck£>.. .> J.
                              • . V^ViTr’i       »V-T • %• • « • »'CrT-» •..fecUeJ:.
                                                                           • «• A*-4 • • .
                                                                                         •                       r t • « T m.•»
                                                                                                                              . . £»>*1
                                                                                                                                   h . •.• (s»\*.
                                                                                                                                           in   • «L

                              .0>wck .\ M ± o . ..^aC. t V a . .. .Vspjpvvyixs^.S - Q C & l .
                              Qjiu k ... .0 ,^ .                                                       ..te .                     ... ty\oteJl/s, ■                j.
                              Signed                                                                Signature witnessed by.
                              'Mimn
                                                                                                                                                .141*
                                              W «*t M idland* Po«c*                                                      y
                                      STATEMENT OF WITNE88
                               «CJ. Act 1*67, •.»; M.C Act 1M0, t.102; M.C. NuIm 1M1, r.TOI

Continuation of statement of . . ........... .*§>.•.                       ..................................................................
 x y fe sd t. .                        . .u^e. . ^ N x ^ ^ d . .a ir.. .<x           .!           .
 . T l r o ^ e i k r ^ . . .V cw rv .. . w f . ..         .. \5bn>d. . a ^ s d . a . . d ^ a k k .
              ..\e&^\ycu:L .Hj?. .. p u b . , ..v*ve.. d ^ S M e , .. ^ V v z ^ c & A ..WinD


C A . . £X bcxV r... S .- .O ^ .p h 'X . r ^ t v c .. .Q D o ic U . .c ^ r U itr .. . d j a s p ^ d
 .u?>..                ...cs&c*r. . t o .cv...^.o\^.uJV\xcVv. A . ^ \ m N < . . . u > o o
 C c d X fc d ..! ! . T ^ sft.                                      /is> .. .Q J c X io t:.. S - \ Q . . . .
                                                  . . V k a . .Caxtijnjci. >.. !7XWa.. ( d n if t r .
 . t k & o . . A c jp h .. .c v n 5 . . . p o s t e r e d .. . t o L . . c d o c V . . . C A ^ A j i ^ r e
 A .. .d o w '.^ d .. ,VCvmxu. .. w A so s.e^.j ..                            . .K v^pcLa,. Qjtx&nQo -
 yvsssxO^..V>q .. .^cVv...o.^...v?)p... .a                                                       .. w a * d k . / . . . . y
         VA^Vsku .uve...-QC& -.QJUL .^TW*. ..S QOAJhy...XrMU^vc\Ou_V>c>
Vsya.. .C m n ^ A id / . . ) . . . C ^ d V i ..                         . .C v^cva^ .^vrp ^ o v tV .S t s ,.
d       x        u        .. oJpfJfceA... clUloVxo.V^ ./A.^rr^cwJ'..A W O & V : .g)(L
irW a .                 . .^£Q **N £^d.. Ax>.. A ^ £ ,. . O p > ^ d . » . .         . .S csju o .
 O k . Sszk. a i . .. .PoY i c a . . . d & i e d .. .a x c r u Y s d .. & v x . . ^ ^ g d c . . .
 c c t k x o t s . :. . M c v r . . f c o . . . V^fiu.. .C r tir w > d ,., . .v*oe, .d ^ .'r d t :
 f e S A S t e . .. a ^ y a .. . e s c o r t ..o.c. ?. cUrec 3 c \ a v x .. ^ O m . .; V ^ ..
 Vfc&\C£ ,... ^ o ^ r O u . .                           ^                    ..eft..                      ..o x \ . t W . .
coc-xxAa. . A >xvdrrr.V ^c>x>..                         .. t W ; . . .p.rewic\D^ ................
 \\e o jr ...         .. X f & n o . .. v ^ O o ^ re.. .b ? . .. o p , . . rTJfa,.. .M c s s d .
 CXO. . .vAnC... .C ^ ^ jC m jd r A ,d .           .. OiOftAVO^                       .............
                          ..v ^ x , q ,..                               .o x ^ c S ..W d V v . .?=9\r'.v\e£l
 \ ..                  .. .v >j^ .. .£ >o(VAvocw. .d ^ o o r /d f ij : .. jO r .V .d jc u r ^ k c ^ a ^ .
         .           . .Q ucJ^ cdU ji A .Q jkv i f e d .. x x t . . .V s ^ .. .C t o A e s . .crfi.tL Q
 ^ S f . ^ r s a s ^...                                          ..cvreo>..
                                                                  .cvTeo>..c & ..'w                   p o o              ^.•ASi
                                                                                                                    V. ..^...\S^»-
                                  .. *>£>....                    ..cs-v?..s>v^fv.,.. ^p.^.V. .c^....
 Cvreat...caivsid... cA...             . .aM .. bcuj'cvs.. to . .Qf&........
 .V. ^ v . . .cvbo^V;.. Id .. .^A«:n^bVfL%....           .<d^d! Wt~........
        \'l£L&r..                      .. Q   xvva   ..c ^ X i p ^ ^ Q v \ S av\..A $ T ..a U ?..m f c £
O m « 6 s .. sxts.e^..                                      . !o^ncL .. .^no^itssCi. . .V?SP.V..VK^Te
sAJt^'P..r k & t . ..                   .v c n o ^ u j l T t ^ ^ ^ V   xi .. .a)d..Xvrrrcv..                                            .
 .u . W ) n ...\m ±g ...fcv:.t e u ... ^ r v N ^ U ..jfbr..                                               ,. .\.                        .
 3 .. .WkOJcsJbed.. fbV.NCQ-.                                          .. Ovwd.. .Cv»..).. SV$£\ iy>
                                                                                         rv       * • • »viy »         « »v \       •••
             _        V T ’K
                                                                 i'
Signed .
                                                                                                          v
                                        WMt Midlands PoBc«                                                               «"■— «»»
                                 STATEMENT OF WITNES8
                        ICJ. Act 1M7. •.*; M.C. Act I960, t.10% ftLC. tU m 1M1. r.TOt

Continuation of ttatom ent o f                                   ....................................................................
. C . f t e . .v...Cro.t.cx..ViYtVs;..fc*VWir...^ocsvcwrd..v u b u ^ . ...
ftsc,. c*£\vd,. . . \ k e . . .UiO\<?... y v v x ^ o e s . . .
. Y ^ w * \ d . .*Y £,. M            . .V \ore,.. SrV£vo.. .YVCj - .vJVvcac. . t e . . O p . ^
                    .A \ s O ..^GJ&pVa..A Y \ .£xc*cdt.                                                              .Yd. ...
. W . .y ^ s o o X r v C u .. r T f o / e . .           ..Yvjocxgs .. .vAfr&yx .1^ . ........
.OiixvxS...                  ..£ o . ...p o c k e d ..iJwxir... w u x ..(kafr...uifefe.
o)\j^ A loe... g m a h n A .. £ M \ 6 .. A .. .'cncuI . . k \ o . r c 3 c * f t h & . . c ^ . m j j
j     i     m     i     e        c   c     ..u£vr>. .a... i f e U a . ..^vvvAffocL .T&£>T’
. .Vq. .wsa.. .wIVvd. . .soQ xaad .. .V^.                                     .. .\o^e6?.cr....
, ^ c v 3 o e £ \ . .O j a Y ... .\Av5» . . © u p s . . . £>Gz%9&.. A>v>X\. iVftf-e
.U-.CO... 5CNC*. . ^ O X A . .(U*T. Xu<yv.. t o . . 9 ? A \ . .C\f>&.L.SCvWs3...




        S & c m ^ o . . .. V d. . k^Ocis .Vc.. A tV o ... GjYUvrvci. Ate}? p^ewioaS
\j^ a r , .. \ .. k \ a d .. y \D .. ^ ' d s ^ s . . £     .. u W e . A. u x v > t e d
\xi..0p.>.. .Cmc\6. .M               jx   ..Cv^Vaa. .                              ..X .k c d . .©rs^vrxc.
A t e . . ; a v m \ d ..            .. c k f r r ^ c .. A W .. C v a ^ c X , . . A t . .Yso.V. .
\w c. . .o fccJ u V ... ^wOr. B>S>. . 0 \ M \ v t e s . . .Y d ... Q £% .. A q .. CV.............
 ta x             .. .c * £ .. w v ^ v c k s . . p \ c ^ . . A .. .Vvc^ X qx5. . .^ v u .hcJ^.eA
 v p .. c * ... ^ e > j v t u A .. . u X o ... t e r ^ e . . .c $ V t • • M s*. • . ^ b . Q ^ X

                      ..tv>ci^..\vx*o..e x ..P cSS^xs uc cso j ^ ..                                                      ...
c.vs. .VWi.. .o.                 ..^sck;..                     .. s>vxe... .'Cvo.. cx)&^hpt
 1 .0 ...u^OrfcCioV... .cx...V>cVret,... \ ..tQ^SO. .                                                      ..cxAgfeot
            .a ..                    . c ^ v a u s ....                             .. joAooat..V^r.TO
  .^LQjr... CX>^C^.J.. V fA ir ^ X . .1V^... .^>.OuC£. . WAcnj^s^lcivv .^We........
  ,V v x t\^ V c . r x ^ & . . A ^ . . .VowvmA , .. r r f r & S o ... 9cS^jll .. d i d ) v s t
 r ? ^ r s ..Vw.bft... do.\v>c^...avv^VVviY\G^..                                                           ..Vk^re..
 .O f^ ocviA .. c v . AqV. . .dfcrr. y& kx & .                                                                          .U fejb
                                 ..VK&.. Q m ^ d y . ..c o .x \n j^ \o ^ v \o c a. ..a te o c it
C ^ b V s . . o v ^ ^ c m . . H a .. x \ \ ^ s A o S a s « .. J^
.W e .                    .. c x ^ ? \d ii.. A ^ J t.. jC^RSvjnd,.. A .. .??cvw .. .o J Q c « \ .
  Vxcv\)^ •         • • O D Z © cv ..                . .CAwwVSOvO.. .OV. 9X. .W & . SVP^U
                                 . c ^ a x v d ... .ui^yvoo^:.           q ..       .A1U.
Signed .                                                       Signaturew itnessed by.
                                                                                                                                                  141:
                                                                                                                                                  M7
                                    WMt Mkflandt Pole*
                                STATEMENT OF WITNE88
                       «CJ. Act 1967, a.9; M.C. Act 1M0. a. 102; M.C U                n   1961, r.70»

Continuation of atatamant o f              . . . . V ^ . ^ r . } ..............................................................................
tar <\^V>k^y. ..V.. .CC^Vd'.'cOc..          .U .U W .. ttcvo^...                  .......
)o&c£?*£$& .              . .Orv^Vv. . o r . . s^y>cix\\£j... vY              .boj^cvox
AVfi^..VM*£*> . X \ & . .YvC&efe.*.....................................................
         ta&vdfc. .-fta.. Ctw\jr*iy.. .tee^cwosc.. V.d.. CpY............
               .. ^jCwv. . Wuj. .                .. m . AVsQ.. . O n k ± x $ > . .CWfevdi
    .. .ovijvjyNd i. .. )....’            ...OyOv. .H a .. oY^or.. .^CSA, .q l
Yuq. . .\v>y^x^X&... v^x^rs>c>o.. .^ C :. YYsut^v. .Vo.. .Ccwsjq,. .JtVvcu
    .. Y^.^Y\\&.-. ... .h^>..V..Trw^oUy.ed,...)... .v?&^v>. ..........
?&W£jc<NCufr....cy>d..<^...^e>>^^                                                                                                    ...
uiWVv. .'is»..                .. * » . .'YW... te£V... O.f... S m .. iof.Wr
       <... fc&. . ^ . .. jcpters*. .Qy^AcS^....               . .'StevrXed.
. ^ e o ^ ^ c ...                  .V fe. . c r ^ ^ d . .'.va. .C s.. jfaijr.NM . .C ^ & ia le u
N&SVN&Ty      .. ftsu.. jy*c^5p^ky. < 4 - .tkdNY. . . ^ A t c v c u i . .to                     /
S a a d ... .Vojgos^ks. /TxVat. . .Y^xycvslX,.. oX foaM *..                                .ql.
. W .. .e*\kred.. .H ^...                             . .v.\a.. Vte,. .?> Y e^. .c^>.d..
. V u ^ k x ^ . . a v s ^ .. Q txsSx .. X .+ .*2 ?.. . u i k K . . U £ v a . .Sfo&Yed. , l o
.'cW*... .. a o ...                    . .e v e n e d .. .VSg...                 ..............
                   . a ... f t v m x A e . .c*T.. . ^ c v .. .V.. X eaX \% & d . A. AsacY..
AvftW. .cKcuvcp.. .c^.. .^.oV^.vyM^.. .ftv^... .fr&xcN.^.. S=o..\ ^ipV^d
AVu.. .QkiIu^>. . £VrvC^.. LvftXV^o.. ftvTo..Ykfc... Av*>.*\iLK.t. .vyaJJc\\'v^
.b^jco. AW . .\v^jc^;. . ^ r e . . Mi^re,. .\ccv^$». .o L . ^ q ^ U ....^
.                 .. .Vevtu.. .a^Vscv^a|U.. .YY.. \M*r>\ yvY.. feoJdvi.. Avso.
.C&y>c^ ^ p^ g5.*.... As. A.. .cexxcVo.d.. .iSo... .^ cvv>cW>c^ tw £*x . .
jq*\ .tVg. ..ott^as:...%>c^r..                     .A W ..Vyxvn^./..                                               1.Wfene...
.V^oofs'c-ed.. .uy>,.. .b.\DcXw\G.. AVa.. M^vu.... s o .. !\V.. ss<v?. .a ...
. c a ^ .c^r.. . 9 . s ^ W > a ,. !cmv>. AYvs... C K & i d . ^ . / . Q G w ^ s t & d ......
. Lv>Vv.. .^ c ^ U ,. .p.osVvuoo... Yt\si... .to .. .qeX .. .o o t . o.v^kp. . i k
.               .*... .OVW-.                                                  ..cxxS...                                      . )!v.e,.
.a^.ecxdvi.. .'c^sV'.ot^c,.. A.. ^cv^o... .r\o ... .^b\\cu. .P^.SVewac1
.Co,^)cco\. . UA^Vsvr>.. AVp. ... GoQSSXs&.‘.
          & e x ^ c > \ V v A ...\.... 0 r v 2 $ A .. o p ..                                                        .teftKwvd
. b W . . O p o A . ..Vcst..             . ^ ..... L C c \ 6 ..b c ^ .
          -..              .No... mL. .b u . .Sv^9.c                                                                          A, ..I.
.6^.' <\Y... .Po^XiOjNaCv^A.. CiWC»R.. YWvs.. .^.9 0 ^ ..                                                     .\ Y.                     ..
                11 1                                                                                  'A ......••
Signed
                                          WMt Midlands Po«c«
                                  STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                           K J . Act 1M7. *.•: M.C. Act 1M0. (.102; M.C. flute* 1M1. r.70)

Continuation of suttm ont of . . . .            • • • .V r\ f^ fr:7 T ...................................................................................
.                                                                 .. . ^G- cpUc. . > . . .                                    AV. .VVa o
Vs?>fsX, rrrvtVrt^.. .tNC^cXs..                                                                     . .^tesr.Yed..u rJt^
.m          ..                 . .o   n   . .'VKo... .y>                         .. \. 77^ > .C W a .. y \ o . .o j s &.
duolx^sf>a. .q ^ a .. .oVa£V>s>.\. ..                                                      . AW . .QYUv^<5.;.ocsd
       .. O v s W . ..0 ^ w c v ^ V > o x \ ...V.. ^ C v w a ..v                           m   ^        .! \ A & ..
.Vvcwsjv/xq. . .<x .o p .. .oA.      .. fib\\csuA..V*\W2. . Slue. .aix eo d u
            atoo.\i Y:.         .. C#sujc^ :. cwta*.<ia. .'ftsa. .\>#.<V£W£ <:
         .V.. .c?«\Vjl . .n \ cvc>o >q £& . .. t e . .                                     .c*..            .Y.. O ^. . t W ....
.C^xr<\£... jfbv. .a ... Caoy.W.. .aj-... .fXwcv^te^.. .V ^bce.. A. \eldr
.ocv^exjJ, ..}&£XjGvci<xv>x\a...r o a C e . .. .Cv*>c^..rjco.re...\vo>jM<yadi
ivA .hu.. ^W.. .0 0 ^ 0 c^^r. .\... Ct*o>Ol <\Y.. .M&VS,, . .a>\Cl .H s
.Ko^>Y...lvo^>. ...raaQf.\.<Ncy....ftt...\A\io.,. .<2kcx\ .A V s u c A n .1..
Coo.V6'.k^. . .VsisoHe .A.. \.. .casfo'. rvi .. xeoAJuui.. Vsso. . .^jA rm ad,
\Y.. .w x a .. .^vc<Sv\or.. Ao... dVtejr.. r*>aAcWa.                              . .\!m^ ..
.becx-v .k^,..At..S M > a . ... v x c x V ^ a . .. V ^ c & . .. A. .U^co\cV.v& ....
.Vvcu^e.. Cv$AtJred .. .vwOri*.. aY\ . .m u > a .. .Qs. .VatOL. .Ocuwsc.:.
     .TAW... Cnos>Vv.vy>Cv.. .<sf... tVft... CYl\U&.. oAi.. elvinttv^...
      . )qqjCjm\ . .Vo.. .d p :.. m&ce... or<X .. rv^Q.te.. X^Aevsse. xycN
A... .bfc-CitS/K. Yc.. .Vv!L^.. .^vcsc. .W>\ fc.. .\a£v2.. S^xv^osAxi.
.U ^A a*.. .^ \^ .o A U x ..                   . .paopU .. .?>fcv£tecV.
.c^V orr^.. .Vvs^d^... SsveAV.v^.a. . . .o^.'NAs ^
.V^.cvd^.. Qr&..                        .<^s.. Alvc>.x A m I . .t o ..jeSC<^v>.e
.Y^...OT o^Vn                .............................. ...................
          fifr.. .ttvw>. .. s>.\q^cj&.. A. xvo.?. .. :^ t v v v d i ^ s n .. o ^ s m , . . A.
%>.W\A.. Vxxd'.^.. W\bs\o>cM.. .Vd.. .f.^cV.. .Orsu^                        . .'(X\u........



. y\Q .. . ' 3 ^ y \ . t o .. .KV\CiVe.. .te k . .CvVovss... O x u .A Y v ^ c x . . e \ > f . ...
. A .. .tfccv?! t\Y.. X ^ cd X fA ..                   . .Q ^ ... C\ ..      Y u ^ A d r.
. s .’o .c ojl , .. A .. ^ p > Y r ^ e V ^ .. . ^ x o o Y ^ q .. .C g 'oA . ^ ^ cA .
.P.v^VvLn^ . .'fYssi.. .^Iw v M &^jcSt^ck.'o.otAs.. . .aU. .11^.. hwo
. & a .. .( b f U , .c.^. . .^AA,. . c a ^ d . . .^a ^ Y & c*. . m                                          . . £ m * w d s .. .
.          ..cx\\o... V W > ...Q£$vjorv&Yse..                                                                                 .h u .. .

                 \   tin                                                                                   *. -         11
Sljjned .
                           \
                                                                                               9^             1419
                                                                                                              •jnt
                                        W#st Midlands Poltca
                                  STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                          *CJ. Act 1M7. «.»: M.C. Act 1M 0. t.102: M.C. NuIh 1M1, r.TOI

Continuation of Mattmw* o f .........<A ^ . . V!'.. . .
.^VjCvyvx             ..lYsS, .- ^ S A . .. SrV^'rC,._______
.Vs&v?.. doxr^X                    rrV!w.. .                                         c*>d...tcvr^t...
o j ..                         r ^ V ? P .V \d .. . w > & .                           NX\G...Vp.
:tV&.. X \dW . .Q.v^r.. .uftvD.. .                                                  . .4^ d A ^ . .b\
.\ \ a . .3fey>ca...               ql.. Jsvere.. .\x\iW>o.. .ex?..V?es3r.          fish 'd
Vg.. .Vx.^Jr..                      . .u p .. .cwod.. o n k f .. .'Vka.. JfercJl*>c\. .orvhD
                                                                                                     .....
.Qv.er.;... .cn. .. ).od. ..oA xaA .. .\Q .v^c£$r. .c k i.. .ta in te d ......
.V>.v^. AW .^\d& . ,d^ . .lOCsd.. .CV>ad... £<?U.. A?Q.. H s .. .OrtCWTid.
        . .Vq .. .Y^. .. Cjpde..           . )cvod.. S©ssu\. £ ^ w sacL
CvxVd . .                ;.. .VAe.. .CVNCS,.. 0 ^scAY>qj:. . £fcUcx. QtotoV&i
Vxj^v). . .^Vx&AdVsi'...owsjcw .. .V^o£oce.. .Ys&. . Ay&w^ W j

o L . .Vte... V.emcvcs.-... .\....                 .. .V\vwv.\5 p . .teuA fdS ...
.      .. . o p t e ... o^d. . a ... ft & s t * ..           .. . q o c o ^ ^ . \ ^ J t < \
.fttfvx.As>...q p ^e... .acxd.. c&>\.. Ctf\Vp.. .?cW...px^cVv......
.rT yta.. .iva^V.:.. t o ^ A . .. y .                               .. ^ S a . ..
.              ..*vsc...                                            ..o ^ \d . ..<^C|aAd..ttV£.
. cRa . C x > ^ .                    :...)... AtyMr^dMAV&\^. .:&A*c\bQ>J&
             .. .hcvcV,.. .O.y>.. .Oyk .te . . .VW?... £e^cxy>cL. .O ^ d .....
. C & tsta-A ^ d .. .^vtVWxj..                                         .. o u t . c f c r . iVft. ^ < & m c s .
.Cvnd.. .gv>^7. ovxV^.                            . .pl\Vc\A. *.. \ ... .&ajcX. .Hun. !^Cr .a ,.
. .f e v ^ .. .m4jcv^^e^... .owfc\\... . \ W e .                                . .O.vsq. .£cw >*v^\cir
.( W ^ o h >. ..V>v\>c>..V^v?... \ ^ o .. .Vsec^.vy.                                .w\o. .A a ..Vv^Ut,
. A t . .! t ^ Q .. .^Coyvfc... .&*>jdAVac... \CwcVT^CUi^V?>ftd..V^.p.. .QfiCk..
. \xx&r.. .vvsm^... p.^C^CP... C^Xd. .b&rjtkyA.. .pv>U.'5oa.. 9^>.U l. .Up
.Cvx5.. .on .ex. .oxx.. Vtc; .. .V ^ .. .9-*       .-... A*??. A . .^>fejip.\pad.
. b o ^ > . . \ . . . . a ^ \ d . . . ^ ^ . . C V . . A a d . . . M j V \ ^ . . y v ^ <^            .....
.Cv\e^. ,c\9i^?d.. .o/>d.. .\c>o.V,ed... .Cv>.. ^ x^ cAn. .V^'.d.......
.$K*Q^?ad.. .Oj^>.ir... fbVSSX..                                                   .fcViCs
.p c w ^ e d .. y>o... )fa>c>.. 3 ? ....         .. V > ^ > . .. .a)p.oxxV .. *20.
            .. ^yp{v(v.. .<rsftr./ . . o x \ . \vw).. .9 ^ ^ / ... fo .A               ....
. Cc>a\d.v&.. .c ^ J r ... to... .V v ^ . ..                                      .Q K ^ jd .
      .T A W e...            .. .IcxAsd^..             . .^ c x ^ V si. .\s ^ \o a . .vorttfec
.O.v\...V^d           o \ c ^ i x ... .v.yv^^wV... .€>4 ,.                     .

Signed                                                    Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                             wa 4ii
                                                                                                       K w N H M71
                                     W # # t Midlands Pole*

                             s ta te m e n t m                     w itn e s s
                     (CJ. Act   I N ? , *.»; M.C.   Act   1M0. s. 102; H X .        1M1. r . m

                                         P           V - \A ^ - t
Continuation of*ut*m*ot of                                .YT;t 7............ ...............
cv*\d..         . u .- e r e ,. .^ V \e^ Y viia ...V q .       .A t e .
b o ^ c ^ o p ? .. .Owq.. .^^e-VcVS«rk,. .S?o.. x * a . .Ckd. G tftcfair
-V\c>...b ^ O j ^ N .Ae0 ^ e v * > £ X ..          .. te o a rd S . .CACM^YV..QsJCVCk.
.S ^ c X ,v y > £ \,. Ai^Qjocs. £ c $7 t.                                  ...V d .. . u s a , ,O s * . .^V felc)scrs> .
....... h§ke?... o J a o j s X t m r v i g c ^ k ^ .. A..  ..o.. fb$*ca .-
s^cjrrxa^.. £W>d... A.. .'Vkw.V,.. Q>... fe\vCSUcOOvWV.                  .
.vNscuttx ..Vq .. xcnoc*1cs. .fe^X to to cK y .. fe.. AW . .V ^A brrr!.

A\v?..             . .C A p ^ d ... .Ck . ^               W ^ r . , A\mp...
. r tffc iL . W   . . M ockr>.                                                 .<




                          .uxjlp '.y'J t. .. a * ( ^ ) c W ^ q ..c ^ r . A>h j x A v*yvp.. A.
C c c to .. .d p . .Vc>.. .V \a ip ...\jM s TH%u . .^ \c s -V ... a i d .. .^ o . A .....
V -& X k e d .. .C^^asvrv>d.. .*-£-$?&...                  A W .. . V o ^ u r ^ d .. C V \d ...
            . .V x \e d .. A c .. C&tr^.cs^ . .. .QJCsd... X e o ^ .u c ^ a .. A te yc a .


                                    dWfc*. .


W y \ . u.y>. .C M \d .. .p te ^ c o d .. k u m . .. Q £ s t e T ! d ^ T I ^ e r A ^ e •
VttCafct. A ^ Q s R c i -w A ^ O r e c s d ^ x a . . .Y x* . .                        *




,o£>. .a *x k -:; c m e r : , Vxv>.,.              .. O ^ x A . A
Arffefifessiifia®®®©®8^                                                             .....
 .O O t d ^ ..         ... .C jtuu<sd... . c u o & ... p k u i i x l . A S w n,.    A te ..
 . .p.O tcX.. \ * \ . W & .. . 0 £ e a . .. v a J W e ,.. A W ... W ^ u c e d .. .V A ^e ..
 .to ^ N C ,. £ ^ .e y > d k & ... Ax>.-........................ ........ .................
          .^ ..\...± k ^ ...V A * > ^ M ^ ..A ^ ^ ^
 . W ^ ^ avxj^ . v L o m l .. .TTfenftA C o,.. .O /x d .... ^ C w a ^. . .\\V D .
Signed .                         ........                 Signature witnessed by ..
                                                                                                                                                       WO 41

                                           W i t t M k f e n d s PoUem                                                                                m ' 97
                                      S T A T E M E N T O F W IT N E SS
                           (C.J. Act 1967. a.9; M.C. Act 1990. *.102; M.C. HUm 1991. r.TOI


Continuation of atatam ent of . .............. S .                            ............................................................................

                                               .. Q * M e x \ ..t^n.qoVVx, ,V>q.,rrsc?otV\.
  Q ^ . . .e v c ^ . c d \ u .. 7 .i Y \ . .'H ^ ^                                                                                        P e te s
          . . . \ .. j d o r s ' ^ r .

 d f t O X A ..Q.C..                           .b £ j C X V O & £ ..                    ..Vvvvs..
              .. .\v>. ..ex.. \z\X . .a^r...                                            .ccjo\d'.Yst.. .C v sx \!
  c k - ^ O n t e e ..                                       . . V c j o W e d .. A\V;^,...T7!3>^..’
 Vfr£J^..Avj^xnq.. .Qytv                                  ..QJT$£xs&. .i^JooaV.
 A W . . Q v c e a . 7 r : £ ^ . ..£>77... .C^-.. ^ W . . . G h o .d..$ y i £ > .
 ^ a - ^ ' v . .Vq .. y^sQ. . . fc>Vv\.. . S ^ f c - . i
         V .. . V A ^ k e d .. .Qs>0M±d. . c ^ - - . .YWa.. .^s.VcA/s.. . ^ c j t . c \ . . . .
WVsOlC'./ .. Q acV . .VVvGj/x .. A ..                                      .W x ^ r .. .^cvyvft .d ^.
 C (\* a .. . v n o t e s * .. x w & M r . .        .*.w->.. . t W .. . ^ . r V V v . S \ U f > c i
5 5?fer\.. .V ^ j a c t e c ^ .. A ^ . . ‘\ V ^ r , . .d fX e c ic S o r s .-... . W \ u . .^ v io jr x is
. ^ * 3 d e d . .Wvg .. . a x \ & . . . .^ V s S v A e c V ..          .. X^csO...          A . .U ^ ivjr
 O v e r. . D sj/x d . .. !^Vjqxi . . . p . v ^ e c k . .K \sa .. .U\*. .v rste. . . H & .............
  N»ccAVv... !^>t e s c s d . .. .Vw *n .                   ....... \ ... k tv s ta e ... duavM>x

 f W .. . Q p \ m . d .. . ^ > . . v * e . .. c O d ... . \ e £ A .. A v k .. . a m v r ^ . c d
 o J b c x v i 1. . . . W . - O O .         . . . Q ^ - v s c S . . . V ^ - s ^ . . b a c V c . . . V f o . S \ q , .........
                             ........................................................
          K*T- .v \0 . . .Vs*XSk... d k ^ d .. A .. .UO.\\xv£_SS». .Q s<w \A vi4ACi.
  Vjd . .CoxN'bixd^r:. .Vex .V*a.. . e x .. C x >m x > c sa l..                                      „...........
  h ^ X e r . .V U l.. .tvNoAcX\. .VWCv£>.. . ^ t o 9 >.\\£e'; . . .v o .. .W o a ..................
  D . ^ v u l ? a . . .VVsa.. S f e ^ c s ...                   .. s > \ o * x . V*>.. X £ x % d t.,X ...
                   . .. t o .. .Yre £ & . ..                .. > jc \o j& « * £ ;. . c l q . a . .p. o b t o c
  P x d & r . ..^ .\X v £ d > c > x \ ...rc^rWir...YVftv\...Ok ...t^r>r\c>os......
 S x v v ^ a e j c o a . . .. ^ . v V i f ^ C A . -... y Y . .. .VM^v>. .QV?yjlvqo^ . . Vq .
 oArvv?A>iV.. . C v c f V w A v a .. .VaJVv?hC .. S^\' ? . .. .V\cv^>                                  .........
 b v ^ v . A r W .. .fcViCfi-V. ,< iv ^ V .. .cdAjd.*y\±... .Cecwdr... . o v ? s . ^ A . . . . .
               y... . Q s k V S s o ^ c ^ ..                    .. v>y^JT€-... .^ e M e r c d ..
                       .. w?>. .. .\>c A c v \c x j >cvT .. V S > £ ... .V^cx-Vdv.. lo ^ c u d x c V .
 \ .O.VnjCD. .. OVC oucjElt. .. \ j J V \ o . . . jp.olVvCiid. . vao, . .o^V. . o i , ."Ha .........
 t e c a c u i a ....               .. u i W c > . . .                 .. .p iU j L d ..
.q L . o V W : ..                      .. . c c f t : . . . o . ^ .
                                                          . . ^oj^.vtrb>.^ . . .\va..Wsj>5>A- \r>^
Signed                                        .t     .     Signature witnessed by .
                                                                                                           V           1413
                                                                                                                       M71
                                            Wsst Midlands Polfcs
                                    8TATEMENT OF WITNE88
                          K.J. Act 1967. a.9; M.C. Act 1990, t.102; M.C. MuIn 1981. r.TOI

Continuation of ttatem ant of                                             \


               ..    .a                                                                       .q XX. : V k e ....
               .. ,u A \o ...                                          . .kV&... V>oJu(l.. Isxuj.
               . .. Ceases..                              .. yZjQQxs.. .S ^ .^ d .. .Vd.     .......
               H a .                .             .         .      .b .o .V .. .C X U ..tV & ja . d ± C \
                                                      . .VSare, ....................................................
          &A^\GcA\ajv ./.. :V\\a. .Qr.op^\^Q&£x\ . .<p(.. ?VVq........
.w V y o W . y y x o it ^ N .. .ckcwj^... . c ^ r . o ^                       .. s-k^ac?. .. oO r... fc a ja lV
.77^m« .. lu^ o . . . v \o ... o.racwcwoc^o cw.. .Q^. ;YVc>. .£
.C : o ^ d & . ..H           jsl    .. , C ^ x ^ . ^ v o > ... .Act..,e>o. c ^ a r t V s ..Pc^va, ..
                          . .v^vV kvN .. .Q ^o^^>.c*:«-cX .. .V o .. A c J ^ V .. .v ^ - o j t .
.u A \a ^ .. .Vmre..                         .. .c s ... c^.r^.c^'TN. .c>^ .. .?dVw^Aa^))tx
.*       ?      ?     0         .       7     .        . .^vSCWV.                                       ............
..C H ^ s t t O y ..V \ c t e v ^ ..C v x ^ ..O . ^ a f ^ w ^ s y ^ o . ..1^8..
.c?yrv. .Y L & ... X ^ W > . .                                    .^Xjro^re ^ > n O > * \ d l ...O k n ..




    .A ... .Cm $\ .. V ^ x W v A C y .. \?c...OJs6<5*tvh\... C X o f X ..VC>.C\\N£
 .ew.v.do-vM^...,\^...fgz^pvTe. df                                          •3V




Slgnec                                                     Signature witnessed by
                                      ftcT-orJ   *    »



incident   102     281089 0P4909                          M E ACTION PRINT

^CTIC  NUMBER : A7559
  ORIGINATING FROM : S1794


                     NATURE OF ACTION
 C ONSIDER SHOWING VISUAL EVIDENCE TO STEPHFN H A R T
 H/A
 INF6 FROM S 1794 STS WAS IN PEN 3 SAW A YOUTH WHO LOOKED UNCONCIOUS LOST SIGHT
 OF HIM THEN SAW HIM ON PITCH RECEIVING RESUSCITATION APP DECD. GIVES DESC

±7-10-89   1756    OP 1047   RAISED FROM S1794
?8-10-89   0840    0P4909    ALLOCATED TO DCI TOPE

ORIGINATING FROM         S1794
ASSOCIATED DOCS
-INKED ACTIONS


          RESULT OF ACTION - PLEASE WRITE CLEARLY
ACTION A7559




                              ,    CL<rv^                                     & .




3ETAILS OF ANY PROPERTY

 ROPERTY REGISTER NUMBER
ACTION RETURNED   DATE :                             TIME      \&; k
’EPORTING OFFICERS :
 RANK,NUMBER AND NAME)
JECJJVERS INSTRUCTIONS :




                                                                                        RECEIVER
 URTHER ACTION NUMBERS :
STATEMENT NUMBER :                          REPORT NUMBER                                INDEXER
 DF NUMBER       :                          OTHER DOC NUMBER
STATEMENT READERS COMMENTS
                                                                                          <14^.
                                                                             F* ‘ ^ ? ■ 3 £ TATa READ
OFFICE MANAGERS OBSERVATIONS :                                               i i; i
                                                                              ' j ' t* , M ’(^3|
                                                                             i IR •       c
                                                                                        SIO
P®*mHe. It

LFCDA
  .                                              MEMORANDUM

 f™, £ b .                           ..




  Date                                                                                                  C ^ S ftS re ^ .



                      & .p ..
  ____                     UB.U£.X___K^o-rS^Li.
..y^..ecl^„„                                                        A ^ lQ                                   feeerr
 ...eiA                                 SE^fe^..-....g?M.......Sgg:^g_cibi                      (*s u % /W&L
....^....Jl.....§£^XMQa.f„_^^^^


          — ....... X...-.V1M                                                                           G c A ^ ,u a y -
:..LN.CJ>, , , , , . . f e ^ l z ^ , , , „ , , ^ S x arvjp                                              ^ <t >4    m m

                                 ...^■■■^fi.l^.5... ^3.0:ri...^^lTKg: O^b0NX> frf
   .(^M^.....I.W.:..k^ACS........y^g^..3 ^ f e . . . . „ ^ ^                              TafVr         \^<VS      cftfrKg*
                                                                                     X     Mqrieao            cs^> ~tue
 .... N d!ll.„,..\r±__ .7&*€                                C>t=     <>€ofit~E -         -T<e-N\«^             QAvst
    ^ 2 ^......^.....^d^....3 ^ ^ S ^ . . . i . X ^ . . § .                     .^v-vCSv>wg^O           cnM M b g S e Q Y .vC
    l*l?£      §.§^.'.0 ^,^.           .
                                       v^ . l ? < & . . . . £ ^                               -T^fc         UATg.
                , Q r . . u v o £ £ . P o O u ~ S o l? P o E          - ' T       S o m C                ~fttkCx-\ V i 6 g £

                       O f ft^...TO 'TH £ u X f t u - T o
    .^.!5jrr....„,§§^..^>..?si.......ib£i3                   :b .£>.<l _____&                                crv ^ u

    $.!^...„.5..y.fe^»^l...^.,X^^.            &.6.^L:                        __ ____
...... .... .......... ..... t v k C                            To&>o^-rsv-<l fQfe.
              .y£l>X      5*I$^.£i.. I ...MGT afcQ                              Qtvje oft- TUSQ              Pfcffug
                                              ..£§,__ V^O£-                        TvVvg.       ^ 5 5 , (M*eftsAcat^,
                                        .(^.H.S'fcAT            x    p r ^ p^              tAts-e^          Cog- -w-ie
      .^!ir.!*t....C?S^*................ ~..............                                                    . __
.... ^.... ^§\€..........                         ££hr:.^.. ^g^c.1^                  fy\£ y b o C - g ga Cy\vR.O[
    C^-r^>       AT       Prf*Go£             lw / S O HrS.                          -T»-At. "teft*HS
                                                        ~                                                              --
                                .3 h 5 .§ :     C .f i e»Q> P        Ptv- v -     ft(U ^ O rAC> V

                                                                         «V 4 Q      C t^At^T C ( \ _jJ€£c
........VA^tg-O.                                     _                                              _       _____
                3^!^.                                                                           {Xto-i         fWO
     ,^i§.      .Qg£*^.$,.. &                        Ik*..T>a£-                 'T^g-A.^cji^cx          G g<UffrJ              ^ v
                                 jN                      tNVyovVt-vS             S> c CS*iC>«4          ^    fcjfitti^ody
NwNt.1l

LFCDA                                                           MEMORANDUM




   Date       ... -___ ....._______ _____ __ R«f*r»nc«.


         p tgecXt-l                                         ' T W & GtQftVy                            ^ g g A Vtg f t d a f f l C
                                   -To          *A.C        #*'rr T U c        "Tt*AS..
 .................                        7 pST                          ,~tU £                             orr" T U g g X .                   ___
 __ fV ffg ^ v A .fc O _ ^ T O                  i:ii^ :i          __________ •~7 R O > ^ S k £ .                                         ^ C H t j fc

         .B it           C O M ...            X .„jB C iSX M X ..™ tr...V ^^S.                   ^ ft_ £ iT C |5 4 s. _ „ i r t 4 ^ ^ W _ .
                                                                                                                   _
         ^ 0 ~ r\O £ 0              f t , M Pcrsi            U-HiM ^          gyA T          g y rsi    y-U ag.<=*C .<.                  P ^ P ftjg -£-~

   - r^3wj           oroce>r-ig-\0\??>                     to     -y -va.C     R    vo a t        o f        m     £           Ctoftv, fo^T _
 ........ ... .....                  3T_.^00,^,,,,.^..Ulf\5CK)^C,                                      f tM O T rtc e ,             €Hftrj_____
                             -t-Q ft.gSOCi- CH'ft |M                                                     TH& ^                                T U ^gx
                                                                             C~W\(CF±          C^OtfviC. Q«s>                   lb€rvgx^
           T^<£E:^bu t c o ^                                                                     ,.                                         \NJTQ
           Tvu=. -Tee.P-^c_\Kjc^                             «vviC>                                                        “®? yp*jAe«/ -         7
 .....     jo ....
          P .9 £ s e w       _uy«                                            ~rt>     tva£.            w£   F ~t       q   P    t h   &- Q c a l -

                                                 T u fc^,,,X t Sftcuj                   /\ ^csv-a c C                               Eqh
          ~X*+£-         0 - r c .v - v         T o         r \ - r T g . ^ c r C^ t~vaeL                                       o ^     T H fc

                                      (Vt            ^Q->        ,;r>Ag*Jj=.                               fH.                       tOOM^SS
            of:                                  cPr-v^eRep                    ^.evAv^ja                ~t**€. Q o m . . __ _
 ........ T*At-.. la>€.<^£                                 c3R.oe<5ugs>             Q ^f r_7t>*g CVxo\
         PjM W*-e.                                         •^Vnjo _                  <^s£^ ^ q aj                               <s^P V>5H^Tt
          U ; A ^ , X „ . . I S ? . k ; ^ £                                              >             $               .              X-V^VS.
          Q o t ^ c , S.o ^ ,.,^ „,.2S ?......I^ .^ .,£.'i.3 & ^ T o *Sfc^                                         iF           t     c e x iib
          Q t . O f m h .                      ^ ....PrQOu ^ o S r
           !^.l
              t^^....^.5^^.....Jfh^.^.._...^VjC.s).'CS3..^?.                                   TM^.          yJ^rO.>s^fr^                             ^
         3>\cr*                                                  SdQf^t~.:._____ ,.___ ____ _______
 ...................................................UM .^i......; x ....CyOT__ . g f i i A M T o Tf t j f c f i c                                 ^

         C£          TVAC                                           ..X         v-oo<^D>                    Tto            AA.H gvQfrcr
         (Ki O       X        c ov,;vO                          ... A P £ U                  P £ O tV£             u m i*4Cj_ Oov^O

         X. w^rr«e-.,                                      ,^THarT        t >a £m            vagftg. p g y v o ^.x
  “                                       A ... S ^ m v u u ...... T \ ) * v j i o € l \ ,     6 g M tW Q                             fcorinu*#
Nmlto. n

LFCDA                                                          MEMORANDUM




  D a ta      ..........................................                                        M * m tm .
  C.O V V V -:.......           X-            ~ T D C>         .Q Q T                      fc & T      A <Q       C g g T l F iC ftftg ,

                         .                Uanutart              g>os>&                              feiACJgf-vl^trA               ’
                                                                                                                            uP
                                                      f e v v c £ ^ ^»J ,ftt4^            X                         C c ^ T U G.
    S.^._..xc^^„                                                     __ c &£»o> ._______ _
                              __— ^                                                                              *****            ***•«
 .................             j-       l « j ,m c> o ccx-o                                   ^>«^Q                         \ r X.

       ££2£!^..-jfes.— ^£......ft^.^..
 ..
    ^^^.<!Orr!:.^.„-.....^...I^^....^.„>i^M^Td^.                                                       .casig-       f ^ * u £ ____
      66c%?x.................... ish£J.— .VAfltfct__g±O....JS»JCtLjgSSii
       ,B.I.¥!^..»..
                    X liS&s*                         .Vd&h^=°......U>i.Xt?s SOCT^.„.,.S=>.ffi$^^SS.™2B,
                             rsr^S...                                         j d o s a l *^        To. -y^g. c n y<frg.
                                                                    .yv^c.             .3b £.                                     ..
      w.c&§....................                                                               1__ g^csrrsfr                 tyw
                                                    PgQ .       va^\?S»~   S t s <tXS> ><V f t£ .     8^-V C ^(\O C         ~TQ

        &£&!*=:--<^£Jr±S^r...------------- 8iJT__J^rPfa,4
                                                                                                                              *»•#«•»••«

                                                                                            ___
           mmf-,'                               .......... ......... .... .... ........... .. .
             -.............................                                                                    Qp     _
       ..lu.^              £‘XC*A. ,€s                                     or. - n ^ e s                 ui&uPin^ its
                                    .<^Q.^...„.lfS.c>i.€;S                                                                        ...
       .ftS...



                                                                                                                                  __
           «•*«.                                                                 :M^Afezr,                               _________
                                             M :           .C?S>5^..Q.§S.________                                             T*&
           .fS^£y?r...... 9.^ed> ...... .^..^...„.X.......^sr!?s£>...
                                                                                                      t~                      ct4
                   ^ P O - X S ^ -A................                                                                      kontinu»d)
K mwi No. f t

LFCDA-                                                        MEMORANDUM

  From ............................. .......   .......................             To.. ....... ,




   D«t«              ... — ... — ----- --- R«f«f*nc*~.....................                                                                  _
                                                                               ......           i.e„XGOUwb                   FilsjP___
                                                     *—                                                         xvus, Pe.€»<\t^ _


  ..A S K fe P         vfr.        T V A fcR c                                                              & £o c > * ls    A t£ v 4 * \$


             .......................
   .,2'S?,.~...,f!fc?.—                                                                         £fefO          feA^S t KjfoArtto
   J&l                                                                   .6.                                           u*\S
   ...A^........................................... & M                                                                     (^3 •
                                                                     B D Q > € S i*3TD
       .IBs*            . Q N ^ Jo.^i.^...r...„X._________________________________
                         ....................................                                                   TQ                      ___
       .fV                         .. J&§S>S&3...!^.^>
                                                     .....’^5.^?^6:,%,_fif^,.„^~-£.                               l$J"T^^^JTV^c
   ....,^.^.ftcM.V?a^.................. ........ .........
                     .C^.......'zgcg^gBj. •^JCi                   t       v    a     £     -    .    I     "     5-
    „.1D,„          £\;,M                              £V $^„...£.O O .u£>               JSZfc.fs.   3V ^j^£^..„C gO L
     ...fe^^....&.£.. f e ^ ^ “
                              ._„..feci,.(.^.S ,^v.!^o>.                                                                    uMivr
     ,,,..!§^^.^....3??..._^:                                                                   Ce>)Cfc\<^ T h & A & t £S,
     ....X .W.,^1. EAl.^.^......^. 3S?. :•?&&.                                                                         uaq€             _
                                                                           ... !.!i._________A tnQ

                  ...... .......          X       ^ M n ’& O W U c i                      v^it-r^T         TO                A\*Ci
     ,...Q £ .....& ^                                            M s> ? X                                       £ . £ .. .^ € . „ J 1 C & £
     ...IP.....<Tr.<2r^S?.!^                                                             M.€&1           .fcsliaftnG*_
      ... C o o v -O                                                               X . . . . . ^ X £ ^ £ - £ ? , ^ VJrV          V**'
      .....y.^.i.^...................................................                                           ogj       i4t<n /W Q
            T H .%            .ftvAyM          Crtv4jQ.Z~                H \> .£ ..^ ^ O - V X r Z y S C .,

                                   feVfc,JL^B?.fe&Q3 CCs.fsr. dB.^.......B.]s>......M.^£_.._^.!X5_.„


    ,...?LSi§£l                                                                .^.V.v^..<S:..
    . . . . ^ ^ . . . . . < ^ © . 1 ^ . . . . . ^                                                        M>g:.
     . . ^ . . . . J ! " ! ^ . . . . ^ ^ ... ,kJ^l!sB.........X...b><3L_ (continued)
Form   Ms. 11

LFCDA
                  _____________ MEMORANDUM

 From ..                  ,
                          ..                    To..........




                                             ft#f«?#ne*...... ...... ... .
                §£=!&>£                 ^            .%S
  ..w.v^.(li=^                                                             K\^   CHgg*jTr
                               — .^i^.O.CT.ASr*.          ._^Jp.
                                                        >VJT Q   t h   €   ^KfiOu^cC
 ..^....S.^.....„..Q^.„..^^i^r,..Xc?.       ftVH. CLAtf-       uMHuex      uj^   rY& s r r
   \      M.n-6     'fWo *%'—I fSov-v^ T»i€




                 J7............. ..... .....

                                                                             fcmwkwMtt
   —__oJf
-Copy   Fm*recoof'pr<
                      I fN t M t& $m 4* T,-s8c* Y\*»-f
                      RECORD Gf ^PROPERTY SEIZED
                      ••cflon                          5*4}
                      Pole* ft Cvtmbtai Evktenc* Adflflt4
                      •Dtkttm nmmmrf         ' ■ '•
MOrn*#
t&eatio# •* .                           ■=4tN>0w f
                                Z£«su




ITEM 4-
                    mmmcKtm
                '•;-rPtishi,

                                         h m   y-




                                                       -‘i    ■>•••.<■




                                               :z :'          ^ ^




                                 k.>?•'->




Copy of record provided to *
                                                                                                                                       O'K&y'ts




                                                                                                                                                    Will
                                                                                                                                                    ' Mrs
                                                                               WNt Mltfiatids P e S t e *
                                                                  STATEMENT OF WITNESS
    • it 22 a       I 15 22 2*                         (C.J. Act 1M 7, i . l ; M.C. Act 1M 0. t-1 0 1 ; M.C. ftulea 1M 1. r.TOI
    IIIQK           I II 23 30
    10 1? H It     10 17 24 31
    11 II15        II II 25    Name .,.
    12II21         12 It 2t
    11 20 27       13 20 27    Age -- £ 1* *        . . J y rtJ                 Date o f Birth .
    14 21 21       14 21 2t
                              Occupation                                                    ........
1 I II222*          I 1*222* Home or business eddrtss
2 • It a 30         I 11 23 30 and telephone number
1101?24II          10 17 24 31
*   it ii n        11 11 25
I 121121           12 11 26
t 13 20 2?         13 20 27
7 14 21 21         14 21 2f
                              Thit statement, consisting of               *7            f^Weech* signedby me, it tn* to thebeatofmy knowledge
1 I 15 22 2*        I 15 22 29 and belief and i make itknowing that, ifitis tendered in evidence. Ithe! be lebte to proeecution H I
2 I It 23 30        S 16 23 30
3 10 17 24 31      10 17 24 31 have witfully stated initanything which Iknow to be false or do not beBevt to be true.
4 11 II 2$         11 11 25
I 12 11 2t         12 II 26
1 13 20 27         13 20 27    Dated the                    day of                                      It
2 14 24 It         14 21 21
                                               .*
              irne&ATfs       Signed                                  ....                          Signature wftne***d by
T*l
                                                                                                    Officer's Name

                                                                                                    Rank            A            No.

                                          & n i .a .                      .m m * f .€ m d . ./..f c v C .a / . M & , .                                  .
                                                                     .r tw .
                                                                      .                                             .I    f m   . a ..A te    .......
                                                                   r # e ..                                                                   .^?w c
                                .m m . in ./cr*\*6*b.. l& f.(xJm*/;. ©                                                                 .      .......
                                .                                 Jfktrm.                                      .ctM^d. .Im          €. Jh &   h    .    .
                                     <k                                                                                                    * .....
                                 0.6.                                     . .{Sr.                              -r . /. m m /m f. . Jw m .
                                 a *jl4      pout&tA                      h r w J L . o*\            L t f & j p & f . . *# J t . .r b f .v ...


                                              fo.                                             k*         k ^ l T A G


                                 W « / f as H

                                                                                w d $ . / . Q . .f e w
                                i U . . okf<^i •                                                                                f          ... 7 ...
                                                                                    m         d           k         i       .                     .....
                                r WJU*                            \                     f                mi m®           m .. a . /m m 9.........
                                 .            . . b . o M . .& w b w < S ! « < & . .                                                       .c **l .
                                     m m jM t*.. . H a m ^ 4 ,. 'f k k . ..**m m ..
                                     a d m u c . . l£Q/9r*. . b . ..2^                         *     *     «    .       «€<h£ ./}&(<&.

                              Signed                                  .^.........                 Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                       » 4
                                                     tik ian d s Poie«
                                   STATf MINT OF WITNE88
                           (C.J. Act 1M 7, s .* M.C. Ac* I960. *.102; M.C. PUsa 1961. r.79» -
                                                                        CMP         *

 ontiiuiation of statem ent of . . . .                                          m       m   M   f    a   v   i    i   t    o : . t e £ f e


  tfp c to fc . o A x jy J ..    jy c . .M&Jh.. JetiU f& zJ...
  I A. tU * .       SOAMJt.. /QTM7 id . . / t i . . a w b ^ c w                                 qL
              .*)<&..ck
  JaW. .           .. .k   x .    a .                    A c / . ♦J r.                                                    ......
  lOacfaJf'..£q.>f0 ^                    .



                ... H-MOp* ..Hr.. 2 :k$ff+raJH. "far.. Lef^^S.


  o A & d . ..                      ..joh&ffe... M x * £ u + a ...                                           -
  *-*£*£ .^cr&.ce..                                . h ^ . .f k & i . oifjfr:. tutff:. $ & * * ...
  & .. A # w .. & £ ^ . . h t e y . .                                                                                        ....
  UffyF^uQ^v*r4..                                                              ... W a . itivnQuds. * * .
   W         f . <5^.. c r l ^ V . cfwrv^ .7 £ « « f..
  '/..^..^..$^...c^
  ana^f... .TAg^e..                                               . A ..4*?- o*#...                                       ......
                    .. ./rt?M..<x4&y£ .. m                       .. T^y^.tMXr . .pcXSxety......
  '.6'.. OtfW. . t t * L .. h ^ A ^ r . y X t t . .blO*-. «$fr.
  W p / h z d * .............. y...,.............. /•••/y............
  ~TX&+e .*&+&.. a s x r fd & d y . .quajzh Q S. ..« .      a r* v y * /
                           ... .h w      r h & ..                                   .. /fa          # a*W ..............

   o m   M    ! .i Ha . . $ h * h . .        .r? $ 4 ... t'A   M te d   ...S   flJ r .. b ^ f.                   .................
  S/eWfty<7f....)...                         ..fiSZJBpfar...c/Un#*#fi/. itt... O V ^ f < ...
  *!<*/&.. ct/us/ ..{h&A4.....( s & f c & d                         aC*ih&&bsf...f . T w & n k . ...
  dr..           .i W i t . ..fo... .ejCjsy^.. w ^ . .                                                                .....


 . ' ^ A ^ s e . . . . . . . . . tf& A & sM .. qJ : . .                                     J p c ^ . <&..&&>..
                   JvU/r                                         .7uS«fbj !k 4. r .^J0&?
                                                                                                                       _____
  h . . j ^ . . . . ^ / e 4 i / ..o i/€ ^ ..                                                        'J h i.c rh J u ....
                                      ..o J r..                                                                       ........

  ^                              .. h 'c J & fc .. T h ^ . .                        .Q & ty O c i^ p ^ m ...
                                                                                                                 f^Lg.

Signed                                                    Signature witnessed by .
                                     " P R T '
                                                  Mktends Polct
                                STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                        (CJ. Act 1987. •.# ; M C. Act 1080, a.102; M.C. M m 1981, r. 701                                   <s>
Continuation of (tatam ant of . .                                      .                       .............................. ......................

   &                   .. < * » d . .                                               .•     i..........                              .....

   c x ^ < ^ . a ^ .. p G i c 6 j 2 d . . f . J 1 ^ . ^                                 /
                             T % u .. p .0k u & a . .                              .....
         . .ftiifjk..             .                     ................. .............
   / bew dL                           y% fc: A ^ / f f / . .#& *< c u u j ..
   rtwrte gfyriutr.                        ..CCMrfCs4f..                                                                 .j f e # ? u .
           ..1% ?.                  7 X * l . < *& & (. . Q fM e a s & t..A .
  WJhJiMQ..                             ..SlsnjLf. .U\.d. & < & m                        a a    i f .. ^ c r v ^ ^ . ^ r .
                                                      J.     ........... {. y                        ................




   #..fa.. # * . .              . a«u?( ..                                 ;7 ^ A..;


  H           ..tf:.                    .v £ c * £ .A              •       .,J b M i r . w e * -
  a s M i * & ..<**/:./}..                        p p J & r . .<*>                  . T m . c ^ ..ui
 ^ e a ? ^ .< d ..u $ A . .                                                               . .6 t> i^ 4 ..                                ....
  .                         . cjfyszd.,. .fcvi^r..                                                                                     ./©.
         j^'T'Su AoJh&Yi.. csS..li. .topvl..../..                                               T ^ U f . ." m r u a k t
         &Ae~ .. «oql*. .. Qpiria. . .fo. .faz. <v/>.<&&.. ( W ^ t & V ..fr:...
   ~fksL. qcuMJt..%KalH&hjte4t....b                                             y        . .ajmff e ...a * ^ ...
   ..L .t^ ...k ffl'iA u ...c n \e .                                                                                                ............
   cftvL                MC.                                                     ..... .................
 . /l)T.               . .r.,.
                           y . ^Q : P Z f >«*.../ .. &**> ..A.. /tfftM.. £ a i4 * . .av>. .7 * * .
  0/<WM..,WWr\.


                                                          .^ w ..                         . .fr o M h s ............
                                       A . . . / £ * . .<s>qty..
                                    yer.
                .   & . J&Xh:       o b t w z . . . t f * . . b . . ^ a ..^U a J t. ..
                                              '   A   /        t   £        J
                                                                           Ffl»........... ..... .
   /                                                      _      .......
                                                     ../Q.W90.6*..   fUAX^Uo
  c h w s . ..w t r . ?.&fe... kfir&Y<&. .orycr. .e^af . *  L A    Ji^..  >J7
                            • £*;:>                   r ‘        -----
Signed                                                    Signature witnessed by .
                                            Wfft Midlands PoRet
                                       STATEMENT OF WITNE88
                             C J. Act 1967. i.9 ; M.C. Act 1900. s.102; M.C. IU m 1991. r.70»


Continuation <if s ta tw n fr t of .        A Mk too umf . Jrt'toPh.. .Q')f€£f£.
                                         ,. J M                       Q K t e t t . ...........

                   J t o   . X M m fe v . .                 . .U jtd r .. toJi0 ..                   iu ¥ N 9 .. #»)
                               iT.usfe..< r f .                Q o a Z s . .I..                                       .
                                        ..ct&iM-zj).                     ..<^.                      .jdfls,/ivC.


   <5^. x « o . r / & * . J 0 & Y . .itau/.                              ..   k & J & d .

                           . W oJbb.'A A .. jf'& L ..                              a sA

                                                                                                                   ......

  # * * i .   .A   & & & . .   «v*.               ./jse4<a£r..p       # j d .     ./   Z f e & A / f . J . ' s M L   ....
  .aro r. A           <6                                    .I . w u d t d . . . f e ^ y u u f c o L .

 M u * . . < 6 a c * : c j * . . Sfefc# . . cu A tff..<&*$.«*.. A * .                                                     ...
  /fi£-....40<U/..{ U & £ . ./ . C& # « 4 . . u f . * .                       .        /   .    .    ...........
                       . ^ * v 3 k . . M . . i C A . h f ^ m .                                 . f a J f i M .....
   J fa u r . (A0*i.                                  . / A©. . / & . . .                  .. MOW.. .A£*?.........
   QiAl&hGa.K I.tet...*«/                                     . iCrfs/.A i d .O0UJ\.                         .***...
   p < x £ & J r. . o       ^ a ( ..      .U r.                          .,. v * . .                                        ..
                   .. fi&ip&r. . AO .tvJd .. W : . .*iv&r. f b r i r w k
   .ctid.%.|:.kJe^i:..*fcro>\ H                                 a        ..t f. .nbskMdl..:......




   a. *faivftK&( .<cm ..ilUr v^fo«r.t. ' t f & 4 . . . f a .                                                           ..
                   .o a ..       .c r v ^                ..(4>k           ..«..                     .... i   y .




  Q i m A. . ■^’w A                      . . M o A i r t h f ...                                                   ...
   jftrt c & . .                       .. /..                 .avt ft.. r f e . ..               c s * .. a * d ...
       u ^ . .K o m .J & / ; .itijL. ,/wvli^.. ><u*/..wjfiX*. .Pu^vi..Z?$
  ■ft                ..Q^\.. f..»
                            W*A                   .                 .a i .. /. ^ c v i . .
  o v s ...
   I.ad..                                              *v\.                                                          y.oe
   M    z i a ..

                      --- — r                                    <’
                            *                                     »i*•
Signed
                                          W fft MldUndt P ole*
                                   STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                            (C.J. Act 1997, a.*; M.C. Act 1M 0, *.102; M.C. M m 1M 1, r.TQI


Continuation of atatament o f . . . . .


         ) <M£L.. fa .. u J A . . CXMA
                <gL        &v>d.


  td * p L .. 1 . p 'd ' .C fc..~ 7 k& & . t* & e. 1& 0 X ..                                                                 • •



                <xvJrt.tll&rtr..                       .*&(:.et^srp^L. p&xffti...fa.........
  r i* A        ,v.H                                              vy   f r
       wc<tdr. .1®.. .<*           »va*\.jWn. j w * .I t M . .M & & A . $ s d & . . 0 k .rffe
                           . &>* .,. ll.J & fc o & i.. & »d , . fO U .. * 3 0 * . fs ^ fX s L . u *
                           .I ..Ci»VM<?(>\.rr.. Ji*vi.0s. GyJfj*’...LsL . .              ............
                \Lf...ctmA>. fie.. &>x..im..Ivu U f e .t o V .<*<**(./ a .
                                                            k jp • 1 '£ * * * & •




  w o o z l .u w s .

                 flf l ..            .r l e . .                          . bo.<K/f<&. j & . tfa *
                                                                                                         .....
                      ..           .. .T**u& , . . . / . . .& W .. fl. .A     «L*U 9     a    \ . . i*   \ . . ^ . ..
   /fit*.                                                                       . * * \ .a .                      . *1.
   r ^ j £ ..                                .fiw & ST ..                                         /< w s. < rf.
  h .Im * *           <tfraf...£**0.                                        ..<mi .. . o k w . ^ ....
 Q y U ^ d A Y ...                    . .U     ^ \ , 'X k ( L . .# u * r t. cm .              .yttOffK.......
  f&A.           ... A t A .              ..7 a C .                                                  •.^5 ^                  •*

                                                              . .<rvei<.                                   . .#fe__
     _________                                                                   & & & & * . . a . .....
  Ozujdc of...p*vrsu4&>.. h k t:...                                              dfo.*<c«^ ..fa.# 4 .
   f r j X K . . < t e . . . & e 4 M . . . h ) k 4t e y                                                  .................
                . .k&*X.'. HfL. -                 .. ^ v f ^ . .         .. c u m *.
  i^iy«^gr. a . .                             ..b . < d f m . ..«uP. .$k*<k..
                              . J&aUted... vr. . « c a Jm X'&l, .                                                    ...
   .to& * / ../«..                    ...Cax/fse/ .^..'Hk-. p.                                                           .

Signed                                                  Signature witnessed by .
                                                           W ffl Mldtandt Pottc*                                                              >j         g K ~
                                                 STATEMENT OF WITNE88                                                                                ^
                                    (C.J. Act 1M 7, • > , M.C. Act 1990. •.102; M.C. fMse 1981. r.70l


Continuation of ttatam «nt of . . . .w                                                .   0?   z f e f i l r i . &   ¥   £    £   ?   £    .......................................
  V t t .. w e / fa . Sfovvtf. a * J . S i0tfcv\. K e p ,.................................................
                                                          &-..a
                                                          > or/hC ^a.. w a . .                                                    . k . .                        . 2 0 'j ,
   ............................................................ a t*/*       4   «        f       •I                         •                **aA...

               ...p&A*i<k v*v#». A / & ..S&ci
   k * * * ... . f e w . . .$ * ? . . a * ^ d . Af i a . .                                                               .a w
 'V&4                                                                                                                         -4X21 JUCKvk. .ou/ao.
 .chad.. I.. i»&bar . . / o .. a .                                                            ...!.                                   . .fa. .&£, a .■...
 .c f^ c U y .. c u p d .. &j>k&£.                                 . / . Cflruw. . w . ......................................
                                                x v u a ^ .. l& .S .h te g L f e n .. jfr to p tfin * * p ,- . . . . . .
   P t ^ w j u i ..s k v * t t . < r ^ . . i h U y . .ps^ . ..^fp.v 1. .T*e*s
   M M + k / . d a M J fa f. . .vA., A a , . M U M &&.. . f o                                                                j f i . .. . c ^ . .(is. .
 $&J£..' i U x t .. t e r . .                                       .                .Ok..rfaJifc,../..
 Aj2. .wsat& ...                                     .. W6*VV.. /o ..                                   ..p v ^ ,..!..(^ v ? f...k ....
                         .4bCL.. aM A ^ tv((V yk C ^ ..                                               ». j . . S                       ..t e .o ..U                           .

                                         ... ( e # 4 x y . ..<A&>).. at*..                                                                ..Sfc..1.. w & n f
  (        o         .         k         M         .         i           s       ^        ................................
  /. h i k               *                                                   u^h.                                                     iMp.                 s&Uth.


                             ./ x ^                              ..i.i5cves>..X X .                                           .                              ofcnc»f
 Pfh. .CX.. & & C Z . Ws&M.. CwJ.                                                                                                         .. Jto-GgZ.......
           Ata. J o . . U ic .. . a . *M*>. ..*vfa..                                                                  .doer/,..I. ifomM*
 .Kji . . w x k . d & M .. < W * M . .                                                                Ua    v h      .                                                        .
 GOO/                                                                                                          .Uff...&}. j t w l .....
 o e a jz .. b o c te k h ., .Q g h ^ ? s .. <s. p c u r tiv * ...: . ....................................
 J .I . . l e > . . .                                               S e & ..ifvh L . . m j b . ,o-<...                                                      a ...
 d£chtf.. O^M^-r. .m/> .qh*J. .. $cU&. « 0 p .J. &. rhi&to}*......
 . I .ficnnfe#.. to..    .o^ysh^w..o*&. .4 m . :<Jqc<wif ....
  2*<?id .. .k&zfi. &m s( .     o t\ Umts-. .I.. kaf.fr:. kat*. < & ....
  Lu a ..p<m*... .w$4.. . t& a l& W . . Ajql c o . ^ . . < ? ^ ^ . v . i. ^ c ) . .
                u z n d f k . . fL a J h . .. i u i . . ff& U Q . . ^.foy.      . 1 .
                       r k ^ . r M $ . . i v t e t e f f k . . fo .?v^ ...a< «iU ?.........
                                               . .Asi..                                   . .n e .. .teu?.. .* u e ..                                    .......
                                                                                 Signature witnessed by
                                                W ttt Midlands Pollcs
                                      STATEMENT OF WITNESS                                                                  < D
                             (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980. * 1 0 2 ; M.C. Rules 19S1, r.70l


Continuation of statement of                                                                                              ....
   iMMMJir.. .bXal.                                                                                        '^{kpar?.,                           .

                                                                                                                              ......
                                                                                                           ..*0.vf i s . . . .........
                                     _ . . . . . ----- . _                                                              . /vci......
           ~ .. . ' w w h e / ' . .a M d . i A t & 4 - r                                  i t . & A ..a
           aJj&d..»yUL                      h       .     s      f      e        /        .        .        j . a u r i . y ....
   wr*-. J !..                  .. rVi&dy fa...                                                                                     .....
                                       .../-•                 ..^Uvvn .. ka A         g       ...Ct*\..Q j              w w m c c
  Q stJ. .         .     .      t u* v\ .. l a . fhjsyjfr. k i b . fvusvri../. .<&<$*'/*...
                  . k&, a ...£v4'*VfV£.,. j                                               r j .........                     ......
   / cfcA^'t. .co.cm*^. . b . <?o. >faac<.. .i#).. fkz&...ax. / jd^0 A.r
                 ..ib... $ & z ..o a a J                oi^   . .&(2& . . .                   1.
         k & . w J u . .H r * .                                      .. Q g A . . t k &                m d ..                              ..
   .j. .&vs.*.. I.            J & fx . x                                t         e                    .        . p k a w ? # ...
  f w t . .. /< w $ .. . i M j f l f e S s . L . m a              k o       . .c\ .                        . ( m ) . . c a Iw . ...
  h id . . MA- .. h*4. .fe & *\Q S ...                                                                                  ../..,.........

  C4>A.<^. k                                                  .rt&&* $ £ & & . .                                   fi
  $ kpftUd...                              . h 4 2 ^ . L u & 4 & .& U * p b l ...3Q ./...
  6 u ..                 .. rmo-. . .CfixaCk. d w < e s . . « d d . ( o f f .                                                .............
                   .O V S ...U /s..                                                             .h t l f p f i Z        .. ( is L . ..
  k tc £         d^f r /         .     .        /        w              q             ..a d ..         .*oK orf.                      ..
   f a K ^ A & J m q . , .I M                                                         .\Ksk. flo, .^,OTO.. /.,.
                       ? ) . a m J . d i d . & & fr.. h& H A O rrt. . : + k a .. W » y s.. xaa^ i I . .
                       f h & L .............. ............... .                                                     .         .....
  C V i.. 2 q u A p * M t. f t O T .... .1 . A K f f e .                                  .. o M            . & l. . f i *
                        .. c &                                    .. 7 % ^ v t . .. a d ~                       ..........
         s b /ih r n ,.( &              f /*?•.. .4X 0... 2
                                                                                                               J




Signed                                                         Signature witnessed        by .
