    nr Documant Form                    Date and time raised   OS   3 0     Z. %     •0   9 '   Number



Titiw                      s g/c                                w rv       C&A*S(f<L
(Include source and any document number if relevantI

Ractiws initnictiMii wgant action ^ fli/N o ______     Qo^fj              -rt— -k,
                                                                                                           Receiver



Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                   Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Statement readers instructions                                                                            Statement
                                                                                                          Reader


Indexed as indicated                                                                                       Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                    0/M             SIO

                                                                                                    7
Further ection no(s)                                                                                           Indexer


When setisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Oocument Master Number Form

MIR 15
           *
Incident        105     020689 0P5012          TYPING SERVICE DOCUMENT
  —   V



                                                          Other Document Number         D23



          Date               280489

          Description        MINUTES OF MEETING WITH COUNSEL




               MINUTES OF MEETING WITH COUNSEL              2.05pm (1405)

                                                            26 April    1989 (260489)

                                                            Mr Hayes Office



               PERSONS PRESENT

               Deputy Chief Constable - Mr, Hayes

               ACC    <Staff Services)   - Mr. Anderson

               Chief Superintendent Wain

               Chief Superintendent Mole

               Mr Bill Woodward QC

               Mr Patrick Limb

               Mr Peter Metcalfe

               Miss Belinda Nortcliffe



               MR METCALFE

               I assume we will get the video and the      other documents    back. Any

               briefs, accounts etc will      remain privilege.   You   ought to note     that

               pocket notebook entries can be called for and must be produced.                I

               suggest at this stage that we d o n ’t call this present investigation

               an inquiry as such but that we look upon it as a gathering of

               evidence.     You should be careful not to use the word inquiry.



               CHIEF SUPT WAIN

               This document bundle has been hastily pulled together.          We have not
                                                                       PAGE
                                                                       D23

taken any evidence yet with which to back up the comments contained

herein,   but we should be able to validate it given time.        Parts IV

and V in particular ought at this stage to be treated with care.



MR WOODWARD

We don't expect to have the details at this stage we merely want to

be aware of that which might be given in evidence at a later stage.

We are interested in types of evidence you are able to gather.          What

I am going to do is ask for certain things don't be afraid to tell us

that you c an’t provide anything.   Look upon this as an informal

meeting amongst friends.    D o n ’t worry if we are asking for things

that you c an’t provide its just our way of getting to the heart of

what is available.    The important thing that you have been tasked

with is to get the information as much of it as you can, as fresh as

it is at the moment, and you appear to have done that or already made

a very good start 1

Turning to the inquiry we don't know yet what form it will take.

Lord Justice Taylor   could do it any way he wants.      It may be done

straight forwardly.    In that case Counsel would present evidence.           It

could be done in many different ways,    e.g.    I could present the case

but call witnesses to give the evidence that can be given.          The main

thing at this stage   is that you must be flexible.      You must be

prepared to give us more than we want,    sooner than we actually need

it.   You must be prepared for us ringing to say we need it in such a

fashion and at such a time and your plans should be flexible enough

to cope with these demands.    In short we have no fixed idea we just

want to be best informed.     I can give you examples of some of the

questions.    E.g. Why was that man there?      Why did X do Y?   What we

ought to anticipate are questions that a third party might ask of

police actions.    We might in conducting an inquiry along those lines
                                                                          PAGE       3
                                                                          D23

be identifying difficulties that are not agreed as difficulties by

other bodies and the danger always      is missing out on covering

difficulties that appear at the case,      but at this stage d o n ’t be afraid

of gathering too much information.       You also ought to be aware that

the information you give us is privileged so you should encourage

anybody giving evidence to put in his feelings,        his worries,   etc.      He

must be aware that confidentiality is assured.        Confidentiality is

impo rtant.



DCC

In terms of validation of this information we have here, we have

talked about obtaining evidence from Inspectors and above and from

everybody PC's and Sergeants etc. who were on duty outside Leppings

Lane,    is that appropriate?



MR WOODWARD

Yes,    but we need to address our minds to the    'what if' quest i o n s ,

e.g. What if Nottingham Forest fans were put at the Leppings Lane end?

(Mr Woodward posed further hypothetical       questions along this     1i n e . )



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

We have addressed that one (referring to the question about

Nottingham Forest fans) Popplewell      talks at length about

segregation.     Chief Superintendent Mole then reviewed Popp l e w e 11 *s

recommendations    in this regard.



DCC

What this represents is a shift of stand point.



MR WOODWARD
                                                                   PAGE
                                                                   D23

Yes, what you should do is test what you know about the events of the

afternoon and test what you decided upon that afternoon by reference

to what a layman might ask or a man on the Clapham omnibus might ask

about what you know and what went on.     You ought to be aware of what

others know and what others are saying in the press or otherwise

about the events of that Saturday.

Part of our concern is not only in enabling Lord Justice Taylor to

conduct his inquiry but part of the concern is how we should deal

with later litigation.    We must at this stage present our evidence in

the most appropriate manner having an eye towards the future.      Now

what are these charts    (Mr Woodward points to 2 charts showing

deployment of manpower at the Hillsborough Stadium and in its

e nvirons).



Chief Superintendent Mole then addressed the charts of deployment.



MR WOODWARD

So you determined deployment by crowd flow that was expected?



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

Yes.



There then arose a discussion about the filling up of the North Stand

in relation to which turnstiles were used.



DCC

Can I answer this.   We only used turnstiles at Leppings Lane and this

may have contributed to the build up.     This could be an important
                                                                     PAGE        5
                                                                     D23

MR WOODWARD

Why was that?



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

To prevent clashes amongst fans.



Chief Superintendent Mole then went on to address the figures of the

actual deployment to explain why those figures were decided upon.           To

explain what the reasons were behind reducing the manpower      in

relation to the 1988 S e m i ~Final, and Mr Mole also emphasized at this

point the North and South divide for the purposes of segregation.           In

other words Liverpool fans would have the North and West side of the

ground and in the main Nottingham Forest would have the East Spion

Kop side.



Chief Superintendent Wain then referred to transport arrangements as

a result of this segregation.    Stations at Wadsley Bridge and Station

in town with bussing arrangement s.   He, as well,   picked upon this

reduction in manpower and reinforced the view that reduction was

merely at the peripheral   points.   Chief Superintendent Wain also

addressed the turnstile flow at this stage i.e. that Nottingham

Forest and Liverpool   fans arriving would enter by different

turnstiles separated from each other and therefore segregation was

ensured.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

I would also like to pick up on the    ’D ’ Division Operational Order.

*D* Division is our City Centre Division and officers from *D* Division

would meet Nottingham Forest fans at the Railway Station in the City

and would travel with the fans on buses and on arriving at the ground
                                                                        PAGE
                                                                        D23

would remain as a reserve at the ground until the end of the match

when they would return on the buses to the Station with the

Nottingham Forest fans.     Therefore this increases the number of

officers that are shown on these charts as being available for duty

at the ground.    I should also like to pick up on the earlier     point of

reduction in manpower.     We found last year that our CID officers and

others at the peripheray were under-employed.     We had an excess of

Sergeants and so when it came to planning for this year we whittled

those figures down yet maintained the 1988 figures    in respect of the

ground itself and the major points that were considered to be

important in successfully policing the operation.     The over­

estimation in 1988 was due to the nature of policing operations at

Sheffield Wednesday.     The normal First Division Football Games are

policed in phases,   therefore officers are moved from phase 1 to phase

2 for example to other duties.     On a football match on the scale of

the FA Cup Semi-Final all those officers would remain at their single

point,   therefore several officers were found to be unemployed at

their single point   in 1988, and the reduction only took place on the

peripheral areas.



MR WOODWARD

Tell me was there anything unusual about this match,       was there

anything that had changed from last year?



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

I did the first bit of planning for the football match,       but I was

replaced 3 weeks before the match and my successor therefore was a

change of Commander from last year.

Other changes that may or may not be significant are trains.           There

weren't so many this year.     In 1987 we had 10 trains,    in 1988 3
                                                                        PAGE
                                                                        D23

trains and this year only 1 special train of Liverpool supporters.

Now we wouldn't have that information until the very last minute

becuase the only thing we know for sure is that special trains can

and do arrive at Wadsley Bridge Station.     We w o u l d n ’t know until

probably the morning of the game how many trains were travelling.

Now this poses problems because with 10 trains at 550 fans each it

means that I know that 5,500 fans are arriving at one point at the

same time and can be handled by police officers meeting them from the

train and accompanying them to the ground.     Similarly in 1988 I had 3

trains arrive therefore 1,650 fans could be received by police

officers and whisked straight into the ground.      Now this year only 1

train arrived with 450 fans on therefore the other fans were arriving

by alternative means and couldn't be so easily controlled.          You ought

to note that its the fans decision about travelling and that this

decision apparently made by several hundred fans precluded the police

from controlling the time of their arrival at the ground.         Another

change from last year was that tickets were printed in various

colours to denote the areas to which the fans were allocated.           This

made it easier for the fans and,    in addition the tickets were

overprinted with the name of the Football Club to whom that

particular section of the ground had been allocated.        It made it

easier for the turnstile operators because all they had to do was

check the colour of the ticket,    the name of the club allocated to the

section of the ground and take one piece off the ticket and let the

customer through.



DCC

What about people coming late.     That was a change.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE
                                                                         PAGE        8
                                                                         D23

1987 Leeds v. Coventry,    supporters arrived late at that match,        to

such an extent that it was necessary to delay the match.         I delayed

the match by 15 minutes.      In 1988 there was no problem,    the match

kicked-off at 3.00pm     (1500) therefore    it was anticipated that it would

be similarly trouble-free this year.         In 1989 there is evidence to

suggest that the fans were here but they weren't at the ground.

Eg. the Traffic Division notes show that the roads were clear in

other words there weren't queues of traffic waiting to get into the

city.    The conclusion is that the fans were here, the Liverpool fans

in particular,   but they had not made their way to the ground.



Chief Supt. Wain then referred to 1440 time on Part IV of the Report

which confirms Mr. Mole's statement.



DCC

Now there were other changes and I think this is what Mr. Woodward

wants.    People tell me, for example,      that they had never seen at

other similar football matches to this one so many non-ticket holders

arriving,   so much alcohol brought to the football matches and

therefore having to be consumed or disposed of at the turnstiles.               So

much obduracy of fans,    eg mounted officers     report that fans were

crawling through horses legs.      Mounted officers are usually able to

clear an area without any difficulty.         They report that this year for

some reason they met opposition from the Liverpool fans whom they

were trying to control.     A further change from last year is the

problems that were encountered at turnstiles.         People were trying to

bribe their way into the match.      (Reference    is then made to the

observations section of bundle 5 which begins at paragraph 5.53.)



ACC   (STAFF SERVICES)
                                                                     PAGE
                                                                     D23

I think its fair to say that the Liverpool    fans because they were

here last year were quite familiar with the organisation of the South

Yorkshire Police,    e.g. there was an incident at Stocksbridge which

has been related to me by a policewoman there.      The van was stopped

and searched and a crate of beer was discovered and underneath the

crate was a note saying we've beat you this year you're not getting

our beer from us.    This implies that they knew the arrangements for

gaining entry to the ground and the fact that alcohol would be taken

from them and that they had come prepared to consume their alcohol

elsewhere and then get into the ground untroubled by the South

Yorkshire Police operation.



CHIEF SUPT WAIN

There is also the story told to me by a police officer of a public

house near to the ground,    I think its called The Owl, where the

Licensee is reported to have said "the fans came and drunk more beer

in 2 hours before the start of the game than I sold all      last New

Years E v e " .



ACC   (STAFF SERVICES)

On that theme there was an ad,    I understand,   placed in the Liverpool

Echo by a Sheffield Licensee who stated "Liverpool fans you can come

to my pub this year and we'll not run out of beer".



Discussion then moved on to the bundle of documents prepared for this

meeting with Counsel.     The index was taken account of.    The first

document,    the map, was explained by Chief Superintendent Mole.



Chief Superintendent Wain then spoke to the history of South Yorkshire

Police and pointed out that as the report progressed it focussed more
                                                                    PAGE     10
                                                                    D23

and more on *F* Division and on the    'F' Division Officers.



ACC   (STAFF SERVICES)

There is a reference here to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.       It

ought to be pointed out in addition to what is written here that he

has policed many football matches   in his duties as Superintendent -

City Centre,   he has policed pop concerts and the like.   He is a very

experienced chap.



MR WOODWARD

Yes I would like to develop the background of Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield and we may like to know more about South Yorkshire's

experience in policing major events.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

I will be covering that as far as Hillsborough is concerned in my

historical account.



MR WOODWARD

Yes I see here at paragraph 1.9 that South Yorkshire is widely

experienced at handling major events.



DCC

Perhaps we can supplement that with details of the policing of

Orgreave and of the steel strike etc.    (This was resolved,    to develop

profiles for each of the   *F* Division Management Team and to

supplement information about South Yorkshire handling of major events

with appendices relating).



Mr. Wain then spoke to Part II of the document bundle, which related
                                                                   PAGE    11
                                                                   D23

to a simple description of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and its

facilities at Hillsborough Stadium.     The album of photographs which

accompany this description was introduced and the photographs were

referred to at length.



MR WOODWARD

What   I don't want you to do is disturb what you've already done.

This is magnificant.     I just want you to add supplements as we go

through and raise anything else.     I would suggest at the end of the

day that it all be indexed,    but for this stage is it already on word

processor?



Chief Superintendent Wain continued with his review of Part II.



I want to draw your attention particularly to paragraph S.25.      You

must be aware of talking about the centre pens etc.     They are

referred to here as pens 1 and 2, but you'll notice on the maps that

in order to avoid confusion with the escape gates which are also

numbered these    pens have been described by their geographical

location.     E.g. North West, North, Centre North, Centre South and

South.



MR WOODWARD

What has caused the alteration that I note here to the CCTV

arrangements?



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

Well the building of the roof on the Kop caused cameras to be moved.

We found that when the roof was on the original    cameras wouldn't give

us the pictures.
                                                                         PAGE   IS
                                                                         DS3

    Mr. Mole then went on to address the Control Room and wha.t's

    contained therein.

    Continue speech.

    Superintendent Murray would be in that box, all      the equipment which

    is listed here at 2.29 is available to him.



    DCC

    I think it fair to say at this juncture that we did experience some

    communication problems.



    CHIEF SUPT WAIN

    We are going to develop that later in this briefing.



    CHIEF SUPT MOLE

    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club have always kept the ground up to

    date because they have wanted to keep the privilege     of holding Semi-

    Finals and the like.     Whenever a recommendation   has been made

    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club have complied with that.       When the

    green guide raised the question of additional    communications etc.

w   they put them in.



    MR WOODWARD

    What monitoring of the turnstiles is available?



    CHIEF SUPT MOLE

    The Controller    can tell how many have come through the turnstiles by

    computer print-out.     This computer flashes when it reaches a thousand

    below capacity.     Now we have a print— out for 3.00pm (1500)   that day

    and it will show that 12,500 had gone through that still      left a

    capacity for a further 2,000 to come through the turnstiles.
    f
*
                                                                              PAGE    13
                                                                              D23



        DCC

        But hundreds,    no,   perhaps thousands,   of people have come through the

        gates.



        MR WOODWARD

        At what time?



        DCC

        I have a note that at 2.53pm (1453) Gate C was opened,         The point is

        that there were more in the ground than those that were counted by

        computer.



        MR LIMB

        Are there cameras trained on the turnstiles?



        CHIEF SUPT MOLE

        Yes.     Stands up and points same out on map.



        MR WOODWARD

        Someone may say for example if you have those cameras upon what basis

        did you make your decision.       The computer or the cameras.



        CHIEF SUPT MOLE

        That camera would be trained on the turnstiles at all times and would

        be available to the commander on the day.



        DCC

        The Commander    could have access to the computer and the camera

        pictures.
                                                                         PAGE
                                                                         D23



MR WOODWARD

Is there an interplay at all between the Club monitors and the Police

monitors.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

We have a PC liaison man in the Club control        room, we also have

telephone links with the police control     room.



Chief Superintendent Wain then went on to talk of the equipment that

was available   in both control   rooms and the means of communication

between the two.



Moving on.



Chief Superintendent Wain turns to Paper 3.         MR LIMB could I just

make reference to the Safety of Sports Ground Act which is mentioned

in Part 3.    I remember signs in a station that,      on certain trains,

alcohol would not be allowed,     there are therefore these dry trains

which may deter fans from travelling on them.         This may account for

the problems you referred to earlier as the reasons for fans deciding

not to travel by trains this year.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

Yes, you could be right.    There's also the problem of dealing with

fans who bring alcohol   in box vans and the like, we have powers to

deal with fans bringing alcohol     in buses,   even mini-buses,   but not in

the back of furniture vans or transit vans etc.



MR WOODWARD
                                                                     PAGE   15
                                                                     D23

I think we may leave Part 3 now,   I've just quickly gone through it,

there's some useful   information in there and it is very helpfully

prepared but it may reward further reading.



MR WOODWARD

Is there a copy of the Short report.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

No, we didn't have a copy of the Short report although it is referred

to in several sections.



DCC

Flag the fact that a short report is required, and indeed all    reports

referred to in Part 3.



MR WOODWARD

Can I go on from there, any piece of paper that is referred to

throughout and that we may refer to at the Committee of Inquiry

should be produced in full,   it's no good us having the two pages to

which you refer if some clever dick wants to refer to the whole section




Chief Superintendent Mole then introduced Part 4 of the bundle and

spoke to it.   DCC referred everyone's attention to the synopsis that

had been prepared of the vital elements.

Chief Superintendent Mole talked about the selection of his

management team and the background of these officers,    particularly

with regard to their experience    in policing semi-final football

matches and also mentioned the fact at this stage that his

replacement was not prejudicial to the operational efficiency of the

semi-final football operation as officers were at hand who had wide
                                                                       PAGE     16
                                                                       D23

experience themselves.



MR METCALFE

Yes,    I think it would be   very helpful to have some sort    of curriculum

vitae of the senior officers attached as an appendix.



MR WOODWARD

Can I turn now to Harris      v. Sheffield United.   It talks   in there

about the description of      police operations and of meetings with the

police to determine the nature of the policing operations at football

grounds.    Can you tell me more about that?



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

Yes, we determined certain policy arising from that case and do hold

regular meetings.     Is it the meeting   in that particular year that you

are interested in?



MR WOODWARD

It seems to me that that year is the relevant one that followed the

case.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

I could get hold of minutes of meetings in other years and in this

year particularly    (Flag for action).



ACC(SS)

Did we not alter our contracts as a result of that case.



DCC

But this match is out of that contractual arrangements.
                                                                      PAGE
                                                                      D23

Deputy Chief Constable then went on to explain how the contract works



"Clubs always get more officers than they pay for at normal        league

matches,    I tell you what I'd better get hold of that contract."

(Flag for action).



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

Our contract    is with the clubs this match is outside the club's

auspices,    they just get 10 percent of gate receipts.



MR WOODWARD

Although it's a different body to whom you are providing services,

the type of services are the same.      I'm interested in what you agree

and what you have agreed to give them.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

There is no negotiation goes on over this match.



MR WOODWARD

Let me read this.     He reads from a section of Harris v. Sheffield

United.     This section contained the phrase "discusses needs for the

season" and Mr. Woodward continued in direct speech to the group,

"So it seems that an order drawing up the arrangement between the

club and the police is called for,     is such an order drawn up

detailing manpower    requirements?   For example,   have you discussed the

requirements regarding this particular match".



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

No, we tell them how many officers they can have,       in

terms of discussing manpower levels we don't, we
                                                                         PAGE    18
                                                                         D23

    tell them.



    DCC

    It seems to be a notional    calculation for the benefit of club

    finances.     We assess matches on a A, B or C category,   thus we

    categorise these matches    in liaison with the clubs so the clubs would

    know how many matches were category A, B or C etc. and therefore

    would have a rough idea of the manpower that would be committed to

    policing such a match.



    CHIEF SUPT MOLE

    We are in constant touch with the club and develop manpower levels

    right up to the kick-off.



    DCC

    Perhaps we ought to have the reference and look into it.



    MR WOODWARD

    The relevant paragraph from the 1977 Judgement    is recorded at page

®   844 of the All England Law Reports    letters D - J, all   I want to know

    is were there any arrangements in being.     (Flag All England Law

    Reports for action).



    DCC

    So we want to determine whether this match fits into those

    considerations and did the negotiations have anything to do with the

    differences    in manpower this year over last year.   Also are there any

    FA instructions to clubs for the policing of semi-finals.       (Flag this

    for action).
                                                                          PAGE
                                                                          D23

MR WOODWARD

Yes,   let's develop that,   look at club versus FA matches from an

objective viewpoint.    What are the differences?



CHIEF SUPT WAIN

We used to meet annually with all Chairmen.



MR WOODWARD

Could I have the minutes of the meetings with the Chairman of these

football   clubs, and furthermore how does policing measure up to what

was discussed at those meetings.     (Flag acquisition of m i n u t e s ) .

Mr. Woodward continued -

"Were there any big matches at Hillsborough between the dates of 1974

and the first of these FA Cup semi-finals       in the 80*s".



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

No, only big league games, which are policed in a different format.



MR WOODWARD

Do you get more trouble at league football matches.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

League matches are generally more predictable because the biggest

proporation of fans are local and tend to do the same things week

after week.



ACC(SS)

It's worth stressing that we have had capacity crowds there.

Mr. Wain interjected with a point that pop concerts were held at

football grounds   in the city.
    f
*                                                            /
                                                                                 PAGE     20
                                                                                 D23



        CHIEF SUPT MOLE

        Yes, w e ’ve had derby matches for example.          Christmas a few years ago.



        MR WOODWARD

        If there are any lessons to be learnt from these experiences           let’s

        look into them,       let's find out what    lessons were learned and what

        lessons we should have learned for policing the FA Cup matches.

        (Refer to relevant football matches).



        DCC

        What we also need is what lessons have been learned from other clubs

        who have staged football matches and should have been learned.



        MR WOODWARD

        Yes
        - i   .


          I           "

        ACC(SS)

        On that point we have learned that we can avoid problems by

        recommending Sunday matches or by recommending k ick-off times in the

        morning before pubs are open.



        DCC

        Now,      significant to this    whole enquiry is the opening of the gates.

        I understand that these gates have been opened before without any

        trouble.



        MR WOODWARD

        Yes,      t h a t ’s back to my earlier point.   What is the difference this

        year with other games.
                                                                      PAGE      21
                                                                      D23



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

In the seven years that I have been at the Division,     I h a v e n ’t known

that the gates have been opened.



DCC

Well,   let me ask you about this.   Superintendent Freeman is alleged

to have had a contingency to block off that tunnel     in the event of a

build-up of fans in the enclosures.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

So did I.     We have blocked them off.   The fans always go for the area

behind the goal.     We can put a cordon there and send them around.



MR WOODWARD

So it seems there are two identifiables here.      1, the gate was opened,

2, no cordon was placed.



CHIEF SUPT WAIN

Did this happen at league games?



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

It was just a contingency.     It may never have happened.



DCC

Points to the gates between the enclosures "It seems that there are a

lot of questions around here".



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

We often find that everybody is standing at the back of the pens and
                                                                     PAGE   22
                                                                     D23

so we keep the gates between the pens locked until we find that the

enclosures are filling at the front and then the gates can be opened

to relieve the pressure.     The Inspector who has a duty in that area

of the ground may decide to open one or both gates and he can decide

when.    I must stress that on this match everything was opened before

hand.

There are also gates here he points to the tunnel area on the map.



DCC

I understand they have been closed in the past.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

T h a t ’s right.



DCC

And another thing,    people get packed up at the back of the terrace

and on this occasion people will have entered,    tried to get into the

centre sections,    found it packed with people at the back and

therefore have shoved all the more to get into the sections       (point

left).



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

C gate is not used as a through passage for spectators at any time.



MR WOODWARD

Are you saying that the gate was opened.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

No, but police can get through by knocking.     It's used for taking out

arrested people or bringing in people arrested outside the ground.
                                                                          PAGE
                                                                          DH3



DCC

So it is frequently used for official       purposes.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

Then there is this sterile area between C Gate and the tunnel, we

often close this area off to keep it a sterile          area and to prevent

fans from moving between the sections.



ACC   (STAFF SERVICES)

What about this tunnel then,     do we hold these keys.

No one answered this question.      (Flag for enquiry).

Chief Superintendent Mole shows the meeting a photograph from the

album of photographs looking from Gate C towards the tunnel.            "If you

look at the next photo you will see that there          is a separation

barrier there to split the crowd coming through the         tunnel   into the

two enclosures".



DCC

Let me see if I can expand this matter a little,        there is nothing       in

the operational order to talk about this contingency that we are

referring to nor,   I understand,    is it referred to at the briefing and

it wasn't referred to at the briefing given by Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield,   so this   'contingency'   is not officially documented and

just for completness on this point it's worthy of note that Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield used his own notes at the briefing which

he has since handed over to the West Midlands team,        therefore,     we

cannot refer to those at this stage to see just what was said about

that.
                                                                           PAGE     24
                                                                           D23

MR METCALF

W o u l d n ’t we expect stewards to be checking the enclosures.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

Yes, and they were briefed on that day by four Inspectors,             where they

were to go, what they were to do etc.



MR METCALF

Would you expect the call to come through the club.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

Yes,   they have done that in the past and incidentally the man in

charge of stewards at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club is Doug

Locke who was formerly Superintendent at F Division,             and so has a

knowledge of the policing arrangements for matches held at

Hillsborough.



DCC

Would there be stewards on the tunnel entrance?



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

I c an’t answer that.



DCC

L e t ’s pick up on Mr. M e t c a l f ’s point,   can we clarify whether the call

has come in the past through club stewards to move             people from one

pen to another because now you appear to be saying something different.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

I have known them come through on a problem but not specifically on
                                                                         PAGE   25
                                                                         D23

the type of problem that you refer to here.      But yes,   I would have

expected it.



DCC

It seems then that there is no positive responsibility (to Mr.

Metcalf).



MR METCALF

That's fine I wanted to know in practice regardless of any formal

arrangements.



DCC

I think we ought to have an Appendix on stewards     (Flag for action).



MR WOODWARD

Yes,   just a thumb nail note please,   how many were there,   where were

they, what were they expected to do, what were they asked to do, what

did they do etc.    Now do the police consider   it their responsibility

for noting that the enclosures are getting full.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

I would always look for that type of situation arising,        I know that

I ’ve got some leeway in the safety figures I can always fit more in

when the computer   is telling me it’s full,   but if I decided it was

full then I would just send a message to close the turnstiles and

that would be it.



MR WOODWARD

I understand you would take the necessary steps but,        is it your

responsibility?
                                                                  PAGE     S6
                                                                  D23



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

I think it would fall upon us on the basis of protecting public safety,



ACC(SS)

The computer flags the capacity,    surely the club would be looking for

that.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

Yes, Graham McCrowle would be telling me that.



MR WOODWARD

Let's say he states that he wishes to close one stand or let fewer

people in one stand than it would hold, what would you do, whose

responsibility is it to ensure the safety of spectators    if he did that.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

Graham would say,   in fact he has said in the past, that I've got

problems fitting spectators in to a particular stand can I open the

North Stand which is membership only, and I've agreed to put them in

there even though they weren't members,   thereby lifting the

membership arrangements.



MR WOODWARD

This goes back to the crucial question why are you there at     all.



DCC

If I was asking about apportionment of fans when the centre sections

are full, who makes the decision.    I am sure the Club are going to

say the Police always do that but whose responsibility is it?
                                                                      PAGE    27
                                                                      D23



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

I   don't think he will,     I see me as an adviser to him to allow him to

steward the ground.



MR WOODWARD

This goes back to my original question.       "What were you doing there in

the first place?"        (Point left).



MR LIMB     (Counsel's No 2)

Going back,       there was talk a couple of days after this incident about

similar problems that arose at Barnsley v . E v e r t o n , I think that is

on your ground (question posed of Chief Superintendent Mole).



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

Yes, my new ground.        Mr. Simpson my Superintendent at Barnsley I

understand opened the gates to allow people in, the club have thus

refused to pay for the policing of that football ground in that we

broke the agreement that we had with the club.        It flies in the face

of a decision that was made at a meeting which was attended by

chairman of the football       clubs (Flag for acquisition of minutes of

that m e e t i n g ).



MR WOODWARD

It seems then that this is parallel near miss according to the

media.      You know to which match we refer,   I think we ought to have a

look at it because someone will definitely ask       (Flag for action).



MR LIMB

My second question is the numbered gates that are at the front of the
                                                                       PAGE
                                                                       DS3

enclosures, what are they used for?



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

Ingress and egress in an emergency.      We often open those gates to

relieve pressure or to allow someone in difficulties,      such as young

fans,   to move out of that enclosure    into another enclosure.     They ar

there for the safety of spectators.



MR LIMB

Just one more question.     Was any direct   contact made with the FA.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

No,   it was telephone   contact from Graham McCrowle of the Club who

asked if we could police the semi-final      on a particular date.     I

confirmed that there was no change from last year and if that

remained the case then we would be able to go ahead,      he asked if we

could change the ends,     I said No.   He came back to me and said OK

w e ’ll go for the same arrangements that we had last year.



MR WOODWARD

What do you mean by changing ends?



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

They wanted the Spion Kop end for the Liverpool supporters but this

raised the problem of segregation.



MR LIMB

Were terms ever written down as a result of these arrangements?



CHIEF SUPT MOLE
                                                                      PAGE     29
                                                                      D23

No,



MR LIMB

Page 10 of this document which deals with turnstiles flow,        on the

best estimate you could get them all     in in one hour.



CHIEF SUPT MOLE

Yes, all tickets.    1000 per hour, we had 15 turnstiles so could cope

with 15,000 in one hour.    The capacity for that end of the ground is

14,500.    Turnstiles opened at 12 noon, we expect to get 30/40 percent

of the spectators   in before 2.00pm   (1400) and in planning terms I

know that they can all be accommodated even if all     15,000 came at

once in one hour.



CHIEF SUPT WAIN

We are going to produce that page 10 as a separate schedule        (Flag for

action).



DCC

I think 1-10 turnstiles served the North stand on this occasion (None

of the members of the meeting were sure).      (Flag to check).



Chief Superintendent Wain introduces Part 5 aind describes the Anacapa

system.



DCC

Explains debriefing set~up.

What the Anacapa people have is notes from these de-brief sessions

and my transcript of viewing the video,     etc.

DCC then explains the Anacapa system in full.
                                                                     PAGE
                                                                     D23

CHIEF SUPT WAIN     So what we hope to do is get statements to

                    validate all that.

DCC                 I think the point is that the bundle you have

                    is the best information we have to hand.

MR WOODWARD         F in e .

CHIEF SUPT WAIN     I think we need to go through the whole of this

                    section,

Chief Supt. Wain begins to review Section 5.

MR WOODWARD         Was there a failure of communications?

CHIEF SUPT WAIN     I think we will need to investigate the report of

                    failure that we have.

DCC                 I have some information in this regard.        Some

                    people report a ticking,   others report clipped

                    messages, which made them undecipherable.        A

                    Communications PC goes and changes the set and

                    reports that communications are then OK,       but this

                    morning, Supt. Marshall and others report that

                    at about 2.30pm (1430) they had problems with

                    communications.   Yet others say that they

                    couldn't hear the radio because of the cacophony

                    of noise with which they were surrounded.        (Actio

                    required to establish the nature of this problem)

MR WOODWARD         Was there anything   in the vicinity that would

                    interfere with the communications,    such as C B ,

                    etc.

CHIEF SUPT MOLE     There have been reports of some local    radio

                    stations transmitting close by, and interfering

                    with communications,    but they are at best

                    unconfirmed.   When I attended after the incident

                    had taken place the communications were still
•   *•                                                                          PAGE   31
                                                                                DS3

                           down.    They were having to deal with matters

                           on the    'talk through'   facility (Mr. Mole

                           explains    'talk through'     facility).

         DCC               Let me add the significance of this.         Supt.

                           Marshall    radioed a message to Control that

                           because of the problems that he has had with

                           communications,    he imagines that he is not being

                           received at Control.       The Controller will say,

                           on the other hand,    that they were deliberating

                           on his questions when the gates were opened

                           prior to their    response.

         CHIEF SUPT MOLE   I know one officer will say he heard Supt.

                           Marshall asking for the gates to be opened,

                           but he w a s n ’t answered.

         DCC               I'm told that    'talk through'     is the normal mode

                           of transmission at football matches.

         CHIEF SUPT WAIN   We'll    clear that up in the investigation about

                           the communications problems.

         MR WOODWARD       This paragraph 5(15) what do we mean by 'becomes

                           critical*?

         DCC               I think that reflects a feeling from the officer

                           on the ground that he has lost control of the

                           situation.

         MR WOODWARD       Does it mean they have lost control or that there

                           is some iminent danger to person or persons?

                           You can see the difference,        this is important.

         CHIEF SUPT WAIN   I think that'    s answered later in that paragraph

                           where it talks of heavy congestion and people

                           being tightly packed.         Let me go back to where

                           officers were given orders to stop searching.
                                                                      PAGE   32
                                                                      D23

DCC                 Some of the witnesses at de-briefing suggest that

                    the searches weren't blocking the flow at all,

                    they were merely withdrawn because of the tight

                    packing,   they were isolated within the crowd and

                    there was very little they could do with the

                    property once they had searched and decided to

                    confiscate anything.     I think we may find that

                    the throttling of the through-put arose because

                    there were people there at the turnstiles who

                    had other intentions than to pass immediately

                    through and into the ground.

CHIEF SUPT WAIN     Let me refer to paragraph 5(16) which talks about

                    the steward opening Gate B a n d thereby causing

                    a greater problem.

DCC                 There is some ambiguity about the position with

                    regard to the stewards.    A number of stewards

                    from Liverpool,   on the 'old boys'   network, appear

                    to have attended with tickets,    shown them to a

                    gate steward,   pointed out they were stewards

                    from Liverpool,   and gained access without going

                    through the turnstiles.    A Police Inspector

                    reports having had to stop this activity

                    because stewards were then handing tickets back

                    to the crowd waiting outside.

MR WOODWARD         How could this be?

No one at the meeting was able to answer.     (Flagged for enquiry)

MR WOODWARD         Is it likely to have added significantly to the

                    numbers going through,    the significance,   I

                    suppose, was more to do with the impression that

                    this would create amongst those that were left
                                                                      PAGE    33
                                                                      D23

                     outside.

DCC                  Now I recall,    the word was that 50 came in, 50

                     stewards from Liverpool,      one of them gathered

                     their tickets together, went outside and handed

                     49 tickets to people waiting outside,       and 50

                     came back in again.

ACC STAFF SERVICES   We do know that bartering was going on at the

                     turnstiles, and there were other attempts to gain

                     entry,    for example,   there were reports of fans

                     keeping turnstile operators occupied whilst

                     other people crawled through their legs,       over

                     turnstiles and into the ground.

CHIEF SUPT WAIN      This remains speculation at this stage,       until we

                     gather our evidence.

MR WOODWARD          Message    clearly understood.

CHIEF SUPT WAIN      Turning to paragraph 5(19),       I interpret that,

                     for example,    that they had lost communications.

DCC                  At some point there is a life-threatening problem

                     in this area (points to a section on the map

                     between *B' and    *C* gates)    so a decision is made

                     to open ’C* gate, with the intention of relieving

                     that pressure by enabling some of the people to

                     come out of the area,      round the corner and into

                     'C * gate.

MR LIMB              To what extent was Gate      'B' opened?

CHIEF SUPT WAIN      Not at all at that time.

DCC                  Gate   'B' was opened at 2.30pm (1430)     to relieve the

                     pressure,    but closed almost immediately.     I have

                     heard different figures of 50 to 500 mentioned as

                     having gone through without passing through the
                                                                         PAGE    34
                                                                         D23

                  turnstiles.        (Ch. Supt. Mole reviewing photograph

                  bundle,       confirms that Gates    1-10 were serving on

                  that day as means of entering the North stand).

MR WOODWARD       L e t ’s get back to this pressure situation.

CHIEF SUPT WAIN   There is talk in here about a gate,            supposedly

                  Gate   ’B ’ ’d a n cing’ .   Moving on to paragraph 5(24)

                  we have got to check on that information.

DCC               Perhaps I can help again.           Mr. Marshall,    as I
                           \


                  understand it, asked for 2 things - one a tannoy

                  announcement,       and two, a Landrover with a public

                  address system,       to tell the fans in that area to

                  stay calm and not to push.           As I understand it,

                  (2) was acted upon,          but no response was gained to

                  his first request.

MR WOODWARD       Who opened that gate?

DCC               We d o n ’t know yet.        No policeman has actually come

                  forward to say that he opened the gate.              Mr.

                  Ma r s h a l l ’s aim was to empty that area (points

                  again to area between Gate          ’B ’ and Gate   ’C ’) to

                  save lives.        He requested Gate     ’C* be opened

                  specifically.        It happened like this,       Inspector

                  Purdy, who was at that area,          tried to make contact

                  with Supt. Marshall, who was standing out on

                  Leppings Lane,       on the bridge which crosses the

                  river,       he couldn’t get through on the radio and

                  was therefore obliged to walk to where Mr. Marshall

                  was standing,       and Inspector Purdy told Supt.

                  Marshall,       "If you d o n ’t open those gates,    people

                  will be killed".        Supt. Marshall     specifically

                  requested that Gate          ’C ’ be opened,   his aim being
                                                                   PAGE    35
                                                                   D23

                  to relieve the pressure within that area, Ground

                  Control    is still apparently considering the

                  request, when the decision is taken away from them

                  by the gate being opened, and we don't know yet who

                  actually opened that gate,    but it could be     that

                  every officer was picking up Supt. Marshall's

                  request for the gate to be opened.

MR WOODWARD       What would Ground Control have done,     given time

                  to make its decision?

DCC               Another relevant factor    is that a Sergeant    (Ch.

                  Supt. Mole interjects ~ Sergeant    1066) makes a

                  report from here, as Gate    'A', at about 2.55

                  (•1455).   His report goes something like this,

                  '*If the gates aren't opened,   people will die".

                  The message he got back from Ground Control was,

                  "If that's the case,    then open the gate".

CHIEF SUPT WAIN   Gate   *C* was only opened between 14.48 and

                  14.50.

DCC               The Mounted officers then move into that area

                  and shove the crowd back,    to clear the problem.

MR WOODWARD       Clarify the    'shove back', where were they shoved

                  back to?

CHIEF SUPT MOLE   Well definitely towards Leppings Lane,     not back

                  into the area towards the turnstiles.

CHIEF SUPT WAIN   You will see at paragraph 5(32)    that Gate    'C '

                  is opened again, and Gates    'A* and *B* are

                  also opened at that time.

MR LIMB           Where does the close circuit television on the

                  South West corner cover?

DCC               I've seen the film,    see along here   (points along
                                                                          PAGE     36
                                                                          D23

                     the back of the West Stand).         We could see fans

                     moving between this area (points to wall which

                     runs alongside Gate         'B'), but I could not see

                     through to Gate      'B'.    I did see fans streaming

                     through.

MR WOODWARD          Are these films annotated with time?

DCC                  Yes,   they're time elapse.

Chief Supt. Wain continues reviewing the Paper 5.

DCC brings meeting back to the point about         Inspector Purdy's    concern,

and points to the map where Inspector Purdy was.          There then arose

some ambiguity about which fence was the fence in question.

Chief Supt. Wain   then continued reviewing the Paper.

When Mr. Wain reached paragraph 5(35) -

CHIEF SUPT MOLE      This is significant,        because that's when the

                     players came out on the pitch.

DCC                  So they would be met with a roaring         crowd and that

                     is when the rush started.        (Check to see if times

                     coincide).

DCC                  However,    the video at this time appeared to

                     malfunction,      the fans appeared to berushing,

                     but that might be my perception, and may not be

                     what actually happening,        because the film

                     appeared to be running on faster than in previous

                     parts of the video.

MR WOODWARD          Was it out of sync?

DCC                  Yes,   somebody has mentioned that fact,       other people

                     have mentioned other factors,        such as pressing a

                     wrong button,      or moving it frame by frame in time

                     elapse,    etc.

                     However,    when these gates were opened, within
                                                                       PAGE   37
                                                                       D23

                      seconds there was no problem outside,    it was

                      reported that within seconds the whole mass of

                      people that were outside the ground had

                      disappeared.

AGC STAFF SERVICES   Was the North Stand full at that time?        Could we

                      tell by looking at the video of the crowd around

                      that time or by the turnstile computer?

CH SUPT MOLE         Yes, we'll have a figure on the print~out.

MR METCALFE          Could fans going through those turnstiles have

                      got over into the West Stand?

CH SUPT MOLE         No,   not without difficulty,   they could have

                      climbed over,   etc.

DCC                  But this situation here at turnstiles     1-10 meant

                      that the fans coming through the turnstiles were

                     only met with a barrier about waist high,       it

                     appears therefore that they were able to gain

                     access into the West Stand,     but there is no

                     evidence to suggest how many did that.

Ch. Supt. Wain moved on to paragraph 5(40).

MR WOODWARD          What does this phrase mean "indications to

                      suggestion?"

DCC                  People coming through in such numbers and that

                     gates other than Gate    'C' were now open.

CH SUPT WAIN         The film at this time shows that there was

                      plenty of room in the wings,    they were just

                      packed in the centre.

Moving away from Part 5, Ch. Supt. Wain quickly reviewed Part 6.

Ch. Supt. Mole introduced Part 7 and highlighted several      factors,

e.g.   the evacuation procedures and the fact that they had been

tested twice this season.     (Action - Find Evacuation Procedures
                                                                  PAGE
                                                                  D23

repo r ts).

MR WOODWARD       Can I move on to the following points ~

                  The reports by Chief Constables to Police

                  Authorities,   as required by the Police

                  Act of 1964,   surely these must have a

                  reference to the policing of football matches

                  and major events.

CHIEF SUPT WAIN   Yes, only short references    (Action required to

                  obtain Annual Reports    1980-1988 and pick out

                  references to policing operations at football

                  matches and major events).

MR WOODWARD       Now, what about the club’s Safety Certificate?

CH SUPT MOLE      We've got that,   but it's odd that it's not

                  been handed over to the Local Authority from

                  the South Yorkshire County Council yet.

DCC               Our Chief Superintendent Denton tells me that

                  we wrote to the new Sheffield City Council

                  about this Safety Certificate.    We received

                  a reply and Mr. Denton referred them to a

                  specimen of the certificate that they may

                  wish to use in drawing up their new certificate.

                  However,   he received a certificate which had

                  been diluted in many areas,    including the

                  section which deals with the policing of the

                  ground.

CH SUPT MOLE      It seems that we have been ruled out of the

                  safety considerations.

MR WOODWARD       What is the date of this certificate that we

                  do have?

CH SUPT MOLE      1979,   but we are still on that old one.
                                                                                        PAGE   39
                                                                                        D23

DCC                 But we have tried our best to modernise it.

                    (Obtain correspondence between Force and

                    Local Council on this matter)

MR WOODWARD         Moving on, what about Section 13 Collaboration

                    Notices?

DCC                 No, we only have informal mutual aid.

Ch. Supt. Wain reterrea   o a c K   10   me   question   o t   grouna   s a f e t y .



MR METCALFE         Is there any correspondence between you and

                    the Council?            (See previous flagging)

MR WOODWARD         Were there any discussions,                etc. since       1979

                    on the Ground Safety Certificate?

CH SUPT MOLE        Only annual meetings.

DCC                 We'd better pull together details of those

                    meetings.            (Flagged for action)

MR WOODWARD         Have the services that police provide outside

                    the ground been categorised as 'special                       services"

                    as per the Police Act?

DCC                 No,   inside the ground is ’special services",

                    outside isn't.

MR WOODWARD         Thus,     the problems are outside the ground,

                    therefore you are there not on 'special services'

                    but as what?

CHIEF SUPT MOLE    What they are paying for at the club are people

                    inside the ground.

MR WOODWARD        They're paying for a service,                not for men?

CH SUPT MOLE       Yes,     I can't say that this 4 and 40 officers

                    are being paid for.            (Flag this point — not

                    resolved during discussions.                 Is there a

                    concern here that the club may suggest that

                    the police were providing a 'special service'
                                                                             PAGE   40
                                                                             DS3

                    that had been paid for and specifically

                    requested at the Leppings Lane turnstiles?

                    This needs to be resolved.)

DCC & MR WOODWARD   It d o e s n ’t matter,    for t he y ’re paying for a

simultaneously      service and would         still be paying for that

                    service even if we         (point left)

MR METCALFE         I can’t see how the West Midlands team can

                    perform their task and be ready to go on the

                    15 May.      This will have to be sorted on Friday,

                    if we are to call evidence we need some             idea

                    of the time scale involved.           I also wonder as

                    well     (addressing Mr. Woodward)        if you need to

                    be there throughout the enquiry?

MR WOODWARD         It may help if we         look upon ourselves

                    as     ’the a c c u s e d ’, we need now to gather as much

                    information as we can,         in the time that is

                    available,      therefore I ask you gentlemen to

                    continue from the         point that you have already

                    reached,     which is     no mean feat in the time that

                    was available to you,         I ask you to cast your net

                    as widely as you can, gather what you think

                    myself or Mr. Metcalfe,         in our most perverse

                    mood may require of you, and get it together

                    for whenever you can.

DCC                 As to the scope of the enquiry, we focussed on

                    a time up to about 3.15 (1515)            or 3.30   (1530),

                    do we need at this stage to focus on consequences?

MR WOODWARD         Yes,    I think so, why did somebody not do something

                    might be a question?          Why did someone die when they

                    n e e d n ’t have done?     I t ’s those sorts of
                                                                     PAGE
                                                                     D23

               questions that we need to be aware of.

               As an example then,       Ch. Supt. Duckenfield would

               need to relate his account from the time of

               coming on duty up to the time that he eventually

               left duty,    is that right?       (From Ch. Supt. Wain —

               reinforce this point at briefings).

MR WOODWARD    Yes.

DCC            So we need all of this that has already been

               prepared,    plus a summary of what happened

               thereafter?

MR WOODWARD    Because there are these writs expected,         we ought

               to have the information that is available now,               to

               answer those in the long term.

CH SUPT MOLE   But when does the incident finish?

MR WOODWARD    I would suggest that your account,         for example,

               should be the time you attended the ground to

               the time you actually go home.          That would act

               as a CORE for us to work from.          We would choose

               what we want to leave in and what we want to

               leave out, and where the emphasis should lie.

CH SUPT MOLE   But time scales go out of the window,         I was

               there all that time and ca n’t remember what           I was

               doing at any give time.

DCC            You can only really do what you can do.

MR WOODWARD    Yes,   that do e s n ’t matter,   do the best you can.

               Identification,       for example, may not be relevant,

               but put it in, and get one or two others who may

               want to put all their thoughts and experiences of

               that day down on paper, as a sort of catharsis,

               to do the s a m e .
                                                                             PAGE     42
                                                                             D23

DCC                  So who should be interviewed?           For example,     there

                     are Specials,       there were thousands of officers on

                     duty in total.         What we have done so far is ask

                     for accounts from          all Inspectors and above     who were

                     on duty that day,          and also those officers of

                     those ranks who attended in response to Operation

                     Support     (Action this).       Then for the PC *s and

                     Sergeants, we have only actioned those who were at

                     the Leppings Lane          end of the ground.

MR WOODWARD          Yes,    t h a t ’s fine,   we have to be sensible.



DCC

The main players   in this are doing their own accounts          is that OK or

would you rather someone take their statement.



MR WOODWARD

It cou ldn’t be better.     They can put all the things in that they want

and we will sort them out.



DCC

So as far as the aftermath is concerned a few of the major players

involved if they provided full accounts that would suffice?



MR METCALFE

Yes.   That would be fine.



There then followed a discussion about the trading of minutes with

Miss Nortcliffe.   This was greed.



MR WOODWARD
                                                                    PAGE    43
                                                                    D23

What are the terms of reference for the tribunal?



MR METCALFE

I know but I haven't got them with me.



CHIEF SUPT WAIN

What about a deadline for this inquiry?



MR WOODWARD

Your heading   in the right direction.    Don't let up now.



MR METCALFE

We could be asked to submit papers by the 5 May.



MR WOODWARD

Lets see what happens on Friday.      If I said the 10 May what would you

say?



CHIEF SUPT WAIN

We would have to work to the 10 May.



MR WOODWARD

Right   lets go for the 10 May,   dependant on what happens on Friday.     I

would rather have the matter      conducted properly rather than quickly

and this will be stressed at the preliminary hearing on Friday.



MR METCALFE

Even if a couple of officers could give an account of afterwards that

would be something to work on.
                                                                    PAGE
                                                                    D23

CHIEF SUPT WAIN

Is there any special format for presenting the information?



MR WOODWARD

As is this is more than acceptable.



DCC

What about indexing?



MR WOODWARD

Don't worry about    indexing yet.   It would help however if this was

transposed onto a word processor so that the thing could be moved

around.



CHIEF SUPT WAIN

It will be going onto the computer from tomorrow so we can do

anything we want with it then.



MR WOODWARD

As a final    point I would like it to be passed to your officers that

anyone can tell Mr. Metcalfe    in confidence anything they want.    Any

observations on how or why the incident happened.      They can place

this information in a sealed envelope and send it to Mr. Metcalfe or

sent   it through you or telephone Mr. Metcalfe and tell him.    (Raise

at briefings).



DCC

And is this privileged information?



MR WOODWARD
                                                                                PAGE   45
                                                                                D23
w        Yes,   I wouldn't want to inhibit officers from feeling able to answer

         the question of how and why the event occurred so confidentiality is

         a vital   ingredient.



         MR METCALFE

         We must start then with self served statements and I can follow up on

         any questions that I have that arise as a result of those.



         The meeting    closed with exchanged compliments at 6.30pm   (1830).

         Appendices    1-21 except for Appendix   16 were then handed to Miss

         Nortcliffe    (A second set and the outstanding Appendices are to be

         copied on the 27 April    1989 and passed to Solicitors).

END OF REPORT
MINUTES OF MEETING WITH COUNSEL                       2 05 pm

                                                      26 April 1989

                                                      Mr Hayes Office




PERSONS PRESENT :



Deputy Chief Constable      - Mr Hayes

ACC (Staff Services)        - Mr Anderson

Chief Superintendent Wain

Chief Superintendent Mole

Mr Bill Woodward QC

Mr Patrick Limb

Mr Peter Metcalfe

Miss Belinda Nortcliffe




Mr Metcalfe



I assume we will get the video and the other documents back.    Any

briefs, accounts etc will remain privilege.   You ought to note that

pocket notebook entries can be called for and must be produced.       I

suggest at this stage that we don't call this present investigation

inquiry as such but that we look upon it as a gathering of evidence.

You should be careful not to use the word inquiry.
Chief Supt Wain



This document bundle has been hastily pulled together.     We have not

taken any evidence yet with which to back up the comments contained

herein, but we should be able to validate it given time.     Parts IV and V

in particular ought at this stage to be treated with care.



Mr Woodward



We don't expect to have the details at this stage we merely want to be

aware of that which might be given in evidence at a later stage.     We are

interested in types of evidence you are able to gather.     What I am going

to do is ask for certain things don't be afraid to tell us that you

can't provide anything.   Look upon this as an informal meeting amongst

friends.   Don't worry if we are asking for things that you can't provide

its just our way of getting to the heart of what is available.     The

important thing that you have been tasked with is to get the information

as much of it as you can, as fresh as it is at the moment, and you

appear to have done that or already made a very good start.



Turning to the inquiry we don't know yet what form it will take.     Lord

Justice Taylor could'do it any way he wants.   It may be done straight

fowardly. In that case Counsel would present evidence.     It could be done
                  k
in many difference ways, e.g. I could present the case but call

witnesses to give the evidence that can be given.   The main thing at

this stage is that you must be flexible.   You must be prepared to give

us more than we want, sooner than we actually need it.     You must be

prepared for us ringing to say we need it in such a fashion and at such
a time and your plans should be flexible enough to cope with these

demands.    In short we have no fixed idea we just want to be best

informed.     I can give you examples of some of the questions.   E.g. why

was that man there.    Why did X do Y.   What we ought to ancitipate are

questions that a third party might ask of police actions.     We might in

conducting an inquiry along those lines be identifying difficulties that

are not agreed as difficulties by other bodies and the danger always is

missing out on covering difficulties that appear at the case, but at

this stage don't be afraid of gathering too much information.       You also

ought to be aware that the information you give us is privileged so you

should encourage anybody giving evidence to put in his feelings, his

worries etc.    He must be aware that confidentiality is assured.

Confidentiality is important.



DCC



In terms of validation of this information we have here, we have talked

about obtaining evidence from Inspectors and above and from everybody

Pc's and Sergeants etc. who were on duty outside Leppings Lane, is that

appropriate?



Mr Woodward



Yes, but we need to address our minds to the'what if questions, eg. What

if Nottingham Forest fans were put at the Leppings Lane end (Mr Woodward

posed further hypothetical questions along this line).
Chief Supt Mole



We have addressed that one (referring to the question about Nottingham

Forest fans) Popplewell talks at length about segregation.

Chief Superintendent Mole then reviewed Popplewell's recommendations in

this regard.



DCC



What this represents is a shift of stand point.



Mr Woodward



Yes, what you should do is test what you know about the events of the

afternoon and test what you decided upon that afternoon by reference to

what a layman might ask or a man on the Clapham omnibus might ask about

what you know and what went on.   You ought to be aware of what others

know and what others are saying in the press or otherwise about the

events of that Saturday.



Part of our concern is not only in enabling Lord Justice Taylor to

conduct his inquiry but part of the concern is how we should deal with

later litigation.   We must at this stage present our evidence in the

most appropriate manner having an eye towards the future.    Now what are

these charts (Mr Woodward points to 2 charts showing deployment of

manpower at the Hillsborough Stadium and in its environs).



Chief Superintendent Mole then addressed the charts of deployment.
Mr Wooward



So you determined deployment by crowd flow that was expected?



Chief Supt Mole



Yes.



There then arose a discussion about the filling up of the North Stand in

relation to which turnstiles were used.



DCC



Can I answer this.   We only used turnstiles at Leppings Lane and this

may have contributed to the build up.     This could be an important

factor.



Mr Woodward



Why was that?



Chief Supt Mole



To prevent clashes amongst fans.



Chief Superintendent Mole then went on to address the figures of the

actual deployment to explain why those figures were decided upon.      To

explain what the reasons vjihy behind reducing the manpower in relation to
the 1988 Semi-Final, and Mr Mole also emphasized at this point the North

and South divide for the purposes of segregation.       In other words

Liverpool fans would have the North and West side of the ground and in

the main Nottingham Forest would have the East Spion Kop side.



Chief Superintendent Wain then referred to transport arrangements as a

result of this segregation.       Stations at Wadsley     Bridge andStation in

town with bussing arrangements.    He^as   well, picked upon this reduction

in manpower and reinforced the view that reduction was merely at the

peripheral points.    Chief Superintendent Wain also addressed the

turnstile flow at this stage   i.e. that Nottingham       Forest andLiverpool

fans arriving would enter by   different turnstiles       separated from each

other and therefore segregation was ensured.



Chief Supt Mole



I would also like to pick up on the 'D' Division Operational Order.

'D' Division is our City Centre Division and officers from 'D' Division

would meet Nottingham Forest fans at the Railway Station in the City and

would travel with the fans on buses and on arriving at the ground would

remain as a reserve at the ground until the end of the match when they

would return on the buses to the Station with the Nottingham Forest

fans.   Therefore this increases the number of officers that are shown on

these charts as being available for duty at the ground.      I should also

like to pick up on the earlier point of reduction in manpower.      We found

last year that our CID officers and others at the peripheray were under­

employed.   We had an excess of Sergeants and so when it came to planning

for this year we whittled those figures down yet maintained the 1988
figures in respect of the ground itself and the major points that were

considered to be important in successfully policing the operation.       The

over-estimation in 1988 was due to the nature of policing operations at

Sheffield Wednesday.   The normal First Division Football Games are

policed in phases , therefore officers are moved from phase 1 to phase 2

for example to other duties.     On a football match on the scale of the

FA Cup Semi-Final all those officers would remain at their single point,

therefore several officers were found to be unemployed at their single

point in 1988, and the reduction only took place on the peripheral

areas.



Mr Woodward



Tell me was there anything unusual about this match,    was thereanything

that had changed from last year?



Chief Supt Mole



I did the first bit of planning for the football match, but I was

replaced 3 weeks before the match--and my successor therefore was a

change of Commander from last year.



Other changes that may or may not be significant are trains.     There

weren't so many this year.     In 1987 we had 10 trains, in 1988 3 trains

and this year only 1 special train of Liverpool supporters.     Now we

wouldn't have that information until the very last minute because the

only thing we know for sure is that special trains can and do arrive at

Wadsley Bridge Station.   We wouldn't know until probably the morning of
the game how many trains were travelling.       Now this poses problems

because with 10 trains at 550 fans each it means that I know that 5,500

fans are arriving at one point at the same time and can be handled by

police officers meeting them from the train and accompanying them to the

ground.   Similarly in 1988 I had 3 trains arrive therefore 1,650 fans

could be received by police officers and whisked straight into the

ground.   Now this year only 1 train arrived with 450 fans on therefore

the other fans were arriving by alternative means and couldn't be so

easily controlled.       You ought to note that its the fans decision about

travelling and that this decision apparently made by several hundred

fans precluded the police from controlling the time of their arrival at

the ground.       Another change from last year was that tickets were printed

in various colours to denote the areas to which the fans were allocated.

This made it easier for the fans and in addition the tickets were

overprinted with the name of the Football Club to whom that particular

section of the ground had been allocated.       It made it easier for the

turnstile operators because all they had to do was check the colour of

the ticket, the name of the Club allocated to the section of the ground

and take one piece off the ticket and let the customer through.



DCC



What about people coming late.      That was a change.



Chief Supt Mole



1987 Leeds    v    Coventry, supporters arrived late at that match, to such

an extent that it was necessary to delay the match.       I delayed the match
by 15 minutes.    In 1988 there was no problem, the match kicked-off at

3 00pm therefore it was anticipated that it would be similarly trouble-

free this year.   In 1989 there is evidence to suggest that the fans were

here but they weren't at the ground.    Eg. the Traffic Division notes

show that the roads were clear in other words there weren't queues of

traffic waiting to get into the City.   The conclusion is that the fans

were here, the Liverpool fans in particular, but they had not made their

way to the ground.



Chief-Supt Wain then referred to 14 40 time on Part IV of the Report

which confirms Mr Mole's statement.



DDC



Now there were other changes and I think this is what Mr Woodward wants.

People tell m e sfor exampletthat they had never seen at other similar

football matches to this one so many non-ticket holders arriving, so

much alcohol brought to the football matches and therefore having to be

consumed or disposed of at the turnstiles.   So much obduracy of fans, eg

mounted officers report that fans were crawling through horses legs.

Mounted officers are usually able to clear an area without any

difficulty.   They report that this year for some reason they met

opposition from the Liverpool fans whom they were trying to control.      A

further change from last year is the problems that were encountered at

turnstiles.   People were trying to bribe their way into the match.

(Reference is then made to the observations section of bundle 5 which

begins at paragraph 5 -53 )
ACC (Staff Services)




I think its fair to say that the Liverpool fans because they were here

last year were quite familiar with the organization of the South

Yorkshire Police eg there was an incident at Stocksbridge which has been

related to me by a policewoman there.   The van was stopped and searched

and a crate of beer was discovered and underneath the crate was a note

saying we've beat you this year your not getting our beer from us.       This

implies that they knew the arrangements for gaining entry to the ground

and ..the fact that alcohol would be taken from them and that they had

come prepared to consume their alcohol elsewhere and then get into the

ground untroubled by the South Yorkshire Police operation.



Chief Supt Wain



There is also the story told to me by a police officer of a public house

near to the ground, I think its called The Owl, where the Licensee is

reported to have said "the fans came and drunk more beer in 2 hours

before the start of the game than I sold all last New Years Eve".



ACC (Staff Services)



On that theme there was an acjd^ I understand^ placed in the Liverpool Echo

by a Sheffield Licensee who stated "Liverpool fans you can come to my

pub this year and we'll not run out of beer".
 Discussion then moved on to the bundle of documents prepared for this

meeting with Counsel.   The index was taken account of.   The first

 document, the map^was explained by Chief Superintendent Mole.



Chief Superintendent Wain then spoke to the history of South Yorkshire

Police and pointed out that as the report progressed it focussed more

and more on 'F' Division and on the 'F' Division Officers.



ACC (Staff Services)




There is a reference here to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.     It ought

to be pointed out in addition to what is written here that he has

policed many football matches in his duties as Superintendent - City

Centre, he has policed pop concerts and the like.   He is a very

experienced chap.



Mr Woodward




Yes I would like to develop the background of Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield and we may like to knpw more about South Yorkshire's

experience in policing major events.



Chief Supt Mole




I will be covering that as far as Hillsborough 13 concerned in my

historical account.
Mr Woodward



Yes I see here at paragraph 1.9 that South Yorkshire is widely-

experienced at handling major events.



DCC



Perhaps we can supplement that with details of the policing of Orgreave

and of the steel strike etc.     (This was resolved;to develop profiles for

each of the 'F' Division Management Team and to supplement information

about South Yorkshire handling of major events with appendices

relating).



Mr Wain then spoke to Part II of the document bundle, which related to a

simple description of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and its

facilities at Hillsborough Stadium.     The album of photographs which

accompany this description was introduced and the photographs were

referred to at length.



Mr Woodward



What I don't want you to do is disturb what you've already done.     This

is magnificant.   I just want you to add supplements as we go through and

raise anything else.     I would suggest at the end of the day that it all

be indexed, but for this stage is it already on word processor?



Chief Superintendent Wain continued with his review of Part II.
I want to draw your attention particularly to paragraph 2.25.   You must

be_aware of talking about the centre pens etc.   They are referred to

here as pens 1 and 2 , but you’ll notice on the maps that in order to

avoid confusion with the escape gates which are also numbered these pens

have been described by their geographical location.   Eg North West,

North, Centre North, Centre South and South.



Mr Woodward



    has caused the alteration that I note here to the CCTV arrangements?




Chief Supt Mole



Well the building of the roof on the Kop caused cameras to be moved.     We

found that when the roof was on the original cameras wouldn't give us

the pictures.




Mr Mole then went on to address the Control Room and whats contained

therein.




Continue speech.



Superintendent Murray would be in that box, all the equipment which is

listed here at 2.29 is available to him.
I think it fair to say at this juncture that we did experience some

communication problems.



Chief Supt Wain



We are going to develop that later in this briefing.



Chief Supt Mole



Sheffield Wednesday Football Club have always kept the ground up to date

because they have wanted to keep the privilege of holding Semi-Finals

and the like.     Whenever a recommendation has been made Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club have complied with that.      When the green guide

raised the question of additional communications etc. they put them in.



Mr Woodward



What monitoring of the turnstiles ..is available?



Chief Supt Mole



The Controller can tell how many have come through the turnstiles by

computer print-out.    This computer flashes when it reaches a thousand

below capacity.    Now we have a print-out for   3 00pm that day and it will

show that 12,500 had gone through that still     left a capacity for a

further 2,000 to come through the turnstiles,
#
    DCC



    But hundreds ,;Jno.: , perhaps thousands;of people have come through the

    gates.



    Mr Woodward



    At what time?



    DCC



    I have a note that at 2 53 pm Gate C was opened.    The point is that

    there were more in the ground than those that were counted by computer.



    Mr Limb



    Are there cameras trained on the turnstiles?


t   Chief Supt Mole



    Yes.   Stands up and'points same out on map.



    Mr Woodward



    Someone may say for example if you have those cameras upon what basis

    did you make your decision.   The computer or the cameras.
Chief Supt Mole



That camera would be trained on the turnstiles at all times and would be

available to the Commander on the day.



DCC



The Commander could have access to the computer and the camera pictures.



Mr Woodward



Is there an interplay at all? to-
the Club monitorsf- the Police monitors.

Chief Superintendent Mole

We have a PC liaison man in the Club control room, we also have telephone links

with the police control room.

Chief Superintendent Wain then went on to talk of the equipment that was

available in both control rooms and the means of communication between the two.



Moving on




Chief Superintendent Wain turns to Paper 3.    Mr.Limb could I just make

reference to the Safety of Sports Ground Act which is mentioned in Part 3.      I

remember signs in a station that7on certain trains^alcohol would not be

allowed, there are therefore these dry trains which may deter fans from

travelling on them.   This may account for the problems you referred to earlier

as the reasons for fans deciding not to travel by trains this year.

Chief Superintendent Mole

Yes, you could be right.    There's also the problem of dealing with fans who

bring alcohol in box vans and the like, we have powers to deal with fans

bringing alcohol in buses, even mini-buses, but not in the back of furniture

vans or transit vans etc.

Mr. Woodward

I think we may leave Part 3 now, I've just quickly gone through it, there's

some useful information in there and it is very helpfully prepared but it may

reward further reading.
M r. Woodward

Is there a copy of the .Short report.

Chief Superintendent Mole

No, we didn't have a copy of the Short report although it is referred to in

several sections.

DCC

Flag the fact that a short report is required, and indeed all reports referred

to in Pa^t 3.

M r . Woodward

Can I go on from there, any piece of paper that is referred to throughout and

that we may refer to at the Committee of Inquiry should be produced in full,

it's no good us having the two pages to which you refer if some clever dick

wants to refer to the whole section.

Chief Superintendent Mole then introduced Part 4 of the bundle and spoke to it.

DCC referred everyone's attention to the synopsis that had been prepared of the

vital elements.

Chief Superintendent Mole talked about the selection of his management team and

the background of these officers, particularly with regard to their experience

in policing semi-final football matches and also mentioned the fact at this

stage that his replacement was not prejudicial to the operational efficiency of

the semi-final football operation as officers were at hand who had wide

experience themselves.

Mr. Metcalf

Yes, I think it would be very helpful to have some sort of curriculum vitae of

the senior officers attached as an appendix.
M r. Woodward

Can I turn now to Harris v Sheffield United.   It talks in there about the

description of police operations and of meetings with the police to determine

the nature of the policing operations at football grounds.   Can you tell me

more about that?

Chief Superintendent Mole

Yes, we determined certain policy arising from that case and do hold regular

meetings.   Is it the meeting in that particular year that you are interested

in?

Mr. Woodward

It seems to me that that year is the relevant one that followed the case.

Chief Superintendent Mole

I could get hold of mintues of meetings in other years and in this year

particularly (Flag for action).

ACC (SS)

Did we not alter our contracts as a result of that case.

DCC

But this match is out of that contractual arrangement.

Deputy Chief Constable then went on to explain how the contract works.



"Clubs always get more officers than they pay for at normal league matches, I

tell you what I'd better get hold of that contract." (Flag for action).

Chief Superintendent Mole

Our contract is with the Clubs this match is outside the club's   auspices, they
M r. Woodward

Although it's a different body to whom you are providing services, the type of

services are the same.   I'm interested in what you agree and what you have

agreed to give them.

Chief Superintendent Mole

There is no negotiation goes on over this match.

Mr. Woodward

Let me read this.   He reads from a section of Harris v Sheffield United.

This section contained the phrase, discusses needs for the season and Mr.

Woodward continued in direct speech to the group, "So it seems that an order

drawing up the arrangement between the club and the police is called for, is

such an order drawn up detailing manpower requirements?   For example, have you

discussed the requirements regarding this particular match ."

Chief Superintendent Mole

No, we tell them how many officers they can have, in terms of discussing

manpower levels we don't, we tell them.

DCC

It seems to be a notional calculation for the benefit of club finances.     We

assess matches on an A, B or C category, thus we categorise these matches in

liaison with the clubs so the clubs would know how many matches were category

A, B or C etc. and therefore would have a rough idea of the manpower that would

be committed to policing such a match.

Chief Superintendent Mole

We are in constant touch with the club and develop manpower levels right up to

the kick-off.
Perhaps we ought to have the reference and look into it.

Mr. Woodward

The relevant paragraph from the 1977 Judgement is recorded at page 844 of the

All England Law Reports letters D - J, all I want to know is were there any

arrangements in being.     (Flag All England Law Reports for action).

DCC

So we want to determine whether this match fits into those considerations and

did the negotiations have anything to do with the differences in manpower this

year over last year.     Also are there any F.A. instructions to clubs for the

policing of semi-finals.    (Flag this for action).

Mr. Woodward

Yes, let's develop that, look at club versus F.A. matches from an objective

viewpoint.     What are the differences?

Chief Superintendent Wain

We used to meet annually with all Chairmen.

Mr. Woodward

Could I have the minutes of the meetings with the Chairman of these football

clubs, and furthermore how does policing measure up to what was discussed at

those meetings.     (Flag acquisition of minutes).

Mr. Woodward continued -

"Were there any big matches at Hillsborough between the dates of 1974 and the

first of these F.A. Cup semi-finals in the 8 0 's.

Chief Superintendent Mole

No, only big league games, which are policed in a different format.
 M r. Woodward

 Do you get more trouble at league football matches.

Chief Superintendent Mole

League matches are generally more    predictable because the biggest proportion of

 fans are local and tend to do the   same things week after week.

ACC (SS)

It s worth stressing that we have    had capacity crowds there.

Mr. Wain interjected with a point    that pop concerts were held at football

grounds in the city.

Chief Superintendent Mole

Yes, we've had derby matches for example.     Christmas a few years ago.

Mr. Woodward

If there are any lessons to be learnt from these experiences let's look into

them, let's find out what lessons were learned and what lessons we should have

learned for policing the F. A. Cup matches.     (Refer to relevant football

matches).

DCC

What we also need is what lessons have been learned from other clubs who have

staged football matches and should have been learned.                         i

Mr. Woodward

Yes.

ACC (SS)

On that point we have learned that we can avoid problems by recommending Sunday

matches or by recommending kick-off times in the morning before pubs are open.
Now, significant to this whole enquiry is the opening of the gates.     I

understand that these gates have been opened before without any trouble.

Mr. Woodward

Yes, that's back to my earlier point.     What is the difference this year with

other games.

Chief Superintendent Mole

In the seven years that I have been at the Division, I haven't known that the

gates have      been opened.

DCC

Well, let me ask you about this.    Superintendent Freeman is alleged to have had

a contingency to block off that tunnel in the event of a build-up of fans in

the enclosures.

Chief Superintendent Mole

So did I.    We have blocked them off.   The fans always go for the area behind

the goal.    We can put a cordon there and send them around.

Mr. Woodward

So it seems there are two identifiables here.     1, the gate was opened, 2, no

cordon was placed.

Chief Superintendent Wain

Did this happen at league games?

Chief Superintendent Mole



It was just a contingency, It may never have happened.
Points to the gates betweeen the enclosures "It seems that there are a lot of

questions around there.

Chief Superintendent Mole

WE often find that everybody is standing at the back of the pens and so we keep

the gates between the pens locked until we find that the enclosures are filling

at the front and then the gates can be opened to relieve the pressure.   The

Inspector who has a duty in that area of the ground may decide to open one or

both gates and he can decide when.   I must stress that on this match everything

was opened before hand.




There are also gates here he points to the tunnel area on the map.



DCC




I understand they have been closed in the past.

Chief Superintendent Mole

That's right.

DCC

And another thing, people get packed up at the back of the terrace and on this

occasion people will have entered, tried to get into the centre sections, found

it packed with people at the back and therefore have shoved all the more to get

into the sections (point left).

Chief Superintendent Mole

C gate is not used as a through passage for spectators at any time.
M r» Woodward

Are you saying that the gate was opened.

Chief Superintendent Mole

No, but police can get through by knocking.     It's used for taking out arrested

people or bringing in people arrested outside the ground.

DCC

So it is frequently used for official purposes.

Chief Superintendent Mole

Then there is this sterile area   between C Gate and the tunnel, we often close

this area off to keep it a sterile area and     to prevent fans from moving between

the sections.

ACC (Staff Services)

What about this tunnel then, do we hold these keys.

No one answered this question. (Flag for enquiry)

Chief Superintendent Mole shows   the meeting a photograph from the album of

photographs looking from Gate C   towards the   tunnel, "If you look at the next

photo you will see that there is a separation barrier there to split the crowd

conuning through the tunnel into the two enclosures.

DCC

Let me see if I can expand this matter a little, there is nothing in the

operational order to talk about this contingency that we are referring to, nor

I understand is it referred to at the briefing and it wasn't referred to at the

briefing given by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, so this 'contingency' is

not officially documented and just for completness on this point it's worthy of

note that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield used his own notes at the briefing
which he has since handed over to the West Midlands team, therefore, we cannot

refer to those at this stage to see just what was said about that.

Mr. Metcalf

Wouldn't we expect stewards to be checking the enclosures.

Chief Superintendent Mole

Yes, and they were briefed on that day by four Inspectors, where they were to

go, what they were to do etc.

Mr. Metcalf

Would you expect the call to come through the club.

Chief Superintendent Mole

Yes, they have done that in the past and incidentally the man in charge of

stewards at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club is Doug Lock.who was formerly

Superintendent at 'F' Division, and so has a wide knowledge of the policing

arrangements for matches held at Hillsborough.

DCC

Would there be stewards on the tunnel entrance?

Chief Superintendent Mole

 I can't answer that.

 DCC

 Let's pick up on Mr. Metcalf's point, can we clarify whether the call has come

 in the past through club stewards to move people from one pen to another

 because now you appear-to be saying something different.

 Chief Superintedent Mole

 I have known then come through on a problem but not specifically on the type of

 problem that you refer to here.   But yes, I would have expected it.
It seems then that there is no positive responsibility (to Mr. Metcalf).

Mr. Metcalf

That's fine I wanted to know in practice regardless of any formal arrangements.

DCC

I think we ought to have an Appendix on stewards (Flag for action).

Mr. Woodward

Yes, just a thumb nail note please,how many were there, where    were they, what

were they expected to do, what were   they asked to do, what did they do etc.

Now do the police consider it their responsibility for noting that the

enclosures are getting full.

Chief Superintendent Mole

I would always look for that type of situation   arising, I know that I've got

some leeway in the safety figures I   can always fit more in when the computer is

telling me it's full, but if I decided it was full then I would just send a

message to close the turnstiles and that would be it.

Mr. Woodward

I understand you would take the necessary steps but, is it your responsibility.

Chief Superintendent Mole

I think it would fall upon us on the basis of protecting public safety.

ACC (SS)

The computer flags the capacity, surely the club would be looking for that.

Chief Superintendent Mole
               /"lc C rc-w ^
Yes, Graham Mackreil would be telling me that.

Mr. Woodward
Let's say he states that he wishes to close one stand or let fewer people in

one stand than it would hold, what would you do, whose responsibility is it to

ensure the safety of spectators if he did that.

Chief Superintendent Mole

Graham would say, in fact he has said in the past, that I've got problems

fitting spectators in to a particular stand can I open the North stand which is

membership only, and I've agreed to put them in there even though the^.ef were^'f"

members, thereby lifting the membership arrangements.

Mr. Woodward

This goes back to the crucial question why are you there at all.

DCC

If I was asking about apportionment of fans when the centre sections are full;
                          %

who makes the decision.     I am sure the Club are going to say the Police always

do that but whose responsibility is it?

Chief Superintendent Mole

I don't think he will, I see me as an adviser to him to allow him to steward

the ground.

Mr. Woodward

This goes back to my original question, "What were you doing there in the first

place?"   (Point left).

Mr. Limb (Counsel's No 2)

Going back, there was talk a couple of days after this incident about similar

problems that arose at Barnsley v Everton, I think that is on your ground

(question posed of Chief Superintendent Mole).

Chief Superintendent Mole
Yes, my new ground.   Mr. Simpson my Superintendent at Barnsley I understand

opened the gates to allow people in, the Club have thus refused to pay for the

policing of that football ground in that we broke the agreement that we had

with the Club.   It flies in the face of a decision that was made at a meeting

which was attended by chairmen of the football clubs (Flag for acquisition of

minutes of that meeting).

~Mr. Woodward

It seems then that this is parallel near miss according to the media.                You know

to which match we refer, I think we ought to have a look at it because someone

will definitely ask (Flag for action).

Mr.Limb

My second question is the numbered gates that are at the front of the

enclosures, what are they used for?

Chief Superintendent Mole

Ingress and egress in an emergency.    We often open those gates to relieve

pressure or to allow someone in difficulties, such as young fans, to move out

of that enclosure into another enclosure.     They are there for the safety of

spectators.

Mr. Limb

Just one more question.     Was any direct contact made with the F.A.

Chief Superintendent Mole
                                              C r - c iv jt s -

N o , it was telephone contact from Graham M&ckrell of the Club who asked if we

could police the semi-final on a particular date.                 I confirmed that there was

no change from last year and if that remained the case then we would be able to

go ahead, he asked if we could change the ends, I said No.                 He came back to me
and said O.K. we'll go for the same arrangements that we had last year.

Mr. Woodward

What do you mean by changing ends?

Chief Superintendent Mole

They wanted the Spion Kop end for the Liverpool supporters but this raised the

problem of segregation.

Mr.Limb

Were terms ever written down as a result of these arrangements?

Chief Superintendent Mole

No.

Mr.Limb

Page 10 of this document which deals with turnstiles flow, on the best estimate

you could get them all in in one hour.

Chief Superintendent Mole

Yes, all tickets. 1000 per hour, we had 15 turnstiles so could cope with 15,000

in one hour.   The capacity for that end of the ground is 14,500.   Turnstiles

opened at 12 noon, we expect to get 30/40% of the spectators in before 2.00 pm

and in planning terms I know that they can all be accommodated even if all

15,000 came at once in one hour.

Chief Superintendent Wain

We are going to produce that page 10 as a separate schedule (Flag for action).



DCC

I think 1 - 1 0 turnstiles served the North stand on this occasion (None of the

members of the meeting were sure). (Flag to check).
Chief Superintendent Wain introduces Part 5 and describes the Anacapa system

DCC

Explains debriefing set-up.
                                 sf •
                    What the Anna Cappa people have is notes from these

                    de-brief sessions and my transcript of viewing

                    the video, etc.

DCC then explains the Anna Cappa system in full.

CH. SUPT. WAIN      So what we hope to do is get statements to vali­

                    date all that.

DCC                 j think the point is that the bundle you have is

                    the best information we have to hand.

MR. WOODWARD       Fine.

CH.   SUPT. WAIN   j think we need      to go through the whole of this

                    section.

Ch. Supt. WAIN begins to review Section 5-

MR. WOODWARD       ^as there a failure of communications?

CH.   SUPT. WAIN   j think we will      need to investigate the report of

                    failure that we have.

DCC                I have some information in this regard.      Some

                    people report a ticking, others report clipped

                    messages, which made them undecipherable.      A

                   Communications PC goes and changes the set and

                    reports that communications are then OK, but this

                    morning, Supt. Marshall and others report that at

                    about 2 .30pm they had problems with communications.

                   Yet others say that they couldn't hear the radio

                    because of the cacophony of noise with which

                    they were surrounded.     (Action reqquired to

                    establish the nature of this problem)

MR. WOODWARD       yas there anything in the vicinity that would

                    interfere with the communications, such as CB,

                    etc.
CH. SUPT. MOLE   There have been reports of some local radio stations

                 transmitting close by, and interfering with

                 communications, but they are at best unconfirmed.

                 When I attended after the incident had taken place

                 the communications were still down.    They were

                 having to deal with matters on the 'talk through'

                 facility (Mr. Mole explains 'talk through'

                 facility)

DCC              Let me add the significance of this.    Supt.

                 Marshall radioed a message to Control that because

                 of the problems that he has had with communi­

                 cations , he imagines that he is not being received

                 at Control.   The Controller will say, on the other

                 hand, that they were deliberating on his questions

                 when the gates were opened prior to their response.

CH. SUPT MOLE    I know one officer will say he heard Supt. Marshall

                 asking for the gates to be opened, but he wasn't

                 answered.

DCC              I'm told that 'talk through' is the normal mode

                 of transmission at football matches.

CH. SUPT. WAIN   We'll clear that up in the investigation about the

                 communications problems.

MR. WOODWARD-    This paragraph 5(15) what do we mean by    becomes

                 critical'?

DCC              I think that reflects a feeling from the officer

                 on the ground that he has lost control of the

                 situation.
MR. WOODWARD     Does it mean they have lost control or that there

                 is some iminent danger to person or persons?      You

                 can see the difference, this is important.

CH. SUPT. WAIN   I think that's answered later in that paragraph

                 where it talks of heavy congestion and people

                 being tightly packed.   Let me go back to where

                 officers were given orders to stop searching.

DCC              Some of the witnesses at de-briefing suggest that

                 the searches weren't blocking the flow at all,

                 they were merely withdrawn because of the tight

                 packing, they were isolated within the crowd and

                 there was very little they could do with the

                 property once they had searched and decided to

                 confiscate anything.    I think we may find that

                 the throttling of the through-put arose because

                 there were people there at the turnstiles who had

                 other intentions than to pass immediately through

                 and into the ground.

CH. SUPT. WAIN   Let me refer to paragraph 5(16) which talks about

                 the steward opening Gate 'B ' and thereby causing

                 a greater problem.

DCC              There is some ambiguity about the position with

                 regard to the stewards.    A number of stewards

                 from Liverpool, on the 'old boys' network, appear

                 to have attended with tickets, shown them to a

                 gate steward, pointed out they were stewards from

                 Liverpool, and gained access without going

                 through the turnstiles.    A Police Inspector reports
DCC                 having had to stop this activity because stewards

                    were then handling tickets back to the crowd

                    waiting outside.

MR. WOODWARD        How could this be?

No-one at the meeting was able to answer. (Flagged for enquiry!

MR. WOODWARD        Is it likely to have added significantly to the

                    numbers going through, the significance, I suppose,

                    was more to do with the impression that this would

                    create amongst those that were left outside.

DCC                 Now I recall^the word was that 50 came in, 50

                    stewards from Liverpool, one of them gathered their

                    tickets together, went outside and handed 49 tickets

                    to people waiting outside, and 50 came back in

                    again.

ACC                 We do know that bartering was going on at the
STAFF SERVICES
                    turnstiles, and there were other attempts to gain

                    entry, for example, there were reports of fans

                    keeping turnstile operators occupied whilst other

                    people crawled through their legs, over the turn­

                    stiles and into the ground.

CH. SUPT. WAIN     This remains speculation at this stage, until we

                    gather our evidence.

MR. WOODWARD       Message clearly understood.

CH. SUPT. WAIN     Turning to paragraph 5(19), I interpret that, for

                   example, that they had lost communications.

DCC                At some point there is a life-threatening problem

                   in this area (points to a section on the map

                   between 'B' and 1C ' gates) so a decision is made
DCC              to open 'C' gate, with the intention of relieving

                 that pressure by enabling some of the people to

                 come out of the area, round the corner and into

                 'C' Gate.

MR. LIMB         To what extent was Gate *B ' opened?

CH. SUPT. WAIN   Not at all at that time.

DCC              Gate ’B ’ was opened at 2.30pm, to relieve the

                 pressure, but closed almost immediately.     I have

                 heard different figures of 50 to 500 mentioned as

                 having gone through without passing through the

                 turnstiles.   (Ch. Supt. Mole reviewing photograph

                 bundle, confirms that Gates 1-10 were serving on

                 that day as means of entering the North Stand).

MR. WOODWARD     Let's get back to this pressure situation.

CH. SUPT. WAIN   There is talk in here about a gate,supposedly

                 Gate 'B '^ 'dancing'. Moving on to paragraph 5(24)

                 we have got to check on that information.

DCC              Perhaps I can help again.    Mr. Marshall, as I under­

                 stand,it, asked for 2 things - one a tannoy

                 announcement, and two, a Landrover with a public

                 address system, to tell the fans in that area to

                 stay calm and not to push.   As I understand it,

                 (2) was acted upon, but no.response was gained to

                 his first request.

MR. WOODWARD     Who opened that gate?

DCC              We don't know yet.   No policeman has actually come

                 forward to say that he opened the gate.     Mr.

                 Marshall’s aim was to empty that area (points
again to area between Gate 'B ' and Gate ’C') to

save lives.     He requested Gate 'C be opened

specifically.     It happened like this, Inspector

Purdy, who was at that area, tried to make contact

with Supt. Marshall, who was standing out on

Leppings Lane, on the bridge which crosses the

river, he couldn't get through on the radio and

was therefore obliged to walk to where Mr. Marshall

was standing, and Inspector Purdy told Supt.

Marshall, "If you don't open those gates, people

will be killed."    Supt. Marshall specifically

requested that Gate 'C ' be opened, his aim being

to relieve the pressure within that area, Ground

Control is still apparently considering the

request, when the decision is taken away from them

by the gate being opened, and we don't know yet

who actually opened that gate, but it could be

that every officer was picking up Supt. Marshall's

request for the gate to be opened.

What would Ground Control have done, given time

to make its decision?

Another relevant factor is that a Sergeant (Ch.

Supt. Mole interjects - Sergeant 1066) makes a

report from here, as Gate 'A', at about 2.55 *

His report goes something like this, "If the gates

aren't opened, people will die."     The message he

got back from Ground Control was, "If that's the

case, then open the gate."
CH. SUPT. WAIN      Gate 'C' was only opened between 14.48 and 14.50.

DCC                 The Mounted officers then move into that area and

                    shove the crowd back, to clear the problem.

MR. WOODWARD        Clarify the 'shove back', where were they shoved

                    back to?

CH. SUPT. MOLE      Well definately towards Leppings Lane, not back

                    into the area towards the turnstiles.

CH. SUPT. WAIN     You will see at paragraph 5(32) that Gate 'C' is

                    opened again, and Gates 'A' and 'B ' are also opened

                    at that time.

MR. LIMB           Where does the close circuit television on the

                   South West corner cover?

DCC                 I've seen the film, see along here (points along

                    the back of the West Stand).     We could see fans

                   moving between this area (points     to wall which runs

                   alongside Gate 'B '), but I could not see through

                   to Gate 'B '.    I did see fans streaming through.

MR. WOODWARD       Are these films annotated with time?

DCC                Yes, they're time elapse.

Ch. Supt. WAIN Continues reviewing the Paper 5-

DCC brings meeting back to the point about Inspector Purdy's concern,

and points tothe map where Inspector Purdy was.    There then   arose

some ambiguity about which fence was the fence in question

Ch. Supt. WAIN then continued reviewing the Paper.

When Mr. WAIN r^ched paragraph 5(35) -

CH. SUPT. MOLE     This is significant, because that'swhen the

                   players came out on the pitch.

DCC                So they would be met with a roaringcrowd and that
DCC               is when the rusli started.   (Check to see if times

                  coincide)

DCC               However, the video at this time appeared to mal­

                  function, the fans appeared to be rushing, but that

                  might be my perception, and may not be what what

                  actually happening, because the film appeared to be

                  running on faster than in previous parts of the

                  video.

MR. WOODWARD      Was it out of syno<?

DCC               Yes, somebody has mentioned that fact, other people

                  have mentioned other factors, such as pressing a

                  wrong button, or moving it frame by frame in time

                  elapse, etc.

                  However, when these gates were opened, within

                  seconds there was no problem outside, it was

                  reported that within seconds the whole mass of

                  people that were outside the ground had disappeared.

ACC               Was the North Stand full at that time?    Could we
STAFF SERVICES
                  tell by looking at the video of the crowd around

                  that time or by the turnstile computer?

CH. SUPT. MOLE    Yes, we'll have a figure on the print-out.

MR. METCALFE      Could fans going through those turnstiles have got

                  over into the West Stand?

CH. SUPT. MOLE:   No, not without difficulty, they could have climbed

                  over, etc.

DCC               But this situation here at turnstiles 1-10 meant

                  that the fans coming through the turnstiles were
DCC                   only met with a barrier about waist high, it appears

                       therefore that they were able to gain access into

                       the West Stand, but there is no evidence to suggest

                       how many did that.

Ch. Supt. WAIN moved on to paragraph 5(40).

MR. WOODWARD          What does this phrase mean, "indications to suggest"

DCC                   People coming through in such numbers and that

                       gates other than Gate 'C' were now open.

CH. SUPT. WAIN        The film at this time shows that there was plenty

                       of room in the wings, they were just packed in the

                       centre.

Moving away from part 5, Ch. Supt. Wain quickly reviewed Part 6.

Ch. Supt. MOLE introduced Part 7 and highlighted several factors, e.g.

the evacuation procedures and the fact that they had been tested twice

this season.     (Action - Find Evacuation Procedures reports)

MR. WOODWARD          Can I move on to the following points -

                      The reports by Chief Constables to Police

                      Authorities, as required by the Police Act of 1964,

                       surely, these must have a reference to the policing

                       of football matches and major events.

C H. SUPT. WAIN       Yes, only   short references (Action required to

                       obtain Annual Reports 1980-1988 and pick out

                       references to policing operations at football

                      matches and major events)

MR.   WOODWARD        Now, what   about the club's Safety Certificate?

CH.   SUPT. MOLE      We've got   that, but it's odd it that it's not been

                       handed over to the Local Authority from the South

                      Yorkshire County Council yet.
DCC                 Our Chief Superintendent Denton tells me that we

                    wrote to the new Sheffield City Council about this

                    Safety Certificate.     We received a reply and Mr.

                    Denton referred them to a specimen of the

                    certificate that they may wish to use in drawing

                    up their new certificate.    However, he received a

                    certificate which had been diluted in many areas,
                                                         m


                    including the section which deals with the policing

                    of the ground.

CH. SUPT. MOLE      It seems that we have been ruled out of the safety

                    considerations.

MR. WOODWARD        What is the date of this certificate that we do

                    have?

CH. SUPT. MOLE      1979, but we are still on that old one.

DCC                 But we have tried our best to modernise it.

                    (Obtain correspondence between Force and Local

                    Council on this matter)

MR. WOODWARD        Moving on, what about Section 13 Collaboration

                    Notices?

DCC                 No, we only have informal mutual aid.

Ch. Supt. WAIN referred back to the question of ground safety.

MR. METCALFE        Is there any correspondence between you and the

                    Council?   (See previous flagging)

MR. WOODWARD        Were there any discussions, etc. since 1979 on the

                    Ground Safety Certificate?

CH. SUPT. MOLE      Only annual meetings.

DCC                 We'd better pull together details of those

                    meetings. (Flagged for action)
MR. WOODWARD         Have the services that police provide outside the

                     ground been categorised as 'special services' as

                     per the Police Act?

DCC                  No, inside the ground is ’special services', out­

                     side isn’t.

MR. WOODWARD         Thus, the problems are outside the ground, there­

                     fore you are there not on ’special services' but

                     as what?

CH. SUPT. MOLE       What they are paying for at the club are people

                     inside the ground.

MR. WOODWARD         They're paying for a service, not for men?

CH. SUPT. MOLE       Yes, I can't say that this 4 and 40 officers are

                     being paid for.     (Flag this point - not resolved

                     during discussions.     Is there a concern here that

                     the club may suggest that the police were providing

                     a 'special service' that had been paid for and

                     specifically requested at the Leppings Lane turn­

                     stiles?     This needs to be resolved).

DCC & MR. WOODWARD   It doesn't matter, for they're paying for a service
simultaneously
                     and would still be paying for that service even if

                     we (point left)

MR. METCALFE         I can't see how the West Midlands team can perform

                     their task and be ready to go on the 15.May.     This

                     will have to be sorted on Friday,if we are to call

                     evidence we need some idea of the time scale

                     involved.     I also wonder as well (addressing Mr.

                     Woodward) if you need to be there throughout the

                     enquiry?
MR. WOODWARD   It may help if we look upon ourselves as 'the

               accused', we need now to gather as much information

               as we can, in the time that is available, there­

               fore I ask you gentlemen to continue from the

               point that you have already reached, which is no'

               mean feat in the time that was available to you,

               I ask you to cast your net as widely as you can,

               gather what you think myself or Mr. Metcalfe, in

               our most perverse mood may require of you, and get

               it together for whenever you can.
DCC
               As to the scope of the enquiry, we focussed on a

               time up to about 3*15 or 3-30, do we need at this

               stage to focus on consequences?
MR. WOODWARD
               Yes, I think so, why did somebody not do something

               might be a question?   Why did someone die when

               they needn't have done?   It's those sorts of

               questions that we need to be aware of.
DCC
               As an example then, Ch. Supt. Duckenfield would

               need to relate his account from the time of coming

               on duty up to the time that he eventually left

               duty, is that right?   (From Ch. Supt. Wain -

               reinforce this point at briefings)

MR. WOODWARD   Yes.

DCC            So we need all of this that has already been pre­

               pared, plus a summary of what happened thereafter?

MR. WOODWARD   Because there are these writs expected, we ought to

               have the information that is available now, to

               answer those in the long term.
CH. SUPT. MOLE    But when does the incident finish?

MR. WOODWARD      I would suggest that your account, for example,

                  should be the time you attended the ground to the

                  time you actually go home.    That would act as a

                  core for us to work from.    We would choose what we

                  want to leave in and what we want to leave out, and

                  where the emphasis should lie.

CH. SUPT. MOLE    But time scales go out of the window, I was there

                  all that time and can't remember what I was doing

                  at any given time.

DCC               You can only really do what you can do.

MR. WOODWARD      Yes, that     doesn't matter, do the best you can.

                  Identification, for example, may not be relevant,

                  but put it- in, and get one or two others who may

                 want to put all their thoughts and experiences of

                  that day down on paper, as a sort of catharsis^ to

                 do the same.

DCC              So who should be interview?    For example, there are

                 Specials, there were thousands of officers on duty

                 in total.    What we have done so far* is ask for

                 accounts from all Inspectors and above who were on

                 duty that day, and also those officers of those

                 ranks who attended in response to Operations

                 Support (Action this)    Then for the PC's and

                 Sergeants, we have only actioned those who were at

                 the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

MR. WOODWARD     Yes, that's fine, we have to be sensible.
The main players in this are doing their own accounts is that O.K. or

would you rather someone take their statement.



Mr Woodward



It couldn't be better.   They can put all the things in that they want

and we will sort them out.



DCC



So as far as the aftermath is concerned a few of the major players

involved if they provided full accounts that would suffice?



Mr Metcalfe



Yes.   That would be fine.



There then followed a discussion about the trading of minutes with

Miss Nortcliffe.   This was agreed.



Mr Woodward



What are the terms of reference for the tribunal?



Mr Metcalfe



I know but I haven't got them with me.
Chief Supt Wain




What about a deadline for this inquiry?



Mr Woodward




Your heading in the right direction.   Don't let up now.



Mr Metcalfe



We could be asked to submit papers by the 5 May.



Mr Woodward




Lets see what happens on Friday.   If I said the 10 May what would you

say?



Chief Supt Wain



We would have to work to the 10 May.



Mr Woodward



Right lets go for the 10 May, dependant on what happens on Friday.   I

would rather have the matter conducted properly rather than quickly, and

this will be stressed at the preliminary hearing on Friday.
Mr M e tc a lfe



Even if a couple of officers could give an account of afterwards that

would be something to work on.



Chief Supt Wain



Is there any special format for presenting the information?



Mr Woodward



As is this is more than acceptable.



DCC



What about indexing?



Mr Woodward



Don't worry about indexing yet.   It would help however if this was

transposed onto a word processor so that the thing could be moved

around.



Chief Supt Wain



It will be going onto the computer from tomorrow so we can do anything

we want with it then.
Mr Woodward




As a final point I would like it to be passed to your officers that

anyone can tell Mr Metcalfe in confidence anything they want.      Any

observations on how or why the incident happened.     They can place this

information in a sealed envelope and send it to Mr Metcalfe or sent it

through you or telephone Mr Metcalfe and tell him.     (Raise at

briefings).



DCC



And is this privileged information?



Mr Woodward




Yes, I wouldn't want to inhibit officers from feeling able to answer the

question of how and why the event occurred so confidentiality is a vital

ingredient.



Mr Metcalfe



We must start then with self served statements and I can follow up on

any questions that I have that arise as a result of those.



The meeting closed with exchanged compliments at 6 30 pm.

Appendices 1 - 2 1   except for Appendix 16 were then handed to

Miss Nortcliffe (A second set and the outstanding Appendices are to

be copied on the 27 April 1989 and passed to Solicitors.
