■?»C» 13Q1 'Cherry(Andrew Martin)   Deepcar Police Station F2
                                    T.N. 370200 ext 205




At 9-OOam on Saturday 15th April 1989 I paraded at Deepcar Police Station
together with other Deepcar Officer in respect of the semi final between
Liverpool and Notts Forest! was then transported to the Hillsborough
football ground for the 10.00am briefing in the North stand.

My duties that day were that of serial ^8, call sign TANGO TH33E I was the
designated driver of the Police mobile used in connection with the above duties.
P.S. 19^8 Miller was the supervisory officer in charge of the unit and was
seated in the front passenger seat of the mobile. The following officers were
carried in the rear

1. P.C. 2172 Prince         B group
2. P.C. 3278 Stagg          B group
3. P.C.893     Hague        B group
k. P.C. 3 1 ^ Robinson Powell B group (off duty sick )

The duties of the serial were mobile patrol of the .'/adsley and Middlewood areas,
with particular attention'to licenced premises and the public order situation.

Following the 10.00am briefing we commenced our patrol. Following a short
enquiry at Ecclesfield Police Sation regarding the missing member of the
serial P.0.31^ Robinson Pow. 11 we were directed to Deepcar Police Station
for a meal.

At 11.30am we commenced the above duties in the designated areas. It was
apparent at that time that a large number of Liverpools supporters were in
the area many of whom were at or walking towards public houses away from the
ground. An initial check of local public houses was made including the following

1. The Middlewood Tavern A6102 One and a half miles Stocksbridge side of the
                         ground. It was full of Liverpool supporters who were
                         in high spirits but presented no problems.

2. The Beehive     Dykes Hall Road. Supporter were seen to enter the premise
                                    under the landlord supervision. The doors of
                                    which were then locked and presented no further
                       •            public order problem.

3. The Sportsman     situated on Worrall Road, this again was quite full with
                                    Liverpool supporters who were of similar spirit
                                    but presented no problems.

   The Horse and Jockey on junction of Wadsley lane and Dykes Hall ,;oad.
                                 Full to capacity with Liverpool supporters
                                 with fans in car park spilling on to grass
                                 verges footpaths and. the road its self.
                                 At that time in order and good spirits.

A regular p itrol was then made of the above area'with particular attention
to the above licenced premises. As the day progressed the number of fans in
the area and public houses swelled.
                                                 - X -                                 120
     P.C. 1301 Cherry Deepcar F2




      At about 1.30pm a further c^eck was made at the Horse and Jockey where it was
      seen that the supporters numbers had increased noticably to approximately 3 0 0 '
      The majority were young males in their early twenties. The noise level had risen
      The consumption of alcohol appeared to be heavy and the situation appeared to
      be deteriorating although no disorder was encountered. Due to the situation
      P.S. Miller requested assistance with a view to dispersal or containment.
      No assistance was available at that time.

       I positioned our mobile in the mouth of the junction in a position to observe
       the punlic house and the supporters outside. A small number of fans were advised
       regarding the chanting of obscenities,no problems were encounted as a result
       of this. The consumption of alcohol continued unabated and it was obvious that
       many, of the young supporters were in fact drunk. Fans were still arriving at the
       public house. I had a conversation with one youth who informed me that all the
       draught beer and lager had been consumed a d that only bottled beer was on sale.

       At about 2.10pm the fans outside the pub w     becoming more disorderly and bottles
       and glasses w. .e broken on the car park. One youth had to be held up by his

>•
       friend because of his drunken state. Several of the fans continually climbed
       onto a high boundry wall to a adjacent house and were jumping/falling over it
       into the garden of that house. The behaviour had now deteriorated and I was
       concerned that it might get out of hand. It was not prudent for our small unit
       to attempt to restore order at this time. Assistance was again sought which
       duly arrived in the form of a second tango unit and dog handler.

       Shortly after 2.15^ the fans were moved away from the pub in small groups
       down Wadsley lane in the direction of the ground.The majority appeared to have
       consumed a large amount of alcohol which was reflected in their behaviour.
       I did not witness any public order or violence at this time. We escorted the
       fans along the streets to Leppings'Lane,the designated Liverpool end of the
       ground. On arrival in Leppings Lane I saw many thousands of supporters outside
       the turnstile. It was apparent that a crush was developing against the turnstiles
       and there supporting walls and fences. I saw mounted Police officers in the
       crowd attempting to restore orderly queues. Their quest was impossible and
       no improvement was made. I saw several fans climb the perimiter wall and enter
       the ground. Superintendent Marshall was stood on a wall near the road overlooking
      "this crowd who were constantly pressing forward creating a very dangerous
       situation. I heard numerous requests via radio for the gate to be,opened one
       of which stated that a catastrophy would occur if the gates were^opened. I shared
       that view. As the rate'was opened the crowd surged through.PS Miller gave the
       order to leave the vehicle and give* instructions to check that fans entering
       the ground were ticket holders. Very shortly afterwards I was instructed by
       P.S.Miller that all Police officers were required on the pitch. Iformed the
       opinion that a pitch invasion was taking place.The unit attendedon the pitch
       where I saw Liverpool supporters on the playing surface and numerous climbing
       over the perimiter fence immediately behind the LiverPool goal. It was unclear
       what was happening and I became detached from my unit. I went to an emergency
       exit t 3 the left of the goalmouth when looking fro* the pitch towards Leppings
       Lane. I assisted a number of fans through the gate,at .that time I thought that
       they were suffering from lack of oxegen because of the volume of the crov/ded
       pen.I was also aware of a crush in    the central pen I saw other officers in
       attendence and continued to assist    people onto the pitch throughthe gate.
       Some time after I entered that pen and moved to.my right     towardsthecentral pen
       I was still unaware of what was actually happening there. Upon reaching the steel
       barrier between the two pens I pulled supporters away from the central pen it
       was at that moment that I realised what we were dealing w’ith. I saw alarge number
       of dead and irjured persons lying in a deep pile against to perimiter wall
       stretching backwards into the terrace. Iremained in that position

                                                                    pto
                                            93-


     P.C. 1301 Cherry   F2 Deepcar




          and as Police and fans liftffed the dead and dying over the fence to me I carried
          them to the safety gate of my pen and passed them through to persons on the
          perimiter track. I do not know how many persons I carried out.It was a large
          number and I lost count. When all the dead and injured had been moved from the
          terrace I again went onto the pitch and assisted where I could. Fans were using
          advertising boards to ferry injured and. dead across the pitch towards the Kop I
          North stand corner. I assisted with this until I was eventually ordered to form
          a cordon across the pitch between the opposing ends of the pitch. Whilst on the
          ■pitch I was accessed raaajy timsso? being?.*, murdering Bastard'and many other things,
          whilst in the cordon I managed to rejoin-my unit*- We remained in the cordon
          until resumed to mobile patrol outside the ground. We remained on patol until
          the crowds" had'dispersed. At approx 9«3Q the unit as stood down from duty.

           I had become aware that P.C. 300 Hays had retired from his duties on the Tango
           one unit. I joined that unit as his replacement under the supervision of Ps f>81
           Hill-Iremained o- standby -with that unit•untilapproxinately 1.00am Sunday 16 May
           1989 in the Niagara sports club when we i^ere stood down.


»•                                                c l 2 c/l




••
