                                                                                         MIR.15



01 HER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised       W o            / f 0y     Number
                                                                                                             CD/30
                                             jJV'*'1         ^ ,01^
      nil/
Title (M A M J
Title
(Include source and any document
                              >nt number i f relevant)   f          7                ^          I
Receiver's instructions - urgent action —^ (fW o   $SLQL
                                                                                                                 Receiver




Document regist/red/indexed as indicated                                                                          Indexer


No(s) of actions raised

Statement reader's instructions                                                                              Statem ent Reader

                          J^T5                ^
                             zSj&uSf K& lc                                                                        Indexer


No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                         \£>               (x




Further action No(s)                                                                                             Indexer



When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                   22nd O c to b e r   90




             SLP/JT.
             L E H . K Y . G l o v e r . 1060.15




             Canter, L evin & Berg,
             Solicitors,
             46/48 Stanley Street,
             Liverpool. LI 6AL.



             Dear Sirs,

             Re:   IAN G L OV ER      (deceased).

             I acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 19th of Octo be r and as requested,
             c o n f i r m that I have received it together w i t h its enclosure.

             A further reply will be sent to y ou in due course.



             Yours    faithfully,




             S.L.Popper,
             H.M.Coroner.-




(\J|Cf(o~^




 BACAAF
                                                                                                     ■> ■> -


                                    Canter Levin & Berg
                                                             s   cm   . i   c:   i   r   o   k   s




                                                                       m     i

4 6/48 Stanley Street            Liverpool L1 6AL                     Tel: 051-236 8574                        Fax: 051-236 1179            DX 14122
                                               (Em ergency Evening Tel No 0 5 1 -2 2 6 8 5 5 2 )



        Our Ref:                                                  Your Ref:                                                 Date:

        L E H .K Y .Glover.1060.15                                                                                         19th Oct. 1990

        Dr. Stefan Popper,
        The Medico-Legal Centre,
        Watery Street,
        Sheffield.



        Dear Sir,

        We refer to the forthcoming inquests involving the victims of Hillsborough.
        We act on behalf of the family of Ian Glover deceased and John Glover, Ian's
        father has asked us to send to you the enclosed letter for your consideration.

        We would be greatly obliged if you would acknowledge receipt of same.

        Yours faithfully,




        Canter




                      Alan Berg. Lee Heaven, John Hassall. Howard J. Nulty, Ronald J. Currie, Andrew J. Pearson,
                                           Kevin Pinkstone, Simon Mintz, David J. Percival
                                                              Associates:
               Mark A. W. Flynn, Mark Bramwell, Paul Hurst, George McLoughlin, Max Marcus, J. Victoria Barnes, Philip Moy
 Also at: 18 Newtown Gardens, Kirkby L32 8RR                                                                          Tel .051-546 4562
 58 Claughton Street. St Helens WA10 1SN                                                                              Tel: 0744 27411
 Albion House. 15 Merton Road, Bootle L20 3BG                                                                         Tel: 051-922 0531
63A Eccleston Street, Prescot, Merseyside L34 5QH                                                                     Tel: 051-426 0141
2nd Floor W helmar House. Southway. Skelmersdale, Lancashire WN8 6NU                                            Tel: 0695 23468/28911
                                      This firm is regulated by th e L aw Society in the conduct of investm ent business
                                                     Liverpool

                                                     15 October 1990

Dr Stefan Popper
The Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield

Dear Dr Popper

I am the father of Ian Glover, one of the 95 victims of the
Hillsborough Disaster and I am writing to you in order to voice my
concern regarding the forthcoming inquests.  In particular, I am
concerned that there are specific issues relating to Ian's death which
might not be addressed.

I am aware that the inquest held earlier this year was meant to deal
specifically with who Ian was and when and where he met his death.
However, I have to state that I found the limitations of this format
extremely frustrating and intimidating.    Consequently, there were a
number of issues relating to Ian's death which I felt were
inadequately addressed yet I felt powerless to pursue answers.    It is
f o r this reason that I am writing to you to ask that you consider
calling evidence in an attempt to find the answers my family and
myself so desperately seek.




                                        the true details relating to Ian's death
are not being r e v e a l e d . G i v e n that Joe was with Ian from his leaving
home on the Saturday morning until he carried him to the makeshift
mortuary I request that you consider calling him to give evidence
relating to the specific details surrounding Jkurfs death.
                                                    m   larik
There are a number of other issues that I feel need raising,             These
are as follows:




                                              c o n t i n u e d ...
                          -   2   -




When Ian was lifted onto the pitch he was placed in a position
close to the goal mouth.  His brother Joe was with him when a
police officer pronounced him dead and covered his face with a
pullover.  Joe and a group of fans carried Ian on a makeshift
stretcher to the gymnasium where he was examined by a doctor who
found a pulse on him and attempted resuscitation (NB this was
approximately twenty minutes after the police officer had
pronounced him dead).  I believe that this issue was inadequately
dealt with at the inquest and request that a detailed explanation
is sought at the soon to be resumed inquests by calling the
relevant witnesses.

There are three issues relating to the notification of Ian's death
and his identification which I feel need addressing:

(a)

                                               The police at this
      stage knew that Ian was dead (Joe had identified him in the
      gymnasium in the afternoon). . However, an official
               checked a computer print-out and informed me that
      Ian was alive because he was not on the list.

(b)   When I was at the gymnasium and before I had looked at the
      photographs of the deceased I was told by a policeman in the
       reception area that both Ian and. Joe were dead.

(c)   Whilst I was being given the above information in Yorkshire a
      police officer visited my home in^Liverpool and informed my
      wife that Joe was injured yet made no mention of Ian even
      though it was some three and a half hours since Joe had
      unofficially identified him in the gymnasium giving his name
      and address to a police officer.

I request that witnesses be called to explain how this inaccurate
information was disseminated.  Moreover, an official complaint
made by myself regarding the actions of South Yorkshire police
has, to date, been ignored.




                                      continued




                                        • f a ta * *   t- ». **A   * * *«•**
                                 -   3   -




                                                       I thereby request
         that the coroner recalls the pathologist who carried out the post
         mortem examinations on my son Ian.

    4.   At the resumed 'mini' inquests my son Joe pointed to a factual
         error in the summary which was to be read in the court.  The
         summary referred to a named police officer carrying Ian across the
         pitch to the gymnasium.  In actual fact as I have previously
         stated, it was Joe and a group of fans who carried Ian across the
         pitch.  When Joe indicated this inaccuracy the Summary Officer
         altered the summary so that it read that the officer mav have
         carried Ian across the pitch.

         I am most concerned that a police officer's statement could, in
         effect, be altered with such ease and without the officer being
         consulted, particularly as this new information apparently
         contradicted the visual evidence.

         I request that an explanation be given as to how the summary
         officer could alter the summary and further request that my son
         Joe be called as a witness in order to give evidence relating to
         who carried Ian to the gymnasium.

    I would ask that you give serious consideration to the issues outlined
    and to the possibility of these being raided at the forthcoming
    inquests.

    Yours sincerely




    John Glover
'
