                                                                                                   MIR,



                  CUMENT   FORM                    Date and time raised               n hho.                      Number

                                                                                                                                         n
T i t l e _____                             U l,                          M~ (jJtJL       Q.Q4j s C(m a            y 1                    c_
                                                                                                                         & 6 to—

(Include source and any document number i f relevant)                 Z3L                     {f/~ tAA    £>*£****-                cA      e~W
                                                                                   C>V.
                                                          /?                                                                                  otf
Receiver's instructions -- urgent action   Y ^ o         *<46                      Ld'^f fPo*-                                            f^               ^   -

                                                                                                                                            Receiver
                               (Helps’      "                   &J&       Ccnju2^kt         u- (fU^Zi^C-v    !—
                             i^zs                      <     u    r       *    &      *       ^<wj3/
                                                      Ike $e.j.                                                                           _Jndexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated
                                                   o h IthvuL
No(s) of actions raised                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                        Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                                              Indexgr.
indexed as indicated

No{s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                                        0/M          SIO
Examined - fu rth e r action to be taken




                                                                                                                                              Indexer
F u rth e r action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Number Form
                                               &   f          oi^

                                              a^
 From:   D G IBBS                                               WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
         A/ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                            HEADQUARTERS
         (Operations)                                         ) PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                                Colmore Circus Queens way
                                                                Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                Telephone: 021-236 5000



                                       H.
                                                              DGI/MR


R M Whalley Esq
Secretary
Hillsborough Stadium
Disaster Inquiry                                              c . c ^ . P l
50 Queen Anne's Gate                                   /r+A
LONDON
SW1H 9AT                                                      10 January 1990

                                                                fcK^AcLT




I refer to your recent letter to             and our conversation about the
difficulties experienced by some Everton supporters seeking entry to the
Coventry City Football Stadium on 19 August 1989 and other related matters.

I will not reiterate the text of the letter sent to Councillor Chase on 24
and 25 August 1989, by the Match Commander for the day and the Director of
Coventry Economic Development and Planning Department (attached).  The
former letter contains details of the Police preparations for the Match and
addresses the points raised by the Liverpool Working Party.  For ease of
reference I have also attached a plan of the Stadium and have marked the
relevant locations.

The Match itself was on the opening day of the 1989/90 Season and was the
first since the publication of the Interim Report into the Hillsborough
Disaster.  All those involved with the policing and the organisation of the
event were aware that a critical eye would be cast over the philosophy and
tactics employed on the day. Indeed there had been a number of meetings
involving the Emergency Services, the Club, and the Council to discuss
safety issues in general.

It is accepted that there was congestion outside the four Visitors' Stand
turnstiles which resulted in about 400 Everton supporters missing the kick
off. There were no persons outside those turnstiles at 3.16pm. As the
crowds built up the policing presence outside the turnstiles was increased
from 11 to 22 officers including 4 mounted officers. That was more than
sufficient to control the situation. The queues to the turnstiles were
segregated by the Police into two groups;  one cash sale group which was
formed east along Thackhall Street, and a ticket holder group which formed
west along Thackhall Street.  The situation was monitored both at the scene
by the Ground Commander, and on camera by the Match Commander, who was in
overall charge of the policing operation.  There was pushing and jostling,
but nothing which caused concern for the safety of those comprising the
crowd.

The Club have accepted that there was a delay on the day and the Managing
Director has publicly apologised for the inconvenience caused. The actual
cause of the delay was due in some part to the introduction of reserved
seating in the Visitors' Stands. For the previous year a ticket to that
Stand enabled the holder to choose his seat.
Continued


Unfortunately within the Stand area there is a mixture of covered and
uncovered seating. Understandably especially during inclement weather most
supporters want to sit in the covered area. That created marshalling and
stewarding difficulties and caused frustration and annoyance for those who
had paid identical prices for different standards of comfort and viewing
facilities.

The introduction of reserved seating and a different price structure for
covered and uncovered seating sought to ease the stewarding difficulties
experienced in previous years.  The Everton Match was the first under this
new scheme and inordinate delays were being created at the pay turnstiles by
individuals who wanted a seat in a particular area of the Stand. Turnstile
Operators understandably found this difficult and time consuming and perhaps
with hindsight, it was inevitable that delays would be caused by this self
selection rather than issuing the next ticket available.

At 2.40 p.m., at the request of the Ground Commander on the scene, the two
pay turnstiles were re-designated ticket only in an attempt to accommodate
the growing number of ticket holders.  It was not until approximately ten
minutes later that a Senior Steward was able to effectively convert those
two gates to enable ticket only entry.  In that time the number of ticket
holders who sought entry to the ground had grown significantly but did not
exceed 600 and was probably closer to 400 at any particular time.

Although there is no recording of the policing tactics prior to 3 pm, at
that time the video recording clearly shows a queueing regime being
policed.  The Ground Commander assured Councillor Chase and his colleagues
that the regime had been in being upon the arrival of additional officers at
2.25 pm. Although a contemporaneous written operations log confirmed the
time of deployment of these additional officers, Councillor Chase was
unable to accept that assurance without filmed evidence.

At the meeting with the Liverpool City delegation, it was explained that
the video shown to them was an edited compilation of the days’ events which
recorded the relevant points which were at issue. The 70 or so photographs
taken before, during and after the Match also showed the density of the crowd
at the particular points in the ground. Members of the delegation chose a
selection of these still photographs and took them back with them to Liverpool.
The Match Commander offered to travel to Liverpool with the unedited video
tapes if required, but no request has been made for his attendance.

Members of the deputation were dismayed and disappointed about not being
given permission to 'inspect' Coventry Stadium.  It was explained to them
by the Council representative and the Club Secretary that it was the
responsibility of Coventry Council to inspect and issue a safety
certificate and a formal inspection from the Liverpool elected members
was inappropriate.  The Club Secretary did, however, invite them to
the next home match to inspect for themselves the facilities available at
the stadium. Continued....
                                    - 3 -


Continued....

At the end of the meeting they would not agree to issue a joint press
statement albeit they indicated their verbal agreement to the three
areas contained in the attached press release.

Accepting that there were delays,the Club,in consultation with the advisory
group, immediately introduced a ticket only scheme for the visitor’s seating
area. A new six position ticket office was erected for the exclusive use
of visiting supporters. Barriers were erected outside the turnstiles to
marshal and channel supporters, and the Club employed uniformed security staff
on the approach to the visitors turnstiles to advise and direct supporters
before they reached the barriers. In the forthcoming closed season the whole
of the north west of the ground is being redesigned to improve the flow of
spectators and refreshment facilities in the vicinity of the visiting
stand.

A computer based counting system has been installed to enable the Club and
Police to monitor the throughput of supporters and relevant densities in
various parts of the ground.  The facilities of the system more than meet the Police
requirements.  Improvements and additions to the  CCTV will be also
carried out this season. Other alterations which have been introduced
include:- The use of poly carbon sheeting to replace the metal grill
radial fencing and to segregate visiting supporters in the seated overflow
area; the removal of two rows of seats to widen the concourse between
covered and uncovered seats in the North or Sky Blue Stand; the erection of
a metal fence to segregate the uncovered and covered seating areas;
structural alterations to seated visitors exit gates to increase the rate
of flow from the ground; the improvement of information and directional
signs inside and leading to the ground; the use of uniform security staff
to keep the Stand stairways clear.  In addition,  we now,as a rule,allow
visiting and home supporters to exit at the same time.

I am sure that you will be aware that Coventry City
were in the forefront of pre-match entertainment and in promoting a safe and
comfortable environment for their customers. They were, in fact, the first club
to introduce an all seater stadium and now have only one quarter of their
capacity allocated to standing supporters.  The move away from an all
seater stadium and the reintroduction of a standing terrace was at the
insistence of the supporters, some of whom missed the 'atmosphere'.

The points made by the Director of Economic Development and Planning in his
letter dated 25 .August, to Councillor Chase about the existence of a working
group before the Hillsborough Disaster and the foresight of the Football Club
indicated the Club’s concern for safety which is further evidenced by their
swift response to the criticism levelled at it.


Continued
                              -   A   -




Continued


The ground and facilities of the Club have been visited by representatives
of the Football Association and Football League, both of whom expressed
satisfaction with the existing facilities at the Club and the policing
philosophy and tactics used on Match days.

As I have already outlined, Coventry City football club have accepted there
was a delay at the Visitors' Stand turnstiles and after consultation with
the Advisory Group, the club have set up new arrangements which have
increased the flow of spectators into the visitors' seating area. Other
improvements have also been carried out.

It was hoped by all concerned that the meeting on 6 September 1989 between
Councillor Chase and his colleagues, police, club officials and
representatives from Coventry City Council and the Advisory Group would
resolve the areas of dispute. Regrettably that was not the case and
certain areas of disagreement have now reached an impasse' and cannot be
taken any further.  Chief Superintendent Swingewood in his letter of 2
October 1989 to Councillor Chase, deals once again with the question of
crowd density and outlines the new arrangements that have been made at the
turnstiles serving the visitors' seating area.

I attended the meeting on 6 September and viewed the video and photographs.
I have to say that I saw nothing in the crowd density that gave me any
cause for concern at all.  As you are aware that was also the view of the
Chairman of the Advisory Group and representatives of Coventry City Council
and the club.

This incident has had a 'thorough hearing' so to speak and all parties
have learned from that particular game.  I do not propose to take the
matter any further and have every confidence in the Football Advisory
Group at Coventry to monitor events and recommend improvements for safety
whenever necessary.  I know they are doing just that on a match to match
basis.

I hope the above has been of further use to you, but should you wish to
discuss any of the issues raised, please do not hesitate to contact me.

Yours sincerely




A/Assistant Chief Constable
(Operations)
zaac'MfloU Coventry                 TEL : Z24473            10,01,90    14=00 N O . 005 F .02
                                                                                                I




    Com; ic .1.1.l o r ;i. C baoo
    Liverpool Civ/ Council
    Cha im a n
    H.Ulsborour',h \Iorkinp; Party
    Chief U m c u U v g s Office                                 2 October 10*»
    Room 5                                                                   ’ ■
   Municipal Buildings
   Dale Street
   l V m ? 0 0 l L69 2DH




    Dear Councillor Charce

    I have been directed by tho Chief Constable to rooly to yor letter dated 12
    September 103?,

    I am sorry that you felt that our recent meeting did not resolve moat- of
    the issues raised. At our meetIns on 6th September it way my understandinr
    and that of the chairman of the Advisory Group, that you were quite
    satisfied witn tne crowd density in all of the standing areas and that the
    video, albeit edited to a time lap3£ mode, graphically support our
    contention that the crowd conditions in that area wore comfortAble,

    The still photographs were chosen by you from those taken by our
    photographer. There were others available to you which you did not
    require. The times of the photographs ranged from early afternoon to after
    the final whistle and it is unfortunate that your choice did not include a
    full range o f the photographs available.

   I accept that the views of the crowds outside the ground were limited and
   relatively poor. They did not show the conditions'nor our tactics
   marshalling and controlling the supporters. X also regret that you felt
   unable to accept our assurances of what wo did to manage a situation which
   was not of our making. However, I understand your ronton for not doin/? 30,
   but I do not see how wo can now progress this issue any further.

   I cannot really add any more to my letter or to our discussions on 5th
   September. As I said to you, recriminations are unhelpful, we have all
   learned from that game and wo and the Club continue to refine our
   operations in the lirjht of experience and will continue to do so. New
   arrangement.*? have been put into place by the Football Club to increase the
   flow of supporters through the 'seabed1 turnstiles, which I think you may
   agree was the root cause of the problems on that day. Those arrangements
   including security staff outside the turnstiles and inside the stands, a
   new 6 position ticket office for the exclusive use of visiting supporters,
   and barriers loading to each turnstile to assist in the management of any
   crowds. Other improvements are planned during this season and next summer.

   Continued
Continued...


I fm aure t’i dt supporters will, not a^ain experience the difficulties which
vrore apparent on tho 19th August.
Your,^ foithfully




P.J. .'Sfin-’evrood
Chief ’Superintendent
                           TEL:   224473                  10,01.90    14 =00 No. 005     P . 04
44731R5U   Coventry.




                                                               City of
 N tm K d u 4t                                                    Coventry
     At the invitation of the Police, a deputation of Liverpool City councillors
     and representatives of Coventry City Council and Coventry City Football Club
     viewed the Police videos and still photographs taken at the Everton game on
     19 August after allegations of inadequate crowd Management.

     The Liverpool City Councillors agreed that

     1     There is no foundation to the complaint that there was      crushing    and
            unrelieved pressure in the visitors standing area

     1     That there is no evidence to support the   allegation of overcrowding    in
            the visitors overflow area.

     3     The video evidence clearly shows that there was no mixing of the opposing
            fans and that there was a physical Police presence in addition to the
            dividing fence to maintain separation of the fans.

     Concerning the decision not to delay the kick-off, it is policy generally now
     not to delay match kick-offs except under exceptional circumstances.    On 19
     August, the day of the Everton Fixture,      there were no such exceptional
     circumstances prevailing.    There was no risk to public safety or public
     order.

     The Liverpool City Councillors questioned the manner in which visitors leave
     the stadium after matches and the adequacy of the exit gates.         Ve are
     satisfied that the size and frequency of exit gates and the manner in which
     they are controlled, more than meet the criteria laid down in the guidelines
     to Safety at Sports Grounds.     on the day in question,  there was adequate
     Policing and Stewarding at those exit gates when fans were leaving and there
     was no evidence of discomfort.

     The Councillors accepted that the potential rate of turnstile admittance was
     within the recommendations of the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor, however,   they
     felt that the recommendations fell short of supporters requirements.

     Concerning the allegation of the lack of any queueing regime, they accepted
     that the video showed at 3.00pm an effective Police operation to marshal and
     steward the small crowd, but they were unable to accept that this strategy had
     been in place since 2.25pm as shown in the Police operational log.   They did,
     however, accept that there were no persons queueing after 3.12 pm.




     DAVID GILES
     CHAIRMAN - SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS ADVISORY GROUP

     6 September 1989
IVesf M idlands Police
                                                                    V DIVISION             h &ADQUARTERS
                                                                          PARK
                                                                    l i t t l e             STREET
                                                                    COVENTRY
                                                                    CV 1 2J X


                                                                    TELEPHONE               0203 555333




 Cllr Harry Chase                                                           p E e := lE \ C E

 Hillsborough Working Party
 Chief Executives Office                                             _=- =e- vce                     KGJB/AJD
 Municipal Buildings
 Dale Street                                                         ,^-e                         24 August 1989
 LIVERPOOL   L69 2DH




 Dear Sir

 I am directed by the Chief Constable to reply to your letter dated the 23
 August 1989 about the difficulties experienced on 19 August 1989 by some
 Everton supporters, and other related matters.

 I am aware of the content of the letter sent by you to the Chief Executive
 of Coventry City Council which arrived in time for its content to be
 discussed by our Advisory Group. The Director of Economic Development and
 Planning will reply to you on behalf of the Advisory Group, but as
 Match Commander on the day I will comment on the points in both letters
 which relate solely to the policing of the event.

 Since the Taylor Enquiry, recommendations 1, 2 and 3 have been addressed by
 the Advisory Group, and as a result the capacity of the Highfield Road
 Ground has been re-adjusted to 26218. Of that number, 5849 is allocated to
 visiting supporters; 2789 for those seated and 3060 for those standing.
 On the date in question the attendance was 17981 which included 5540
 visitors, 2578 of whom were seated and 2962 standing.

 Closed season improvements carried out in the visitors seated area were
 designed to separate'“the covered from the uncovered area. Those
 improvements allowed the club to re-introduce reserved seating for the
 convenience of seated supporters and to make marshalling and stewarding
 more effective.

 For the match itself, our intelligence indicated that between 4-5000
 Everton supporters would attend the match and that the overall attendance
 would be in the region of 19,000.  It became apparent quite early on in the
 week that the seated and standing overspill areas for visiting supporters
 would be required. That information was relayed to the club and
 re-inforced on Friday morning as a result of information received from
 Liverpool. The policing operation was adjusted to accommodate a capacity
 crowd in the visitors areas. The tactics used by the Police have been well
 practiced in the recent past and reviewed in the light of the events at
 Hillsborough and the recommendations made by Taylor.




THE OFFICER DE A LIN G W T H THE CORRESPONDENCE IS   Supt K Birch             exreNStoH
                                       -   2   -




We have experienced larger visiting support and never before had
allegations of crowd problems, either inside or outside the ground which
were beyond our control and which could have prejudiced safety.

At the pre-match briefing the potential for a capacity visiting contingent
and our response to it was dealt with in detail, and sufficient reserves
identified, again in line with the recommendations made by Taylor.

The club informed us that almost 2000 tickets had been sold before the
match and that a further 600 were to be made available for sale on the day;
again a normal practice.

The four turnstiles in question are described by the club as being slow.
Their potential rate of flow indicates an ability to admit one person every
4 seconds, that rate correlates very well with the capacity for that
viewing area (recommendation 19).

Two of the four turnstiles into the Sky Blue Stand were initially allocated
to ticket holders and two for those wishing to pay. Our deployment
comprised 8 officers and a Supervisor and 2 mounted officers. At
2.15pm we were aware of a build-up of supporters at those four turnstiles.
This was seen on the ground cameras and reported by the Officer Second in
Command of Operations, who was at the scene.  It was apparent that the
queuing was to the two pay gates but at that time, the queue was orderly
and good humoured. There was no queuing at the ticket turnstiles. At that
time there was not need to increase Police presence at that location.

The situation was monitored and at 2.25pm there was evidence of an increase
in the size of the queue and an additional 10 officers and 2 mounted
officers were deployed to that area. It was congested in the immediate
vicinity of the turnstiles but along its length, supporters were queuing in
twos and threes. At that time, it is true to say that more people were
arriving than were passing through the turnstiles. Those joining the queue
again did so in twos and threes. There was a separation of ticket and cash
queues and it is reported by the Sector Commander that those wishing to pay
cash formed orderly queues, whereas those with tickets were not so orderly.
There was an attempt made to form the ticket holders in to some sort of
order using horses and foot patrols, but because of complaints, the tactics
used by mounted officers were eased. I was able to view the events on the
video and there was no request from the Sector Commander to deploy other
available officers to the scene. I was satisfied with the tactics being
used and the number of officers deployed to what was a relatively small
crowd. By 2.40pm the cash sale gates were re-designated "ticket only" to
ease the congestion outside the tickets turnstiles.

 There is no funnelling at those turnstiles and therefore, the verbal
 advice and containment tactics from the mounted and the 18 officers was
 ample to control the 400-500 supporters who were outside the ground.  I
 think you will agree that the number of officers at that location was
 appropriate to deal with the numbers waiting, but we could do nothing about
 the rate of flow through the turnstiles. Our tactics and availability of
 resources was fully in line with the letter and spirit of recommendation 28.
                                   -   3   -




I am aware that by 3.12pm there were no queues at any of the four
turnstiles mentioned.  There were the inevitable late arrivals who
experienced no difficulty in gaining access to the seated area. You will
see from the details given in the third paragraph of my letter that the
number of visiting supporters was under the reviewed capacity. The "Green
Guide" density recommends 54 persons per 10 square metres. A 15% reduction
in that figure results in a recommended density of 46. On Saturday the
actual density averaged out at 44 persons per 10sq.m.  I have had the
opportunity to view the video of the crowd which shows there to be ample
room in the visiting standing area. The Director of Economic
Development and Planning will respond to you in more detail about
densities and video footage which completely refutes the allegations
contained in your letter to the Chief Executive.

At 3.00pm it was estimated that there were 400 spectators waiting at the
four turnstiles, and at that time I still had 18 patrol and 4 mounted
officers in attendance.  The presence of that crowd did not constitute
either a public order or a public safety risk. I was able to police the
crowd inside and outside the ground, and the mere fact that there were
people who could not get in in time to view the kick-off is not sufficient
justification to warrant a delay in the kick-off. That option was
considered by me prior to the players taking to the pitch. That fact was
relayed to those still waiting outside the ground. They were
understandably unhappy and frustrated about their delayed entry, but in the
circumstances were quite orderly.  It is interesting to note that one
complaint related to a persistent refusal to delay the kick-off, yet in the
letter to the Chief Executive one of the complaints was that we misled fans
about a delayed kick-off! There was little the Police could do to
relieve that frustration as we had no control of the speed of entry of
those fans into the ground.  I saw no justification to order the kick-off
to be delayed and on reflection I still consider that to be the right
decision.

There is no doubt that a number of people were frustrated at not being able
to get into the ground in time, even though most had arrived early enough
to do so. I would say that the 400 outside the ground probably arrived
near to the kick-off time. Nevertheless, the fact that quite a few of
them were frustrated can have implications for public order with
consequential safety ramifications. The mood of a few visiting supporters,
and only a few, made marshalling and stewarding thereafter more difficult
than it should have been, but I can fully understand their feelings. On
Monday morning I expressed my views to the club on the delay caused by the
turnstile configuration and other related matters.  That was discussed at
the Advisory Meeting on 23 August. The outcome of that meeting will be
outlined in the letter from the Council.

In relation to your third point, I recollect that the communications on the
day were good and that there were no systems failure.  The volume of radio
traffic was reasonable and did not pose any operational problems to the
experienced operator, nor did the volume of information being fed into the
Command Post. I am not aware of any heated arguments or disagreements
between Police Officers in the overflow section behind the Everton goal, or
in any other area. It is true that officers spoke strongly to one or two
fans. I have viewed the video of that section of the crowd and it
appeared well behaved, requiring little intervention by the Police.
                                   -   A   -




Nothing occurred which would have led to a 'discussion' on policing tactics
or action. I certainly saw no arguments between officers. My enquiries
since receiving your letter confirms that fact.

Referring now to the last allegation about the attitude of my officers.
They were briefed to act in a courteous, firm and positive manner and to
communicate a philosophy of professionalism in dealing with both home and
visiting supporters.

We tried to deal with a frustrated section of the crowd with firmness and
understanding but it was perhaps inevitable, where the tempers of some of the
fans were becoming frayed, that there was a breakdown in effective
communication.   At the end of the day, allegations of curtness from both
sides were inevitable and understandable.

If I may touch briefly on the letter you sent to Coventry Council, there is
no evidence whatsoever from the video to support the allegation that there
was severe crushing or over-packing of the visitors pen which we refer to
as the overRoj.ll area. I can make the video of this available to you,
which will show quite clearly that conditions within the crowd generally were
comfortable and in the pen referred to specifically by you, you will see that
conditions were very comfortable indeed.

I listened with interest to some of the comments made on Radio Liverpool
and you may have heard that I responded to them all. Some of the comments
about the absence of police , the time taken to get into the ground and
that some fans were still queuing at 3.40pm were wholly inaccurate and
unhelpful.

Like many other grounds, including Goodison Park, the visiting supporters
are kept in until the streets are relatively clear of home supporters. You
will fully understand the reasons why we continue to employ that tactic.
There were 6 announcements made to the visiting fans that this would be
done and as far as I am aware, there was no severe overcrowding on the
approach to the exit gate. Bearing in mind we were under the reviewed
capacity for that area, there was nothing exceptional in the size or
density of the crowd which would have warranted police or steward
intervention. Our Police box is situated just 10 metres from that exit
gate. It is elevated some 5m above the crowd and the windows at the front
face out on to the main exit gate and have excellent views of the
crocodile which forms behind that gate. Police Officers manned those gates
and assisted with the stewarding of the exiting fans and I, as Match
Commander, had an un-restricted view of the exodus of fans, saw nothing
exceptional to justify the allegation that there was severe crushing at
that location.

I hope the above comments have eased your fears over the conditions
reported to you. I can assure you that everything possible was done on
the day to allow the match to take place in a safe environment. Having had
the opportunity to again review the events of the day I am satisfied that
the spirit and letter of the Taylor report were followed and that there
were no safety problems at the ground.

Yours faithfully




          2W00D
 Chief    fcrintendent
copy:
Councillor J Cunningham, Leader of the Council
Councillor P W G Robinson JP, Chairman of Economic Development
                              and Planning Committee
DEDP 7 01
Superintendent Kevin Birch, West Midlands Police
ADO Les Martin, West Midlands Fire Service



DEDP I P C B C )5 /DJG ICS I SSGA


25 August 1989


Councillor Harry Chase (Chairman)
Hillsborough Working Party
Liverpool City Council
Chief Executive’s Office
Room 5
Municipal Building
Dale Street
Liverpool L69 2DH


Dear Councillor Chase

SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
COVENTRY CITY V EVERTON
19 AUGUST 1989

Your letter dated 23 August 1989, received by facsimile transmission
addressed to Mr Iain Roxburgh, my Chief Executive, has been passed to me
for reply as it is this Department in conjunction with the City Secretary
that has responsibility for overseeing safety at sports grounds.

Your Working Party would seem to be making a number of serious allegations
concerning safety standards at Coventry City Football Club’s Highfield Road
Stadium, however, as a preamble to my reply you should be aware of the
following facts.

Immediately on publication of the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor’s interim
report into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster a meeting was called by the
City Council of all those parties interested in safety at sports grounds,
namely:-

1     The Local Authority
2     Coventry City Football Club
3     West Midlands Police
4     West Midlands Fire Service

This group which has always met on a regular basis was immediately
reconstituted into a Formal Advisory Group and it was agreed that future
meetings would also include representatives from the West Midlands
Ambulance Service and a Supporters Group.

                                                            Continued
                                     2

The immediate responsibility of this group was to make sure that the 28
points of the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor’s interim report were implemented
as far as was practically possible before the commencement of the 1989/90
football season.  I am satisfied that this was achieved.

As you are no doubt aware, Coventry City Football Club had considerable
foresight in attempting to create an all seater stadium for viewing
football many years ago, but this was frustrated by fans who wished to
stand. Be that as it may the total spectator capacity of the stadium was
significantly reduced by the experiment and currently is a mere 26,218.

A new General Safety Certificate was issued to the Club on 24 August 1988
and this has been amended once since that date. Coventry City Football
Club have recently made application for a further amendment of their
General Safety Certificate concerning reduction in ground capacity in the
light of recommendations. Furthermore, the City Council will be carrying
out a review of the Safety Certificate in its entirety, also as
recommended.

There have never previously been allegations of crowd problems, either
inside or outside the ground, which were beyond the control of Police or
stewards and which could have prejudiced safety.

The problems which were encountered on Saturday 19 August were in the
opinion of the Advisory Group - many of whom were present - of a minor
nature and certainly not beyond the capabilities of the Police to control.

Taking your allegations point by point

1   The Coventry City Football Club have acknowledged that there was a
    problem concerning the rate of admission of  visiting spectators to the
    seated areas of "The Sky Blue Stand".  This  has been identified by the
    Advisory Group as being due to spectators possessing tickets and those
    wishing to pay by cash attempting to pass through the same turnstiles.
    The problem has been addressed, a solution put forward and adopted by
    the Advisory Group. It must be said that the situation was
    exacerbated by the late arrival of Everton supporters.

     At no time was there "severe crushing and unrelieved   pressure" and the
     Police did impose a queueing regime.

2    It has been the policy, as it is at many football grounds, for the
     Police to keep "away" supporters inside the stadium until such time as
     the home supporters have dispersed.

     Although it is acknowledged that there was crowding, there was nothing
     exceptional in the size and density of the crowd which would have
     warranted any Police or steward intervention.

     I believe it is the intention of the Match Commander (Police)
     to elaborate on the point in his reply to your letter to
     Mr Geoffrey Dear.
                                                                         13
N»




                                          3

     3   I must entirely refute this suggestion. On analysis of the figures,
          at no time was a density of more than 44 person per 10 m 2 of terrace
          prevailing on the visitors terrace. The pen did not contain any
          Coventry City supporters.

     4   The Match Commander (Police) in charge of policing matters on
          19 August entirely refutes the claim that his officers misled and
          misinformed fans about a delayed kick-off. There was never any
          suggestion of delaying the kick-off. Police officers are there to
          assist the fans, not to attribute blame.

     I would be pleased to inspect your dossier of complaints when it is
     complete, but I must say that on the unchallengeable information available
     to me I feel that the matter does not warrant any further investigation.

     Yours sincerely




     Director of Economic Development and Planning
COVENTRY   C I TY   F C        STADIUM




                                   THACK                                         """
                                                             ''''N O R T H    STAND
                                                             —       I¥?"T 1yi'T*1'-*!

                                                                                                                         CCTV
                                                                                         ^     SEATING
                                                                                         //.
                                                □ t r a — crortl
x
Q                                 HOME     SEATING          NO GO
                                         fencing            AREA
LU
                                                                                                              HOME


                                                                   SUPPORTERS                             STANDING,
                                                                   OVERSPILL
                                                                   AREA

           o
                                                                                                                                                 rO
                          CD                                                                              a                                      N
                                                                                                                                      THE MOAT
                          LU                                                                                     Score
                          CO                                                                                     board

                                                                                                          VIS IT OR S
                           CT>                                                                            STANDING


                                                                                                                 CCTV,
                                                                                                          LU




                                                              CCTV

                                                     MAIN STAND


                                                                                                                POLICE CONTROL ROOM

                                                                                               DETENTION ROOM
