                                      P C * / i / | (g-




       West Midlands Police

D
r




0
                              ,«Vw   .1   ... *




    HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


            Part VI
           PART VI




This part of the submission will deal with the

medical facilities and response of the emergency

services, starting with the medical assistance

available on standby at the ground prior to kick

off.   This will include the Club doctor, the St John

Ambulance Brigade and South Yorkshire Metropolitan

Ambulance Service.   From there the submission will

discuss the role played by doctors and other

supporters with medical training as the disaster

became apparent, followed by that of the Ambulance

Service and Fire Brigade as they answered police

calls for assistance.   The last part of the

submission will examine the effectiveness of

communication and coordination between the police,

fire, ambulance services and Sheffield City Council

on emergency planning as related to the disaster.




Before going into detail it should be explained that

statements from South Yorkshire Metropolitan

Ambulance and Fire Service staff were not taken by

West Midlands Police Officers.   They were made to

solicitors for the respective services who in turn

provided them to the West Midlands Police for use at

the Judicial Inquiry by Lord Justice TAYLOR.

Consequently a caption under the Criminal Justice Act

1967 does not appear on any of the documents.




                                                      152
•r
                            MEDICAL FACILITIES




                            The provision, location of the first aid room and the

                            level of equipment necessary have previously been

                            discussed in Part II.   Suffice to say the room is

                            equipped to a standard considered satisfactory by the

                            St John Ambulance Brigade and the Sheffield Wednesday

                            Football Club physiotherapist to deal reasonably with

                            injuries to players or supporters which might occur.

                            It is not equipped to deal with a disaster on the

                            scale of that which was encountered on 15 April 1989.




                            CLUB DOCTOR




     Part II                Schedule 2, Item 8(2) of the Safety Certificate

     Doc.No 55              requires that ’a physician employed or retained by

     Doc.Page(s) 344-355    the holder is available to attend at First Aid rooms

                            if required.’




     St.Page(s) 3481-3491   Dr William PURCELL, a local General Practitioner, is

                            the club doctor, he was available at the ground on 15

                            April 1989.   He treated some spectators.    However

                            there is a difference of opinion between him and the

                            Club regarding his actual duties.   He regards himself

                            as the team doctor with responsibility for Sheffield

                            Wednesday Football Club staff, whereas the

                            Club regard him as the physician retained by them to

                            fulfil obligations under the Safety Certificate.



                                                                                   153
                       ST JOHN AMBULANCE BRIGADE



                       Item 8(3) of the same schedule lays down that ’the

                       holder shall arrange for the attendance of such

                       numbers of qualified First Aid assistants as the

                       County Council shall require but without prejudice to

                       the foregoing, the holder shall ensure, that at every

                       specified activity there is at least one first aid

                       assistant for every 2,000 spectators.’




                       Given that there was a total of 54,000 tickets sold

                       for the match this would represent a minimum of 27

                       First Aid assistants.    In fact 33 were provided by

                       the St John Ambulance Brigade.




Part II                Peter WELLS is a local Superintendent for the

St.Paee(s) 1095-1104   Brigade and he confirms the number of personnel on

                       duty and the fact they had two ambulances present.

                       He describes events after the disaster became

                       apparent.




St.Paee(s) 3488-3491               Ls also a Superintendent of the Brigade.

                       She was responsible for the First Aid room at the

                       ground and describes the situation as the number of

                       casualties increased post disaster.




St.Paae(s) 3492-3496   Frank GODLEY was one of the two ambulance drivers for

                       the Brigade.   He describes the situation as the



                                                                            154
              disaster unfolded, and made a number of trips with

              casualties to the Northern General Hospital.




              A cross-selection of other statements from members of

              the St John Ambulance Brigade accompany the

              submission.   Further statements are available if

              required.



              SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBTTLANCE SERVICE

              (STAND BY)




              For matches likely to attract a large crowd of

              spectators ie league or cup semi-finals, the South

              Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service policy is to

              provide two front line ambulances with crews, plus

              two senior officers.    One ambulance and crew with the

              officers are to remain in the ground near to the

              gymnasium.    The second ambulance and crew remain   at

              Middlewood Ambulance Station about a mile away from

              the ground as a back-up if required.




Transcript    Patrick HIGGINS is a Station Officer with the
20.6.89
Day 24        Ambulance Service.   He describes the historical
Pages 31-56
              relationship between the Service and Sheffield

              Wednesday Football Club in regard to stand-by duties

              at the ground.   He also deals with events at the

              ground after 1503 hours when he first noticed what he

              describes as a disturbance behind the goal at the
                       Leppings Lane end.    After investigation he sent for

                       the back up ambulance.     Later he requested a further

                       ten ambulances and informed his control of the major

                       disaster.     He experienced radio difficulties.   No

                       statement from Station Officer HIGGINS is available

                       although he did give evidence to the TAYLOR Inquiry.




St.Page(s) 3529-3540   Paul Anthony James EASON is a also a Station Officer

                       with the Ambulance Service.     On 15 April 1989 he was

                       on duty inside the ground with Station Officer

                       HIGGINS at about 1505 hours when he responded to what

                       he thought was a fight.     He describes the situation

                       on his arrival at the Leppings Lane end and the

                       treatment of a number of the dead and injured.      He

                       also mentions the difficulty he experienced with

                       radio reception because of crowd noise.




                       Statements from the two ambulance crews on stand by

                       are also included.




                       OTHER MEDICAL ASSISTANCE




                       Enquiries reveal there were a number of doctors,

                       nurses and ambulancemen attending this match as

                       spectators.    They responded by going on to the pitch

                       and assisting the St John Ambulance Brigade and South

                       Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service to treat the

                       dead and injured.    Other doctors living in the



                                                                                156
                       vicinity of the ground also responded to the call for

                       medical assistance and attended and gave treatment.




St.Paee(s) 3560-3569   Dr Glyn PHILLIPS is a Liverpool Supporter and was

                       actually in pen 3 at the time of the disaster.     He

                       describes the circumstances and how he eventually

                       extricated himself from the crushing.   He then

                       assisted in treating the dead and injured.   He is

                       highty critical of the lack of medical equipment and

                       organisation following the disaster.




St.Paee(s) 3570-3574   Andrew Jolvon BYRNE is a Consultant Anaesthetist.       He

                       attended with colleagues and sat in the South Stand.

                       He comments on the crowd density on the Leppings Lane

                       terraces and describes what he first thought was a

                       pitch invasion.   He subsequently realised the true

                       nature of the situation and with colleagues assisted

                       in treating the dead and injured initially on the

                       pitch and later in the gymnasium.   He certified a

                       number dead.




St.Page(s) 3575-3587                  is a Liverpool supporter and Nurse.      He

                       attended with friends and describes the situation at

                       the turnstiles and in pen 3 during the crushing.

                       When the crushing ceased he assisted by treating the

                       dead and injured actually in the pen and later in the

                       gymnasium.




                                                                               157
                       A selection of statements from other medically

                       qualified persons are included.



                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBTTTAMCE SERVICE

                       (RESPONSE)




                       South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service were

                       informed of the incident at Hillsborough by the

St.Page 3600           police at 1506 hours.    The police requested a fleet

                       of ambulances to the Leppings Lane end of the

                       ground.   This request was confirmed by reports from

                       their own staff at the ground a short time later.

                       Initially, eight additional ambulances were

                       dispatched.    When these were unable to cope, their

                       major incident plan was activated and ambulances from

                       other areas including those outside South Yorkshire

                       were directed to the scene to assist.     The operation

                       that followed involved a total of 126 South Yorkshire

                       Metropolitan Ambulance Service personnel, eight from

                       West Yorkshire, six from Nottinghamshire and six from

                       Derbyshire (including senior officers).




St.Page(s) 3599-3604   Raymond CLARKE is a Superintendent in the Ambulance

                       Service and was in charge of the Control Room at

                       Rotherham on 15 April 1989.    He received the original

                       phone call from the police and deployed ambulances to

                       the scene.    He also activated their major incident

                       plan as the scale of the disaster became apparent.



                                                                               1 58
S t .Page(s ) 3605-3616   Alan HOPKINS is the Deputy Chief Metropolitan

                          Ambulance Officer.    He was actually on duty in the

                          Control Room at Rotherham when the police call for

                          ambulances arrived.    He gave certain instructions and

                          then made his way to the ground where he took charge

                          of the ambulance operation in liaison with the other

                          services.   He describes events including the

                          difficulties encountered in getting ambulances on to

                          the pitch because a wheelchair ramp had been built

                          which partly obstructed the entry.    He was involved

                          in supervising arrangements in the gymnasium

                          including the movement of bodies from the Northern

                          General hospital to the gymnasium and later to the

                          mortuary.




                          Other statements from ambulance crews that attended

                          the scene accompany the submission.




                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE




                          South Yorkshire County Fire Service received the

St.Page 3648              first call from the police at 1513 hours informing

                          them of a major accident and requesting cutting

                          equipment to Hillsborough Football ground.      Over the

                          following period some 50 firemen responded to the

                          scene.




                                                                                 159
St.Page(s) 3648-3651   Susan Elizabeth DAVIES is a Fire Control Operator

                       with the Fire Service.   She accepted the call at 1513

                       hours 15 April 1989 from the police informing of the

                       incident and directed appliances to the scene.




St.Paee(s) 3652-3655   A.D. HORNSBY is an Assistant Chief Officer with the

                       Fire Service and was the Senior Duty Officer on call

                       when the disaster occurred.     He attended

                       Hillsborough and took charge of the Fire Service

                       operation liaising with the other services.     He

                       describes the situation on his arrival and the first

                       aid assistance rendered by his crews.




St.Page(s) 3656-3658   J . SWAIN is a Station Officer with the Fire Service.

                       He was the first senior fire officer to arrive at

                       Hillsborough following the disaster.     He describes

                       the general confusion on arrival.     He deployed

                       firemen to assist in first aid using equipment

                       carried on the fire vehicles.     He remained in charge

                       until the arrival of more senior officers.




St.Page(s) 3659-3663   Derek HOUSLEY is a Leading Fireman with the Fire

                       Service.   He was one of the first firemen to arrive

                       at the scene of the disaster at 1522 hours.     He

                       confirms the confused situation initially and

                       describes events on the pitch and in the gymnasium.

                       His account mainly refers to the administration of

                       first aid treatment to injured and dying supporters.



                                                                               160
                        Statements from other fire service crews that

                        attended giving their version of events accompany

                        these papers.




                        HOSPITALS



                        In addition to the 95 dead, there were some 730

                        injured in the disaster and many of these received

                        treatment at either the Northern General or Royal

                        Hallam Hospitals in Sheffield.   Statements from

                        medical staff at both hospitals, describing the

                        situation are incorporated with the papers.




                        COORDINATION - POLICE. FIRE. AMBULANCE SERVICE AND

                        SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL




                        The last part of this submission examines the

                        emergency services contingency plans for a major

                        disaster and the degree of coordination and

                        communication between them and Sheffield City Council
                                                                    /
                        so far as the Hillsborough disaster is concerned.  To

                        do this the following documents have been

                        considered:-




Part V                  (a)     South Yorkshire Police Order "Operation
Doc.No 205
Doc.Page(s) 1315-1351           Support".


Part V                  (b)     South Yorkshire Police Major Incident
Doc.No 206
Doc.Page(s) 1352-1444          Manual.


                                                                             161
Doc.No 208              (c)     South Yorkshire County Fire Service scheme

Doc.Paee(s) 1448-1453           for Peacetime Maior Disasters.




Doc.No 209              (d)     South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance

Doc.Paee(s) 1454-1477           Service Ma ior Incident Plan and Appendix -

                                Action to be taken in the event of Ma ior

                                Incidents at Sports Stadiums.




Doc.No 210              (e)     City of Sheffield - Scheme for Maior

Doc.Page(s) 1478-1490           Peacetime Emergencies.




                        These documents have then been compared against

                        information from various sources gathered during the

                        course of the overall investigation including the

                        following;-




                        (i)     South Yorkshire Police Extended Incident    Log

                                for 15 April 1989.




Doc.No(s) 211-220       (ii)    Extracts from Transcripts of tape recording

Doc.Page(s) 1491-1589           made on 15 April 1989 by South Yorkshire

                                Police in the Force Control R o o m .




Part III                (iii)   Video film and photograph material from South
Doc.Nos 109-177
Doc.Page(s) 740-865             Yorkshire Police and the media.


                        (iv)    Statements, submissions, recollections and

                                transcripts of evidence by other available

                                witnesses.
Three main issues were examined; activation, liaison

and the rendezvous point.    They are dealt with in

that order.



ACTIVATION




The Police Major Incident Plan indicates that in the

event of a disaster they will inform other emergency

services prefixing messages with the code word

"CATASTROPHE."   The Fire Service scheme understands

this, but the Ambulance and City Council plans do

not. Consequently, the only service effected was the

Fire Brigade who on receipt of the code word would

automatically have deployed ten pumping appliances

and two emergency tenders.    In the event, it is

academic because the police started by mobilising

Operation Support which gradually developed to the

Major Incident Plan.   No code word was used to any of

the services.




LIAISON




The police plan indicates they have the key role in

control and coordination at the scene of a disaster,

the Site Commander liaising with officers from the

other services, including the Council.   The Fire

Brigade scheme compliments this, whilst the Ambulance

Service plan and Council scheme indicate that their



                                                      163
Incident Officer and Emergency Liaison Officer

respectively should be appointed to liaise with all

other services.




To some extent this reflects what took place at

Hillsborough, when Divisional Officer David LOCKWOOD,

a Senior Fire Officer attended the incident post

(Police Control Box) to establish liaison with the

Site Commander and was unable to do so.      There is no

evidence of an approach by the Ambulance Incident

Officer.     The Emergency Liaison Officer did not

attend the scene.      The evidence, does indicate

however, that liaison at a lower level did take place

between all of the services.      This appears to have

worked w e l l .




RENDEZVOUS POINTS




In the police plan there is confusion between the

definition of a rendezvous point and an incident

post.    The Fire Service scheme refers to a control

point but describes the function of a rendezvous

point.     The appendix to the Ambulance Service plan

describes a parking point.      The City Council plan

makes no mention of a rendezvous point.      This lack of

a common understanding though highly undesirable, did

not, as it transpires, affect the situation at

Hillsborough.      All emergency vehicles were told to
attend Sheffield Wednesday Football Club at either

the Penistone Road or the Leppings Lane ends.     This

was later modified to the gymnasium at the Club.         Had

they attended a rendezvous point away from the ground

then their arrival may have been delayed to the

extent lives could have been lost due to lack of

expertise and first aid equipment.




CONCLUSION



In any disaster there is always likely to be an

initial period of confusion.   Hillsborough was no

different in this respect.     Police officers of all

ranks at the scene responded to what they first      ■

believed to be a public disorder situation.

Apparently it took some minutes for them to discover

the true position and modify their action.    In that

time further confusion and delay occurred

particularly in informing the Fire and Ambulance

Services.




                                                         165
   West Midlands Police




   WITNESS LIST
  (ALPHABETICAL)




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


        Part VI
                                        WITNESSES
                                      (ALPHABETICAL )


       HAS MADE OTHER NON MATERIAL STATEMENTS OR QUESTIONNAIRES.

(1.)   WITNESS AT THE PUBLIC INQUIRY
       SEE SEPARATE WITNESS INDEX



                                             Medical               3671 - 3677

                                             Medical               3696 - 3698

       BYRNE          Andrew Jolyon          Medical               3570 - 3574       (1.)

                                             Ambulanceman          3552 - 3559

       CLARKE         Raymond                Ambulance Control     3599 - 3604       (1.)

                                             Medical               3678 - 3864       *

                                             Ambulanceman          3617 - 3632       *


       DAVIES        Susan Elizabeth         Fire Control          3648 - 3651       (1.)

       EASON         Paul Anthony James      Ambulanceman          3529 - 3540       (1.)

       FLETCHER      Lawrence Brian          Fireman               3664 - 3670       (1.)

       GODLEY        Frank                    St John Ambulance    3492 - 3496       (1.)

       HELLER        Tom                     Medical               3594 - 3598

                                             St John Ambulance     3488 - 3491       *

       HOPKINS        Alan                   Ambulanceman          3605 - 3616       (1.)

       HORNSBY        A.D.                   Fireman               3652 - 3655       (1.)

       HOUSLEY        Derek                  Fireman               3659 - 3663       (1.)

                                             Retired Fireman       3667 - 3670       *

                                             Ambulancewoman        3633 - 3639       *


                                             City Council          3699 - 3706

       PHILLIPS       Glyn                   Medical               3560 - 3569       (1.)

       PURCELL        William                Club Doctor           3481 - 3487       (1.)

                                             Medical               3685 - 3688

       SAXTON         Philip Martin          St John Ambulance     3497 - 3517       (1.)

       SWAIN          J.                     Fireman               3656 - 3658       (1.)

       TOWLER         John Edmund            St John Ambulance     3518   _   3528   (1.)
                                  PAGES

                   Ambulanceman   3588 - 3593

                   Ambulanceman   3640 - 3647

WARDROPE   James   Medical        3689 - 3695

                   Medical        3575 - 3587

                                  3541 - 3551
                                 WITNESSES (PUBLIC INQUIRY)

                                        ALPHABETICAL


                                         PUBLIC
        NAME                             INQUIRY DATE         TRANSCRIPT PAGE(S)

BYRNE          Andrew Jolyon             21.06.89                18   -   32

CLARKE         Raymond                   20.06.89                71   -   80

DAVIES         Susan Elizabeth           13.06.89                38   -   46

EASON          Paul Anthony James        20.06.89                56   -   70

FLETCHER       Lawrence Brian            13.06.89                56   -   66

GODLEY         Frank                     12.06.89                90   -   95

HIGGINS        Patrick                   20.06.89                31 - 56

HOPKINS        Alan                      20.06.89                81 - 103

HORNSBY        A.D.                      13.06.89                66 - 76

HOUSLEY        Derek                     13.06.89                77   -   81

PHILLIPS       Glyn                      26.06.89                85 - 99

PURCELL        William                   20.06.89                12   -   29

SAXTON         Philip Martin              8.06.89                95 - 103

SWAIN          J.                        13.06.89                46   -   55

TOWLER         John Edmund               12.06.89                86   _   90
                  WITNESSES

                 INCLUDED IN

                   PART II

                (ALPHABETICAL)

                                 PART II PAGE (S’
                                                )



WELLS   Peter                    1095 - 1104
                                                                          STATION

I^E:               WILLIAM
                   PURCELL

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 49

OCCUPATION:        DOCTOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 240589                                             WILLIAM PURCELL (SIGNED)



           I eiiia General Medical Practitioner by profession and have worked in

           this capacity since 1964 (000064).     I practise frcm the

                                             Sheffield.

           I have provided a G P service to the Sheffield Wednesday Footall Club

           sirc:e 1976 (000076).    The position is generally referred to as "Club

           Doctor" but this is misleading so far as the duties are concerned and

           it would be proper to regard the task as "Team Doctor". I am the

           General Practitioner to both the players and the office staff and

           attend all First Team matches to render emergency medical assistance

           to injured players.     I either attend or am on call for Second Team

           garres and have attended at FA Cup Semi Finals held in previous years

           at Hillsborough.     I hold a Sports Injury Clinic for players twice

           weekly and am nearly always on call when Reserve and Youth games are

           held,     it is not part of my duties to be on call generally at the

           Ground as a Doctor.     St John's Ambulance Brigade provide First Aid

           facilities to Supporters at First Team games.     I would not normally

           expact to learn about Spectators being taken ill or injured unless

           this happened within my sight.



                                                                                     3481
PUFCELL                 WILLIAM                                            2


There have been a small number of occassions over the years when

people have collapsed or been injured fairly near to where I was

seated and I have of course gone to help these people.

I do not have any written contract with the club but the duties that I

describe above are those which have been carried out by the "Club

Doctor" for very many years and the way that I have dealt with the

matter is in no way different from my predecessors.

I do not have a direct relationship with the St. John's Ambulance

Brigade.     They have their own Medical Officers one of whan I believe

is Dr. SHOFTLAND.     The club provides a First Aid Room for the use of

the St. John's Ambulance Brigade.     I do not have a key to this area

and have only been in on one occassion that I can remember.       I have no

control whatsoever over the operations of the St. John's Ambulance

Brigade personnel.

At the club there is a treatment room which is primarily the area

where the Club Physiotherapist               treats injured players.

This contained two couches, three physiotherapy machines and stocks of

bandages, dressings and some drugs.     This room is often referred

to as the "Medical Room" but really it should be called the

Physiotherapist Rocm although I do use it occassionally.    A player

injured on the field would be taken to this rocm and then if necessary

to hospital.    There is a stretcher kept in the corridor just outside

this rocm.

Abcut four or five years ago a former Director of the Football Club

Mr.             collapsed with a cardiac arrest near to me in a

Reception Lounge at half time.     I was eventually successful in

resuscitating Mr            |. I was assisted by a Doctor from the

Norwich Football Club who had an Ambu-bag and airway with him.       The

Amtu-bag is a substitute for applying mouth to mouth resuscitation.
PUFCELL               WILLIAM                                             3


The purpose of the airway is to pass a pipe over the tongue and down

the mouth to create a clear passage.

The next morning I was asked to speak to the Club Chairman Mr MCGEE.

By chance there was an article in the current British Medical Journal

abcut portable defibrillators and I tore this out to take with me.

When I met Mr McGEE we discussed the events of the night before and I

told him that I felt the Club needed a defibrillator and showed him

the article.   However Mr ICGEE told me to obtain an Ambu-bag and

airway as the Norwich Doctor had used.    This I did soon afterwards.

Ever since I have always carried an airway in my pocket at every match

and keep the Ambu-bag in my case.    My normal practise is to leave my

case in the physiotheraphy rocm.

A defibrillator can only be used in certain circumstances.    For

example an area must be cleared around the casualty before the charge

is delivered to ensure that anyone standing nearby does not receive an

electric shock.

It would not be possible for a St. John's Ambulanceman or indeed a

qualified Nurse to use such a piece of equipment as in general only

qualified Doctors may do so.    Since my discussion with Mr ICGEE there

has not been any occassion when a defibrillator would have been

required.

On the 15th April 1989 (150489), my wife and I had been invited by the

Club to the F. A. Cup Semi-Final at Hillsborough.   My wife was'given a

seat in the Stand but I had been asked previously by Graham MACKRELL,

the Club Secretary, to take a seat behind the dugout at the side of

the pitch.   This was because of an incident at a Football match

elsewhere in which a player nearly choked by swallowing his tongue

when knocked out.   The Football Association had made a direction that

a Doctor should be near the pitch.   Where I was to be seated was a
PUFCELL                 WILLIAM                                              4


much more convenient place for getting onto the pitch quickly than

being seated in the Stand.

My wife and I attended a luncheon in the Executive Suite before the

match and I actually got to the area where I was to be seated at about

2.40 pm (1440).      I did not notice anything about the crowd at that

stage.    Indeed I cannot say that I noticed anything unusual prior to

the match being stopped.      I had not particularly looked at the

Leppings Lane end of the Ground.

When the match was stopped I simply thought that the Police

were dealing with a crowd invasion.      I had seen somebody running

across the pitch being chased by two policemen inmediately after the

gaira was stopped.     I could see that people were being lifted into the

Stand above the Leppings Lane enclosure but still thought that it was

a crowd disturbance due to the number of spectators and Police

milling around in front of the crowd barriers at that time.

Within about three or four minutes of the game being stopped I saw a

Policeman lifting somebody out of the crowd over the fence and

realised inmediately that this was peculiar and that the situation

required further investigation.      I hurried to that end of the Ground

and found a number of people lying or sitting on the edge of the

pitch.    I went around these looking for anyone seriously injured but

without exception these people were all conscious and had suffered

only minor injuries.     This would have taken me about two minutes.     I

then came upon a casualty who was obvsiously asphyxiated and who was

being resuscitated by two people I now know to be Dr. Glynn PHILLIPS

frcm Kilbride and Mr.                from Liverpool.   I stopped to assist

these two and we were joined by a fourth person who I cannot identify.

This was a male aged between forty and fifty who was obviously a First

Aider but I cannot recall whether he was in a St. John's Ambulance
PUFCELL                WILLIAM                                                5


Brigade uniform or not.

I spoke to a Policeman who was near to us and told him to bring any

asphyxiated people that he could find to the area where we were.          I

could not identify this Policeman again but within a short space of

tirrs there were a number of people who were asphyxiated laid on the

grcund near to us.    The four of us split into two teams, I was working

with Mr.         from Liverpool who I later ascertained was a Nurse

Manager working on the Cardiac Unit at Broad Green Hospital.

It must be understood that we were working in the middle of a large

crcwd.    We were slightly to the left of the Goal Posts as you look at

them on the pitch, about two or three yards onto the Pitch.       There

wera hundreds of people in that immediate area and it certainly

wasn't possible to see through the crowd to the fencing.      I therefore

had no idea what the scale of the casualties would be but the evidence

before me at that time suggested that people were either going to be

asphyxiated or only comparatively lightly injured.       It was obviously

appropriate to turn my attention to the asphyxiated first of all.

This was a question of working on one person until such time as it

seemed that there was no real prospect of them breathing unaided again

and then moving on to another victim to try and assist.      In

doing this one would pick whoever looked least cyanosed and whose

pupils were least dilated.    I can't say how long Mr.         and I

worked in such a fashion or how many people we worked upon but it was

quite a long time.    I have to say that in general the people that we

treated were cyanosed to such an extent, and their pupils were so

dilated, that it seemed to me that they had probably not been breathing

for some minutes before we were able to try and help them.

I had two Brookes airways in my pocket which were used but proved

useless as they became choked with vomit very quickly.
PUFCELL                 WILLIAM                                             6


I rsmarter that during this period I spoke to a Policewoman and told

her that there was a stretcher in the players tunnel which she should

go and fetch.      I never actually saw her with the stretcher but to my

knowledge the stretcher has gone and has not been returned to the

club. When there seemed to be no more that we could do on the pitch,

Mr.           and I ascertained that there were casualties in the

Gyirnasium.

We made our way off the playing area and round the back of the North

Stand where we came upon a number of casualties laid on hoardings,

most of whom were obviously dead but there was one lad aged about

twelve years in a red shirt (possibly a Liverpool Football Club Team

Strip) who did not appear cyanosed.

He was not breathing and there was no pulse so Mr.           and I started

work upon him.      We maintained that task until an ambulance crew took

over and moved him from us.       I would add that there was a lorry

parked between where this lad was laying and the First Aid Rocm so

that the people in the First Aid Rocm (which was dealing with a number

of minor casualties at the time) would not have been able to see him

lying there.

Mr        and I then went into the Gymnasium which was divided into two

halves.   One area was laid out with a number of bodies and in the

other area there were probably half a dozen or so casualties.       These

were already being tended by a number of Doctors and Nurses.        I was

made aware that most of the bodies had already been certified dead by

the Doctors who were there.

At this stage I was approached by an officer from the South Yorkshire

Police, PC              who asked me to certify one of the victims as

dead, the Officer indicated that I had been attempting resuscitation

on this particular person.        Because of the number of people that I
        PUFCELL                WILLIAM                                               7


        dealt with and the circumstances in which this work was carried out I

        was quite unable to recognise any particular victim.   As far as I am

        aware another Doctor subsequently certified this person as dead.

        It appeared that there was nothing further we could do and Mr

        was anxious to leave the ground to meet up with his brother from whan

        he had become separated in the crush.    I ensured that Mr         had

        appropriate directions and then made my way to the Physiotherapy Room

        in the South Stand where I found that there were two casualties.      This

        surprised me because I thought that all the injured people had been

        raroved from the ground by that stage.    These people were not

        seriously injured and were being looked after by              the Club

        Physiotherapist.    At the same time that I arrived an Ambulance crew

        caire in to take them away and there was nothing that I needed to do.

        Whilst in the Gymnasium I had spoken to a Police Officer who told me

        that there were known to be at least 75 dead at that stage.       I went to

        report this conversation to the Club Chairman Mr McGEE who was in the

        Director's Box.    A short time later I left the football Club with my

        wife and returned home.



                                                             W PURCELL SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          1IME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                            STATION

N^:
ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 53

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060589                                                              (STONED)



           I am a single woman and work as a

                                         I am a member of the St Johns Ambulance

        Brigade and hold the rank of Divisional Superintendent. On Saturday

           15th April 1989 (150489) I attended Hillsborough Football Ground for

           the football semi final between Liverpool and Notts Forest.      I

        arrived at the ground at about 1330 hrs (1330) accompanied by one of

       my Sergeants a Mrs                       As   soon as we arrived I signedon

        in the clubs first aid room.      The room is situated under the North

       Stand.

        I organised the laying out of our first aid equipment. The equipment

       cor prises dressings and sterile saline.      Our resuscitation equipment

       is kept in our two ambulances which are parked at the rear of the

       North Stand.     The brigade members who were present then dispersed

       to their previously areas of the ground.       Staying in the first aid

       rocm with me were Divisional Superintendents                  and

                          My Sergeant,                  was also present.

       Members also split up into four sections and went to the four comers

       of the ground.     Each of the four sections were in contact by radio.
We received our first patient at about 1415 hrs (1415). An elderly

man suffering from high blood pressure who returned to his place in

the ground after a rest.

At approximately 1515 hrs (1515) a young lad was brought into the

first aid room.     I don't know who it was that walked him in.      The boy

ccrrplained of being unable to breath easily and said he suffered with

asthma.     The boy was aged about 13 yrs, very slim, not very tall,

dark hair.     I treated him by calming him down and resting him.      I

heard a message over our radio that there was trouble in the

ground.     The message also mentioned fatalities.   At this time the

first of the many injured were carried round to the area of the first

aid room.     Our room isn't very big and has only two beds.    A male

patient was brought in. I can't recall who it was who brought the

patient in as I was too busy & involved to note.      The man brought

in was suffering from a broken right ankle and a double fractured

anr. He was treated by a South Yorkshire ambulance man who put a

wire splint on the injured limb.     An unconscious male was placed on

the floor.    He was then transferred to one of our treatment couches

in the recovery position.     Sgt                 took over treatment of

that patient.     The patient was aged about 28 yrs, slim build with

dark hair.    Some men came into our room and introduced themselves as

doctors & medical students and some off duty nurses.     They had, I

learnt, responded to an appeal over the club tannoy for medical help.

A patient was brought in suffering from some type of internal

injuries.    One of the doctors advised me that the mans liver may be

dairaged.    I dont know who the doctors were.   I sat the patient

outside with a blanket round him as the room was filling up with

other patients. I think the mans name was                      By now many

injured patients were crowded into our room.     They were brought along
on trolleys and hoarding boards. They were suffering from fractured

rifcs and abdominal injuries and one in particular with a fractured

pelvis.     An S.R.N. looked after him until he was transfered to

hospital.     The South Yorkshire Ambulance Service set up drips as

required.     I tried to organise patients in some order of priority for

treatment but it really was chaotic like as though in war.       I carried

on monitoring the progress of patients, making sure that airways were

clear etc.     I then found out that the police were taking the walking

injured to hospital in their own vans.     I escorted the man with the

bacly broken arm to a van, there was also a man with a broken leg,

insisted on going in the van as well.     I then asked         an

ambulance member to go in the van with the police.       More ambulances

arrived and most of the casualties were then taken to hospital.        The

police officers helped to lift and carry patients to the ambulances

& helped in any way they could.     A man I now know as Mr BALL from

          was brought into the first aid room,

                     he was accompanied by an 11 yr old boy called

                    Mr BALL had brought          to the match in this car,

toeether with                  & his son Kester BALL.    At 1745 hrs

(1745) I escorted the last patient from the first aid room, he was in

shock & cold, I handed him over to a police sergeant who took him to

the coach.     I dont know the lads name, he was 20 yrs, crew cut hair,

blende in colour, white t shirt, slim build.      He had white trainers on

with no socks.     All the St Johns Brigade departed the ground at 1800

hrs (1800).

On the following day at 0900 hrs (0900) 16 April 1989 (160489) I

received a phone call frcm a Mr                  a Public Relations Officer

frcm the London Headquarters of St Johns.    He informed me that a Pete

WELLS had personally seen that the oxygen cylinder kept in the
        ambulances were full & in working order prior to going to the

        foctball ground.




                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

   :CERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                             STATION

                  FRANK
                  QODLEY

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 50

OCCUPATION:       GRINDER (ST JOHNS AMBULANCE P/TIME)


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 010589                                                  F H GODLEY (SIGNED)



           I v.ork in my spare time for the 'St John's Ambulance Brigade" and

           have done so for the past 4 years.     I am usually engaged as an

           Ambulance Driver.     This was my posting on Saturday 15 April 1989

           (150489).    My hours of work were frcm 1 pm (1300) until 6.45 pm

           (1845) on that day.

           I arrived at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground at 1.10 pm (1310) and

           I parked my ambulance under the North Stand, as usual.       I took up my

           position in the ground at 2 pm (1400), on the perimeter track of the

           pitch, in front of the Spion Kop, next to the North Stand.       There

           wers                                 bnd                    standing

           toeather in the comer.      They are also in the Brigade.

           is in charge of this comer and he was in possession of a radio.

       At 3.00 pm (1500) the game kicked off.         After about five minutes I

           savv some of my colleagues walking towards the rear of the goal post

           at the West Stand.                 then ran up towards the West Stand

           to see what they were doing.     He spoke to them and then came back

           down to me and asked me to get a carrying chair from the ambulance

           and take it to the comer of the West Stand at the North Stand, as
GOCLEY                  FRANK                                                   2


sorraone had a suspected broken leg.      I collected the chair and took

it up to the comer.      I saw a white youth sitting down waiting for

me.     He had dark hair, large build, wearing brown shoes.       I can't

renariber what else he had on.      I sat him on the chair.    He refused to

core with me, he wanted to stay and watch the match.          Someone, I

don't know who, said there was someone on the pitch with a broken leg.

I turned around and saw a lad sitting on the pitch about 3 yards away

frcm me.     I saw a colleague,           and                   standing

beside the lad.          was bandaging the lad's legs together and I

tock the chair over to him.       We put him in the chair and        and I

tock him to the First Aid Room.      He had a pair of blue jeans on,

that's all I remember about him.

I saw that there were a number of people on the pitch by this time

but I didn't know what was happening.        I was only concerned with

taking this lad to the First Aid Room.

I v.ant into the First Aid Room with the lad and left him with

                a colleague, to deal with.    She asked me to get the

amtulance to take another patient she had, to hospital.          I went to get

the ambulance, and                   was with me, just watching as I

reversed out.     A Police Officer came up to me and said, "Get the

amtulance on the pitch, it's bad out there, follow me." I could not

describe this policeman in anyway.

I followed this policeman to the front of the West Stand, behind the

goal posts.     There were people all over the pitch, it was absolute

chaos.     I got out of the ambulance and looked into pen 3 by the

gate.    I didn't see if the gate was shut or open.     I saw a pile of

bodies on the floor of the pen, all lying on top of each other.

There were some people at the fencing, trying to pull it in towards

them.    Policemen were also trying to kick it in at the same time.         A
GOCLEY                 FRANK                                                 3


Police Inspector was standing on the wall at the fencing telling the

crcwd to stand back.    He was using a megaphone to talk to the

crcwd.    Same people did move back a little bit.

I want and opened up the rear of the ambulance.       Someone said a

doctor required oxygen.     I took the bottle out and I saw a man

sitting on the back step of the ambulance. He was having trouble

breathing.     I gave him some oxygen.    He was a white male, he was bare

chested, fat, dark hair, that's all I remember of him.       He said he

felt better and then walked off.

I then gave the oxygen to a person who wasasking for it for a doctor

to use.     I can only say he was a white male, nothing else.

I cot out of the ambulance and went to help a youth who was flat on

his back, he was white, 19-20 yrs.       He was stripped to the waist,

slight build, 5'9.     Someone was tying to do cardiac massage on him;

the only description I can give of him is that he was a large build,

white 30 years.     I gave the youth the kiss of life while the

large chap continued cardiac massage.       I believe the youth was, in

fact, dead.     I got no response whatsover.   His face was black and he

was stone cold.    Someone asked me to get the ambulance.     I went back

to the ambulance and found that two bodies had been placed in the

rear.     I believe that they were both dead, they were both male, white

in their 20's.     I can't remember anything else.   A man approached me

anc stated he was a doctor, he had blood all over his face, it was

rurning down his forehead.     I think he had an injury to his forehead.

I think he had a rugby shirt on, 30 yrs, fair/ginger hair, medium

build.    His name may have been                        He asked me to

remove the bodies frcm the ambulance as he had just resuscitated a man

after 10 minutes and wanted him taken to hospital. Myself and 3 or 4

supporters, I can't describe them, took the two bodies out of the
GOELEY                  FRANK                                               4


ambulance and put them on the pitch.     The doctor and I then placed a

man on a stretcher and put him in the ambulance.     I would describe him

as 50 yrs, fat, no teeth, dark hair, possibly a moustache.     He was

conscious.   Another man on a stetcher was put in the ambulance.      I

didn't see who put him there.     I can't describe him in anyway.

Another person was lying on the floor of the ambulance. He was white,

mala, wearing only boxer shorts, yellow with a pattern.     He was

fat, 30ish, semi-conscious.     Another man sat in the ambulance in the

back to help out.     He was white, male, large build, black hair, beard

and moustache, 30 yrs, wearing a green and white shirt, wearing

stereo headphones on his neck.     He seemed to know the patient whom the

doctor had resuscitated.     A policanan led me out of the ground and, as

I came off the pitch, a police motorcyclist escorted me to the

Northern General Hospital.      I dropped the patients at the Casualty

Dept and I drove back to the ground.     I drove into Leppings Lane

entrance of the ground and stopped just outside 'C' gate.     Two white

males, in their 20s, were lying on the floor.      I can't describe them

in anyway.   They were both conscious I believe.    Together with someone

else, who I don't remember, placed both of these youths in the rear of

the ambulance.   A young lad, who said he had a rib injury, jumped in

with them to keep an eye on them.     He was in his late teens, that's

all I remember of him.     I then drove back to Northern General Hospital

with a motorcycle escort and dropped them at the Casualty Dept.

I then drove back to the ground.     As I got near to the ground I was

stepped near to Herries Road and Pennistone Road by a coloured doctor.

He had a white smock on and stethoscope around his neck.     He asked me

to take him to Hallamshire Hospital, together with 3 females, I don't

knew who they were.    I dropped them at the hospital and went back to

Leppings Lane.   I drove to the gate at Leppings Lane where I was
       O X LEY                 FRANK                                                  5


       approached by a police officer.          I can't describe him.   He asked me

       to take bodies frcm outside 'C' gate on the driveway to the

       gyrrnasium.     I drove down to 'C' gate where someone put 3 bodies in

       the ambulance.     I didn't get out of the driver's seat so I didn't see

       whc put them in.     A uniform policanan and 2 people in plain clothes,

       whc I think were policemen, got into the ambulance.           They were

       carrying some personal belongings frcm the bodies.            I drove around

       to the Pennistone Road entrance to the ground and reversed up to the

       gyrr. Two County Ambulance men took the bodies into the gym.              I

        then went and parked in Pennistone Road.         I later returned to the

        ambulance garage in Psalter Lane,         (sgd) F H Godley




                                                                  F H GODLEY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE

         TIME:               DATE:     010589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE




                                                                                          3496
                                                                           STATION

                  PHILIP    MARTIN
                  SAXTON

ADDRESS


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 34

OCCUPATION:       SURVEYOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 025 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 050589                                              P. M. SAXTON (SIGNED)



          I am a married man and I live at the above address with my wife and

          twc sons.        I am employed as a       for the local Coalboard but I

          do take part in the voluntary work carried out by St Johns Ambulance.

          I have been working for St Johns Ambulance for some twenty three

          years and take part in various events.     I do not normally work at

          foctball matches but I have recently taken to assisting at the larger

          foctball matches, such as semi-finals with large capacity crowds.

          I have taken part in quite a number of large events such as pop

          concerts and horse shows, so I am fully aware of the problems and

          hazards with large crowds at such events.

          Being an ambulance man for St Johns ambulance, I have to be

          fully aware and trained up to date with First Aid, I attend as best

          that I can, a meeting at least once a week, I can't really say how

          often I have to take exams but I would say that I know First Aid very

          well and when I am asked to take an exam I just make a note of the

          date.     I find no need to study as I know my stuff as second

          knowledge, my First Aid is my prime interest and has been since I was

          a cadet at the age of eleven, in fact all of my family have an
SAXTON                PHILIP    MARTIN                                       2


interest in the same service.

On Saturday 15th April, 1989 (150489) I worked for St Johns

Ambulance at the Semi-Cup Final match between Liverpool Football Club

and Nottingham Forest, the game was being played at Sheffield

Wednesday Ground, Hillsborough.     I normally start work at a large

event such as this at least two hours before it is due to start.

At 1300 hrs that day I set off from my hone in                 and from

there I went and collected my mother and father,                       and

my nephew                frcm my mom's address,

         from there I went and pick up                    of

                    From .               sorry I remember now I didn't

actually pick               up on the day of this football match.

Frcm my mother's house we tried to get onto the main A61, however,

the route was heavily packed and I had to find an alternative route,

I eventually got to the ground after parking my car in Famdale Road

at approximately half past one (1330), I entered the ground

through one of the gates between number 77 to 88.

I am a Supporter of Sheffield Wednesday F.C. and I am fully aware of

the layout of the ground.

I signed on duty in the duty room at approximately twenty to two

(1340) and received my postings which was in front of pen one on

the track at the comer of the West Stand and the South Stand, just

in front of the Police Control box.

I want out onto the pitch at approximately ten to two (1350) with

my own personal First aid kit which consists of triangular bandages,

plasters, water and bottle, my bag was packed with provisions for

First Aid, I was posted to this position with my Father

                             and another girl I only know as

each of which would have had their own bags filled with similar
SAXTON                PHILIP   MARTIN


articles.   We took with us two manual stretchers and own hand held

radios, five people was a usual amount to have posted to this

position, later we were joined by three others and at the point of

kick off there was eight people posted at this position.

At this time, which was approximately ten to two o'clock (1350) I

noticed that the Spion Kop was quite full with Nottingham supporters

and that the terrace pens three and four were also quite full.     I saw

a few fans climbing frcm Pen one and into the South stand, it was

noticeable that both the North Stand and the West Stand were quite

empty but the South Stand was quite full, that is that the ground

was well filled with Nottingham fans and the Liverpool fans were

later arriving.

I also noticed that, now as the pens were filling up fans were being

pulled frcm the terraces and up into the West Stand, fans were also

climbing frcm pen three over the fence into pen two, it was now

approximately two thirty (1430) to about twenty to three (1440)

I can say at approximately ten to three (1450) there was a

broadcast over the air of the radio, my St Johns radio, that the

gaira would possibly be delayed, I looked round the ground and it was

evident to me that not all the fans had arrived, pens one and two

were quite sparce but pen three was extremely full, I would say to

its capacity, fans were evidently trying to get out of the packed pen

three and into pen number two.

I noticed that between pens one and four there was only one

Policewoman on the track covering the gates, she stood on the gate to

pen number one, just in front of our post.

The Policewoman I would describe as a white girl approximately in her

mid to late twenties she had blonde hair which was in a pony tail,

she was of a slim build approximately five feet five inches tall
SAX TON               PHILIP MARTIN


(5'5), she seemed to be left on her own to cover quite a large area.

Just after the radio message I received, the football players came

out onto the pitch for their pre-match warm up and in view of the

fact I had received this radio transmission I was quite surprised to

see them come out so early considering they were supposed to be

delaying the start.

It was approximately three o'clock (1500) and ,           and

          had just returned frcm the toilet, they told me that

had seen a push forward and that people were screaming trapped

against the perimeter fence, both felt as if we were going to have a

few casualties, I stood up and looked down the track, I could see

sore fans climbing from pen three over onto the perimeter track and

othars climbing frcm pen three into pen two, my attention was drawn

however, to some twenty fans walking along the track towards us, the

Policewoman opened the gate and invited them to stand in pen one, to

the best of my recollection the gate to pen three was open and two

Policemen were on the gate, one or two lads sat next to us on the

track and appeared to be out of breath but did not approach us, for

First Aid; the rest of the fans, some went into pen one, some stood

and sat on the perimeter track, the fans milling about were quite

reluctant to get back into pen one and some were distressed.

I decided at this point to go and view the situation myself to see

if any First Aid was required, the gate was now closed again and seme

more Police Officers were there, I took           and          to find

out what was going on, I moved down the track and stood in front of

the fence to pen three, my first thoughts were, that all the people

at the front of pen three were crushed flat against the fence, some

were concious others with their heads free they were screaming out

of terror.   Some were conscious but weren't saying a word you could
SAXTON                 PHILIP   MARTIN


see terror in their eyes, some were with their heads free and others

weren't some were unconcious and one man in particular, his head was

pressed right against the fence he was very pale blue, he was trapped

with his head forward, I thought he was dying or he might be dead so

irmadiately thought of trying to open an air way by tilting his head

backwards, I put my hands through the fence and I tried with my left

hard to push the crowd back, he was pressed side on.    I put my right

hard through the fence and attempted to push his head back it was too

tight I couldn't move his head, the man was just to the left of the

gate to pen three, I climbed up onto a small wall and hung onto the

fence.    I shouted to everybody to get back I could see a sea of faces

the fans arms were by their sides they were packed solidly, they

couldn't move, I climbed back down and I saw the first middle aged

mar, who was pale, I could see now blood was running down his face

frcm his nose, I went back to our post and told my Father that people

locked as if they were dying and that we needed further assistance as

much help as possible, Peter WELLS, who was the Officer in Charge of

St Johns that day joined us and I related the facts to him, he was

surprised and looked in disbelief, he told me to stay and went to

lock himself he called to me as he got to pen three he could see it

for himself, other Police Officers were standing on a small wall

telling people to move back the crowd were still packed solidly.

On going back towards pen three I told        and       two other First

Aiders to come with me to the fence, we returned to the first man, we

saw, I pointed him out to Mr WELLS, I told him I had failed to get

his head back, we both then tried again, at this stage he was blue,

we both failed to get his head back, I believe at this stage he was

dead.    I then went to another man and tried to get his head back he

toe was crushed forward in the same way, he was about fifty plus and
SAXTON                PHILIP MARTIN


going bald on top, I put my hand in his mouth to open his airway



         I couldn't get his head back the pressure was too great to

mova his head, then I climbed up the fence to tell people to move

back, I could see the tunnel I told the fans to move back to the

turnel but they could move, the people who I had seen earlier

that were conscious were now unconscious, the majority of people who

wera in that pen were deteriorating, some people who were unconscious

were now blue and I could see people were dying even dead standing up,

I iroved to another woman who was situated near to comer of the left

hard side of pen three near to the dividing fence between pens two

and three, I spoke to her she had terror in her eyes, she wasn't

scraaming she was conscious but terrified, I tried to clam her down I

told her whilst she had the opportunity that she ought to put her

head back to keep her airway clear, I said "Take deep slow, deep

breaths" and that she ought to keep her head back.

The next main thing that happened was that the gate to pen three was

open and Police Oficers were there, one youth was on his back in the

entrance to the gate with his feet trapped in the gateway, the

problem was that all the people, with all the pressure had collapsed

as the gates had opened, they were fallen across the entrance to the

gata and this youth was trapped with feet underneath them,   I would

describe him as a white youth in his late teens with short dark hair

shaped around his ears and appeared quite tall, he was conscious, I

saw seme Police Officers trying to release the pressure of the crowd

on this lad's feet, because by releasing his feet and moving him this

enable other people to get out, I assisted Police Officers but the

pressure was far too great to move the crowd, we couldn't move him,

at least four came over the top of us to get out, I remember now
SAXTON                PHILIP MARTIN


there was a scuffle behind I turned round and saw a fan struggling

and having a go at a Photographer for taking pictures, I interjected

and seperated them, I advised the Photographer to move on, I returned

to the gate area, I looked around and spoke to a Police Officer to

query why the fans weren't being taken out at the back, I don't know

whc he was or what he looked like, I can't remember much about his

features, I was concerned that no one was taking the fans out at

back.    I left it at that and went back to the fence, before going on

to identify myself, before I got to the Police Officer I discarded my

hat as it was getting in the way .was getting in the way.

When back at the fence, I worked in the area by the gate to pen

three; in fact between pen three gate and the dividing fence between

pen three and two.    I didn't know what we were going to do, there

was no way out for anyone the Police were trying to free the gate

area, and no one was moving out of the back.

I could see people climbing over to the fence over people in order to

escape, out of pen three, I looked into the pen and I could see

people dying in front of me.    I knew I needed to get into the pen.     I

thought that if I could give some mouth to mouth, just a couple of

inflations I knew I could have a chance to revive them, or anyone who

was unconscious to turn them into the recovery position to stop them

chcking.

I saw a small gap appear a third of the way up pen three, a gap only

a small one, about seven metres (7m) away on the lefthand side,

whilst there was rocm at the back the people at the front were still

crushed against the fence dying or even dead.

I saw in the gap people on the ground blue in the face, the gate was

still blocked, I just wanted to get to them to help them, people were

crossing over them and trying to climb out of pen three towards pen
SAX TON                PHILIP MARTIN                                     8


twc, I climbed the perimeter fence and into the pen, I climbed onto

the top of the crowd and crawled across the tops of the fans, I

alirost   scurried over their heads and shoulders to get to the people

in the gap, I eventually got to the space where the people were.     I got

this man on his back, his face was blue his eyes were wide open his

pupil dilated, I felt for a pulse he hadn't got one, I started mouth

to mouth and tried   heart massage, I did this for three cycles and on

the third time down he vomited, I thought I had got a reaction and I

turned him into the recovery position, I tried for a pulse but I

couldn't feel one, I thought if he had started it would be weak

anyway so I bend down to listen to see if he was breathing I couldn't

hear anything, people were tripping over me.    I thought I had given

hiir a fair chance, I had to make a decision whether or not to leave

hirr, at that point I had to leave him.   I had to move on, all I can

rerrember is he was a man, I left him in the recovery position, I

pulled another person over a couple of yards away, he was lying on

his back, I tried to revive him, I got no reaction at all, a fan bent

down and I told him I couldn't revive him, I tried mouth to mouth and

heart massage, I tried another person giving a third mouth to mouth

and heart massage, I had a gap in front of me I looked down into the

gate area all I saw was a pile of bodies with blue faces, wide eyed,

ants interlocked, blood frcm the nose, some had vomit by their

mouths, fans were still trying to get out, the bodies were all over,

sore were face down, some face up, the bodies were about four bodies

deep, I had to convince myself that they were beyond help and that

there were others who needed my help more, all I wanted to do was to

find somebody alive, I remember looking up having done what I can, I

stcod thinking that I was all on my own no one else had climbed over

to help me or the fans, the gate was still packed even though the
SAXTON               PHILIP MARTIN                                         9


pressure had eased, I felt so alone to have to make these decisions

on my own, I can say nobody else giving mouth to mouth.

I started to move across pen three towards pen four, I got to a

position by the broken barrier.   I saw a man a big bloke with short

cropped hair, slightly ginger he looked a big powerful man with a

thick neck, I and another fan managed to turn him over off his back

as he was breathing but unconscious, the fan who assisted me I can not

describe, I told him to stay with this man if he wanted to save a

life, I had to move on to help someone else.

I turned back and looked up I could see that the bodies in front of

me and between me and the gate formed a second half to the bodies on

the right of the gate, as I looked at the gate in front of me, there

were bodies either side of the gate but the bodies did not go as far

back on the right hand side.   I saw people pushing through towards

pecple they recognised, they were all grief stricken trying to get to

the dead bodies they had recognised I didn't stop them.

I decided that the best thing to do now was to start thinning the

nurrber of bodies down from the pile of dead bodies, I and a fan took

hold of one lad, I said to the fan these people are dead we've got to

thin them out.

I took this fan towards the back of the terraces to lie him down.      I

returned to the pile of bodies to take another youth from the pile, I

and the other fan took hold of a leg each and began to pull him back,

he was face down, I stopped to turn him over because I didn't want

his face to get cut up or damaged.   I noticed then some fans were in

the comer of the pen trying to pull another fan out who was trapped,

he was alive, as I looked over I then caught the eye of a woman, it

was the same woman I had advised earlier to keep her head back, to

stay calm, she was also trapped by her legs by dead bodies, she was
SAXTON               PHILIP   MARTIN                                      10


clinging on to the fence, she just stared at me, I went over to the

lacs and I helped them to pull him out his feet had been trapped by

bodies, we pulled him free and the fans then tried to pass him from

per; three into pen two, I convinced them to put him down, I checked

hirr over and he was moved back.   I gave him a drink he didn't want me

to leave him, but I had to go to assist other people, I think he was

reassured with me being there, I can't   describe him or the other four

or five fans with him previously I got another fan and told him to

stay with this man, until he could get him out safely, because there

was still a few fans about on the terraces and the entrance at the

back was blocked, I went back to the comer I noticed the woman had

gone, the other fans who had helped the first fan out were still in

the comer trying to get another man out, the man was a tall white

male with blondish hair about middle aged, he was unconcious the fans

hac lifted him up and again were trying to pass this man over into

pen two, I told them to put him down, and as they were doing that two

Police Officers came to the dividing fence and said "Pass him over

here we're talcing them out here" I said "Bodies both dead and alive"

They said "Yes we're taking them out over here" I told them that this

man was alive and I made them aware of this fact, I just wanted to

make sure that he was being taken out properly and to a proper First

Aid post, the thing that annoyed me was that the Police although I

told them to carry him out face down with his head back they carried

hirr out face up, half way out they turned him over, because I shouted

over to them to turn him over.

I turned back towards the pen and looked at the fans by the fence I

locked at the pitch which was covered in people, I decided I could do

no more for the fans at the front of the pen and made my way to the

gate at the front of pen three to help the people on the football
SAXTON                 PHILIP   MARTIN                                     11


pitch.   I noticed that the entrance to the gate had been cleared I

locked up and saw that the Police had formed a human chain across the

pitch at right angles to the gate of pen three, they were passing

the bodies along this chain and out of pen three,     I pushed my way

through the Police line because I felt I was breaking down I felt for

the first time penned in.

I turned and pushed my way through the right hand side of the Police

line and walked onto the pitch, there were people all around some

lying down and receiving mouth to mouth, I was looking for a friendly

face, I saw my Father,                   I went over to him, he asked me

if I was okay, I told him I wasn't I'd had enough, he calmed me down

anc reasurred    and told me to keep going, my Father didn't seem too

bac, I think he was putting on a face to reassure me.

All I can remember at this stage was seme people layed out, and

pec pie were giving mouth to mouth the casualties were blue in the

face, I knew it was too long to revive them, but I didn't stop the

pecpie helping they weren't doing any harm.

One particular one which I remember was a girl with blonde hair:

there was a man walking around in a daze telling everybody to give the

casualties air, he approached a man giving mouth to mouth a young

girl when the man in the daze told him to give her air, he turned

round and told him in no uncertain terms to leave him alone because

it was his own daughter that people were giving Cardio Pulmonery

Resusciation (CPR) there was about five people assisting, they

appeared to be doing the best they could so I left them, the girl I

car, describe only as a young lass with blonde hair

                I can't describe anybody else there I was more concerned

with finding scmeone I could help.

I iroved round near to the edge of the penalty area, and saw a man who
SAXTON                PHILIP   MARTIN                                      12


was stocky and he was dead, it seemed half an hour or more since the

first incident, he had blue face, open eyes and vomit on the face, as

I watched him a few fans brought a ripped advertising board and came

over to pick him up, they put him on the board but as they picked him

he started to slip off, the fans were in     a rush, I told them to take

it easy because he was dead !.

We put him on the board and they rushed him off, I can't describe him

or the fans.   I'd seen so many people that day everybody was the same.

I started walking back towards the goal, there was a man standing

over a dead body, I asked him if he had got something to cover his

face just out of respect, I left then to it because there was nothing

I could do, in the same area I saw a lad about 18 yrs laid on his

back there were two other young men with him and a girl, I went over

because he shouldn't have been on his back, I went over but I knew

straight away he was dead.     I asked if anybody had treated him, they

intimated that no one had treated him.    I knew he was dead but for

them, I bent down and checked but there was no pulse.     I knew he was

dead but for their benefit I started mouth to mouth, one of the lads

started the heart compressions, I checked and again there was no

pulse.

I explained that there was nothing more I could do, they all got

upset but one lad more than the others was upset and the others were

coirforting him, it was if the dead person was a closer friend or even

a relation to him, I tried consoling him but I had to leave them to

move on to help elsewhere.

The lad who was most upset was a white male, with dark thick hair,

neck above the collar length, approximately 5'6 it's difficult to

describe him he was kneeling down facing the South Stand.     I can't

describe the others really, I was too busy giving mouth to mouth,
SAXTON                  PHILIP   MARTIN                                     13


the casualty, I can only describe as a white male in his late teens,

quite slender in build, with short dark hair, I think now the girl

had blonde hair, but I can't be sure, the only other thing I can say

is that they definitely knew each other.

At this time I was still in the same area and people were frantically

trying to help.

I iroved to a lad lying in the recovery position with a blanket over

hirr, he was lying a quarter of the way up the pitch on the South Stand

side.    He lay with his face facing the Spion Kop, his head towards the

South and his feet towards the North Stand.       He was a young lad with

dark hair.

He had people who were obviously known to him standing round him, he

was conscious, breathing with his eyes fluttering, I asked him if he

was and where he was hurting, his friends said his legs, I asked him

if he could move his legs, his friends shouted his name, which I can

not recollect, "Move your legs", "move your legs"       I told than to calm

dovcn.   I bent right down to him and said "Can you move your legs" I

said this slowly He moaned "No".

I thought his spinal column was injured

I iroved down his body, lifted up the blanket, which I noticed as one

siirilar to a St Johns blanket, a dark brown one.      I pinched his leg

and he moaned.     I knew he was alright.   I told his friends he would

be okay.

I looked up and I saw                       and                   frcm St

Johns.     They were coming towards me with a stretcher, a stretcher I

recognised as one of ours from St Johns, a green tubular framed one

with wire meshing across it.     They came to me and placed the stretcher

down.    The fans moved forward to grab him to put him on a stretcher.

I told than to back off and that we would put him on the stretcher.
SAXTON                    PHILIP   MARTIN                                        14


If               and            prepared to move him, whilst constantly

reassuring the casualty.        I took his shoulder area and

tock the hip area.       I think a fan may have helped.   We all carefully

placed him onto the stretcher and then someone carried him off.          I

don't know whether it was the girls or the fans.

I row moved off looking for people to help.        I moved towards the

South Stand and just on the pitch by the running track I met my dad

again.    He was with a man who was sitting fully up and conscious.          I

would describe him as a white male, in his mid twenties, of a stocky

build.    He wore tight jeans, which I noticed because he was well

built.    He had a button up shirt and was sweating.      He had light

brcwn hair, swept back.       He sat facing the West Stand with his friend

reassuring him.        I asked on getting there if he was alright.   I had a

quick look at him and checked him over, asking if he was alright.            He

just looked exhausted.       He stated he was thirsty so I offered him

sara water.     He drank all that I had had in my bottle.      It was at

this point I remember undoing his trousers.       His companion wanted

scare water and this time I noticed a man in a white chef's coat

carrying two large 'dixies' of water.        He put one down by us and his

friend had a drink, the man in the coat moved on.

The next thing I knew was a lad who was an ex St Johns person, named

              tapped me on the shoulder and asked me if I was alright.

He seemed okay and after briefly talking to him he moved on.

I looked up and people were still busy giving C.R.P. but the pitch

had thinned out.       I couldn't see anyone who needed any help.

I went back and made my way back to the first aid room, however,

prior to that I returned to my first posted comer in front of pen

one.     I picked up all the equipment and coats that were lying about.

I ramariber seeing two women who when just prior to the start of the
SAX TON                 PHILIP   MARTIN


gaira, I had spoken to about the match start being postponed, delayed.

I saw than again in the same position right in the comer under the

Police Control Box.     I spoke to than again.   They had a brief

conversation with me about the disaster and queried if there was

anybody dead.    This astonished me to think that they still didn't

knew the extent of the disaster.      I think it was now about ten to

four (1550).     I gathered the equipment and moved off diagonally

across the pitch towards the first aid room although the pitch was

thinner now with casualties.     People were still giving CPR and I

noticed a few dead people with their faces covered.

I had decided at this time to go to the First Aid room to help out

there.    I passed through a Police line which was across the width of

the Football pitch.     Just as I did pass through the line I looked to

the North Stand and I noticed a scuffle between quite a few fans,

perhaps four or five.     I think a couple of Police Officers climbed

into the stand to sort than out.      I had enough on my mind.     I didn't

taka any further notice of them.     I did notice, however, that the

Spion Kop had thinned slightly.     There were still quite a few fans

there however.

I continued up between the Spion Kop and the North Stand, under the

North Stand and into the area of the First Aid Roan.     Whilst on my

way over the pitch, I had time to think and I was beginning to get

ups at.   As I got to the First Aid Roam, I saw my mother.       I began to

get upset.    My mother asked me to treat a woman with a sprained

ankle.    She obviously wanted to keep me occupied to stop me from

getting upset.    I went and checked that she was alright and then

moved amongst the casualties outside the room, just basically

reassuring people and comforting them.     One lad was in the comer of

the section outside the First Aid Roan layed on his back between the
SAXTON                  PHILIP MARTIN                                          16


wall and a Police prison van.      He was conscious and talking to me.

He was slightly flushed.     He had two large bruises in the area of

his lower abdoman which looked      consistant with the lad being pressed

against a barrier or something similar.

I would describe this lad as tall, in his early twenties, of a medium

build, and he had a blanket over him.      He   didn't seem        too bad soI

moved into the first aid room.       Whilst in there I saw         a lad on a

couch who was semi-conscious.      His eyes were flickering.     He seemed

alright, perhaps slightly warm.      I left him in this room with a lad I

knew as          tending to him.   I moved back out of the room to the

passage outside.    Here I saw another lad layed down by the back of a

vehicle.   I asked him if he was okay.     He stated yes, so I moved on.

I iroved back to him, suddenly realising that although I was looking

for a more seriously injured casualty, they had moved onto the

hospitals and that the people I was talking to were now my priority.

I went back to him.     I asked where it hurt.    He said his right arm.

I checked his arm which was red.      He moved it about.      I then checked

his chest, it looked okay but when I touched him his chest was very

tender as if he had a couple of cracked ribs.       My father,

arrived and assisted me to bandage him up to take to the hospital.

             ame over and I asked her to take his name and address.

She had difficulty understanding him because of his Liverpool accent,

but I remember now he lived south of Liverpool.       She noted his name,

address and nature of his injury.       I sat reassuring him.

I noticed a lad walking in being assisted either side.          I heard a

minor commotion and as I turned I saw him vomit blood.          Some people

moved him to one side.     The casualty I was with I got to his feet

very steadily.     I moved him to a Police Sherpa van situated at the

gate to the gymnasium entrance.     We sat him on the front seat.      This
SAX ION                 PHILIP MARTIN                                         17


var was full of walking injured, this van was moved away immediately.

This lad with the cracked ribs I would describe as a white male, in

his early twenties, about 5'11, with a good build.       He had dark

hair.     To establish his identity I'm sure you'll find his details in

the St Johns first aid book.

The lad who came in and vomitted blood was a white lad and thats all

I can say about him.     I vaguely remaonber my mother treating him, but

I was busy treating my patient and he was being well looked after.

The next thing was I went back to the passage by the First Aid Room.

A lad was lay down by the Police cell van.       My mother and father were

with him and a man who I later found out was a student doctor

tending to him.     I remember he had a suspected fractured pelvis.      My

mother, father and I strapped his ankles and knees together with

bandages.     I moved away leaving him in the good hands of my mother,

father and the student doctor.       The doctor looked oriental with

straight black hair.

I now remember a stretcher coming in without a casualty on it.          I saw

the man who had had the bruising on his lower stcmach.       He was still

here.     So I told the person with the stretcher, "over here" but

another doctor requested it.        I explained that the man with the

bruises had been here a long time, the stretcher was put down by my

casualty.    The doctor explained his casualty needed it more so I

locked over to his patient and noticed his pateient was linked to a

drip.     I let the stretcher go.    I moved outside as I was worried that

my patient with the bruise might have had internal injuries.       I saw

an ambulance man with a stretcher and conmandeered it for my patient.

Other persons put him on the stretcher.       I left and went and got a

drink and stood to the side where the Police were sitting.

I noticed outside the gym were a number of stretchers and at this time
SAXTON                  PHILIP   MARTIN                                       18


I knew that the majority of the incident was over.         I knew that the

deed bodies that were in the gym were in there position to stay.        No

mora were going in, however, there were a few casualties drifting

in.     I stood about talking to the Police, a few doctors, discussing

whet had happened and what we had done.

I remember talking to a man I know as Doctor                from



I remember while we were talking that the word got round that there

was eighty four fatalities.      At this time various people got

upset.     I think we were all shocked by the number of people who had

died.    We all stood trying to comfort each other.

I then decided to check to make sure that nobody had been left in the

ground, so both I and                      who is a St Johns member, went

out onto the pitch, the ground was empty.       We were approached by four

or five fans who stated they had lost a friend.       I escorted them to

the entrance to the passage to the first aid rocm, in order that we

could check the first aid book.      Their friend's details were not in

there so I directed them to a Police Officer to take their details to

see if he could assist.

I vaguely remember it being about half past four (1630) when we were

talking before entering back onto the pitch, but then we went back to

the First Aid Roan to ask if we could leave.       I remember my mother

saying it was about half past five (1730), but as I remember it was

earlier about ten past five (1710).       We were given permission to

leave and I returned to where my car was parked in Famdale Road.          I

made a phone call to my wife,              I called from

           house and then my mother, father,          my nephew and

myself travelled heme.

I would like to point out that I was in pen three and at this time I
SAXTON                  PHILIP   MARTIN


asked a youth to cover up a deceased person.      I did this because

not only out of respect, but to mark that the person had died,

to save anyone else attending to them.      I do remember later that

this deceased had been covered over and another person nearby.

I vvould also like to say that the brief descriptions I have offered,

the location of different persons and the times of different events

are vague, these factors were not my priority all I was interested

in was the preservation of life.

Furthermore, I feel once this incident had started there was no way

anyone could have done anything, except for the supporters to go

back through the tunnel, which I now realise was inpossible, or to

cut them out quicker.

On the day of this disaster I was wearing my St Johns Ambulance

uniform, which consists of black trousers, black crew neck jumper,

white shirt and black tie.       I was carrying a white havasack and

wearing a flat peaked cap with a white band.      This I wore up until I

was attending to people in the gate area, at which point I discarded

it because it was in my way.

The day's events have been related to this inquiry as accurately as

possible, but it is possible that they may not be in sequence and no

doubt I have missed semething which I can't remember at this time,

or indeed will remember.

Having read my statement I would like to clarify seme points:-

On page (2) where I stated I didn't know how I often I take exams I

believe it is at least once a year.

On page (3), line 18, where it states two manual stretchers, it

should read 'one'.

On page (4) line 19, where it states between pens one and four, it

should read between pen one and the dividing fence between pen three
SAXTON                  PHILIP   MARTIN


and four.

On page (5) I can't remember correctly or accurate rather in what

sequence I saw the gates to the pens being opened and closed, but

the order I have given is my best recollection.

On page (13) line 16, where it states "I wanted to make sure that he

was being taken out properly to a proper first aid post”, it should

read to an ambulance.

On page (19) line 15 where it states, "I did notice that the Spion

Kop had thinned slightly, there were still quite a few fans there" -

I vvould like to say the majority of the fans were still there.
        SAXTON            PHILIP   MARTIN


                                            P. M. SAXTON SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   050589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                          STATION

NAME:           JOHN EDMUND
                TOWLER

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 42

OCCUPATION:    MAINTENANCE SUPERVISOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 013 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                                 J E TOWLER (SIGNED)



           I am a married man and live at the above address with my family.    I

           am employed as a Maintenance Supervisor by



           In my spare time, I work as a volunteer for the St. John's Ambulance

           Brigade based at Sheffield Number One Cadet Division with

           Headquarters at Southey Green School, Sheffield.

           I joined the St. John's Ambulance Brigade in 1957 (000057) and have

           risen within the Brigade to the Rank of Divisional Superintendent and

           am in charge of the Cadets within my Division.

           I hold a normal First Aid Certificate, First Aid at Work Certificate

           and Lay Instructions in First Aid Certificate.

        On Tuesday 11 April 1989 (110489) I attended an Ambulance Training

        meeting at the Area Headquarters of the Brigade based in Sheffield,

        together with my son,                           These meetings are

        basically refresher courses for Ambulance Drivers and Attendants.

        At this meeting mention was made of a van attending the F.A. Cup

        Seni-Final Football Match to be held on Saturday 15 April 1989

           (150489) at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club's ground in
TOILER                JOHN   EDMUND                                        2


Hillsborough.    The game was between Liverpool Football Club and

Nottingham Forest Football Club.

I asked if they needed any further assistance, which they did, so I

volunteered the services of both myself and

I laft heme at about 11.30 am (1130) together with my wife              and

my son,          I left at this time as I was to take my wife to work

prior to going to Area Headquarters to catch the mini-bus to the

grcund.

On rny journey through Sheffield I saw about fifty cars containing

foctball supporters from both teams.     I recognised them because of

their scarves, although both sets of fans were wearing the same

colours the insignia is different.

I saw no evidence of drinking within these vehicles, whilst passing

them in heavy traffic.

I cropped my wife off at work and as I was still early I drove around

the Moors and arrived at Area Headquarters at about 12.30 pm. (1230)

At Headquarters I met up with               and a man I know as

             is also a Divisional Superintendent of a different

Division.   Also at Headquarters was       _________   J who was loading
his car with jumble for a jumble sale that had been organised on

behalf of the Brigade later the same afternoon so he was not

attending the football match.

            was taking one of our two ambulances to the ground and as

it is allowed to carry two passengers, I took the opportunity to

travel to the ground with him instead of waiting for the mini-bus.

We arrived at the ground at about 1 pm     (1300) at which time both__

and myself were posted to the coiner of the North Stand and Leppings

Lara Terraces.   We signed in the attendance Register and I was given

a personal radio.   One radio is issued to each comer post enabling
TOILER                  JOHN    EDMUND


contact to be made between each post and the first aid roan, which is

situated beneath the North Stand.        We were posted with two adult

nursing members but I do not know their names.

In the first aid room I checked my first aid bag and topped up my

water bottle, then together with             I went out onto the side of

the pitch to my post.     By this time it was about 1.20 pm. (1320)

At rny post I can see to my left the North Stand which is a seating

area and to my right is the standing terrace of Leppings Lane and an

upper seating stand.     There are no perimeter fences along the North

Stand but a perimeter fence runs all along he Leppings Lane terracing

which has about five exit gates to allow people to get from the

terracing onto the side of the pitch.        At this time, the terracing

was sparsely populated.

At about 1.40 pm (1340) we were joined by another Divisional

Superintendent                 . his wife and three Cadets, whan I do not

knew.    On being joined by these, the two Nursing members stated they

would move to the comer of Leppings Lane and the South Stand where

other members they knew were.       This they did.

A short time later, a radio check was completed to check that the

radios were working properly.       By now it was about 2 pm (1400) and I

corrmented to              that the Spion Kop Terracing was more or less

full of spectators, but that the Leppings Lane Terracing was still

fairly empty with virtually no supporters directly behind us in the

position marked 7 on a sketch map shown to me by PC

At about 2.30 pm (1430) whilst looking at the Leppings Lane Terracing,

I could see about 12 people climbing over a set of segregation

fencing from the area marked 4 on the map into Area marked 5 and 6.

I conmented to         that we could have some casualties from that

position if they were not careful due to the design of the railings
TOILER                 JOHN   EDMUND                                      4


with the protruding metal bars.    At the same time, I could see about

6 people being lifted from the standing area into the seating area.

I assumed that they were being lifted up by friends to get a better

position to watch the match.    At this time, the areas marked 3 and 4

on the map were becoming fuller but they did not seem full to

capacity.    The other areas in Leppings Lane Terrace were stiLl fairly

empty which I found very unusual as it was a big game and normally

the Terracing would be nearly full at this time.

At about the same time I discussed with        a policy procedure of

who would go into the crowd if we were required and who would remain

on post.

At about 2.40 pm (1440) I saw a Steward who was wearing an orange bib,

marked up with the word Steward, come to the gate marked Number 6 on

the map in Leppings Lane Terracing and allow a fan out.    They came up

to us and the Steward informed us that the fan had some grit or

something under his contact lens and asked us to assist.

            took the fan, who I would describe as a white male in his

late teens about 5'10 tall with light brown hair cut part way over

his ears, wearing an anorak style coat, in the direction of the first

aid room for treatment.

The Steward then asked me to direct the fan through the gate and

along a passageway leading to the seating area on his return.   The

Steward then went back into the Stand.

I could see that the Steward was not manning the gate, but there were

about six Police Officers along the fencing.

I did not see anything else happening and at about 2.45 (1445) the fan

returned from receiving treatment and I directed him back into the

Terraces behind us as requested by the Steward.

I was stood at my post and just looked around the ground for a time,
TOILER                 JOHN   EDMUND                                     5


but did not see anything that was wrong.

At about 2.55 pm (1455) I looked around towards the goal area at

Leppings Lane end and saw        beckoning   me with his hand.   I beganto

walk along the track, towards him and called to        to follow me,

which he did.   I was looking towards the crowd, but did not detect

anything was wrong at that stage.

As I reached the gate marked 4 on the map, I could see that it

appeared people were pushing forward from the back.    The fans at the

frcnt, which were young boys, teenage girls and older people, were

pushed against the fencing and looked as if they couldn't move.     I

could hear the older people shouting, "Get them out, get them out."

There was a look of terror and fear on all the faces that I could see.

A Police Officer at that gate, who I can't describe, opened the gate

and it appeared that the force being applied from somewhere behind

pushed about twenty fans through the gate, after which I believe he

clcsed it as no more came through.     I could hear a Police Officer

shcuting towards the crowd, "Get back, get back," but I do not know

whc.

As they came through the gate they began to spread along the

trackside towards our post.

I want up to a young boy who I would describe as a white male about

10 yrs old with blonde hair, who was accompanied by an older man,

whc stated he was the boy's father.    I could see that he was having

difficulty breathing but had no visible signs of injury*    I sat him

down and examined him.   I found no signs of injury other than shock

and the breathlessness which was caused by being crushed, which was

returning to normal.

I reassured him and his father that there was no need to worry and

askad one of the Cadets to take him to the First Aid Rocm so he could
TOILER                 JOHN   EDMUND                                         6

rest for a short while.

I then went to a man who was sat on the side of the pitch.     I asked

hirr if he was alright.   He said that he was having difficulty

breathing and that he had previously had a heart attack.     I loosened

any tight clothing and checked him over for any injury and found none.

At this time he was breathing quite normally so I walked him over to

the comer and sat him on the stretcher which we had placed there on

taking up our post.

I would describe this man as being white male, about 60 yrs old

with dark hair brushed back with some type of hair dressing, he was

very thin about 5'6 tall, clean shaven and I believe he was wearing

an old suit which was a dark colour.    On checking that he was

breathing comfortably and was in no danger, I turned my attention to

a young man who I would describe as being a white male aged about 20

yrs of heavy build and clean shaven.    He was sat down on the grass

of the pitch near to the stretcher.    He complained of pain in his

right ankle so I examined this and saw swelling around the ankle and

I formed the opinion that it was fractured.

At this, I directed my son,        . to fetch a wheelchair from the

First Aid Rocm and transfer him there for further treatment.        It was

at this time that I realised there were about 30 people on the pitch

behind me.    Most of them were standing and appeared winded and in

shcck.   I began to go around them to check on their condition,

offering re-assurance and drinks of water from my water bottle until

it ran out.    It was at this stage that I realised that we would

require further assistance and from what I had seen there we could

have a lot of crushing injuries.

I radioed the First Aid Roan and ambulance.    I said, "Stand by, we

have suspected crush injuries and we need assistance."     I believe I
TOLER                JOHN    EDMUND


got a response, but am not sure.

I then gave a general assistance call to inform the other posts that

we required their assistance.

The people I gave water to and examined at this time I can only

describe as being young as there was such a large number.

During the time I was treating people, I was aware that the football

geara had started from the roar of the crowd, but did not see any

foctball being played.   By the time I made the radio call, I would

estimate it was about 3.05 pm (1505) and I realised that the game had

stepped because I could now see large numbers of football fans on the

pitch.

I could now see fans being placed on the pitch by Police Officers,

mary of which were lying down.     I went amongst them checking for

injuries, that they were conscious, had a pulse and were breathing.

All were showing signs of being winded so I re-assured them and told

them to take deep breaths.    I loosened tight clothing and if I

thought it necessary, I put them into the recovery position.    Almost

all had someone with them, so I told those to keep an eye on the

injured and call me if their condition deteriorated.     I treated about

thirty people in this way and can only describe all as being young.

I can recall no other description of them.    When my bottle of water

had becane empty, I sent         to refill it but did not see him again

until after the disaster.

After treating about thirty fans, I saw the ambulance cane onto the

pitch and went to the area behind the goal.    As soon as it arrived, a

Policeman who was close to me shouted, "Have you got a Brookes Airway

and any wire cutters."   I said, "I'll get the Brookes airway, but we

dor't carry any cutters."

I ran to the ambulance and took the airway from there to the
TOILER                  JOHN   EDMOND                                         8


officer.     I can't describe this officer and I did not see what he was

doing because of the amount of people milling around, but assumed

frcm another carment. "We're losing this one," that he was giving

mouth to mouth resuscitation.

It was at this time I realised that there was something very

seriously wrong.

Alnrost immediately after this, I saw a young man I would describe as

                     tfhite male,

          I think he was clean shaven, wearing I believe a jumper and

jeans, who was lay on his back in the goal mouth.       I could see he was

unconscious, his eyes were closed and his face was white/grey in

colour.     I knelt down beside him and check for pulse and breathing

but found none.     I then checked that his airway was clear and began

mouth to mouth resuscitation.       There was a Police Officer near to me

and he began cardiac massage.       I followed his counting.   We continued

this for about 5 minutes but were getting no response.         The Police

Officer then said, "We're getting nowhere, let's put him on a

stretcher." We put him onto an old fashioned canvas stretcher, which

was close by and a different Police Officer and myself carried him to

the area of the First Aid Roan, where we found a South Yorkshire

Ambulance which was being loaded.       We put our stretcher down next to

the ambulance and told the staff there that we had another casualty

for them.    I had, at this time, formed the opinion that this man was

dead and I could do nothing further for him.

I returned to the pitch and found a lot more fans on the pitch, again

many were lay down with soneone with them.       Again, I went amongst

them and checked for injuries, loosened clothing and gave

re-assurance.     I treated about 30 more fans in this way, none of which

shewed any signs of injury other than breathlessness and shock.
TOILER                 JOHN   EDMUND                                         9


Whilst treating fans, I was called by a Liverpool fan who stated that

he knew first aid and asked me for help.    He took me to past the half

way line toward the Spion Kop where there was another Liverpool fan

lay on his back.     I would describe him as being a white male, in his

lata teens and of very slight build.     I think he had fair hair.       I

could see he was unconscious and had no colour to his face it was

very white.     I checked for a pulse but could find none, whilst the

supporter checked for breathing.

We then began to give him mouth to mouth and cardiac massage.        I was

doing the cardiac massage whilst he did mouth to mouth.    We did about

five minutes and the supporter asked if we could change over.        I

agreed and I began to give him mouth to mouth.    At the first breath,

fluid trickled out of his mouth, which smelt of alcohol, when I gave

hiir the second breath, I could taste that it was beer.    This

trickling continued throughout the mouth to mouth procedure.      After

abcut a further five minutes, a woman who I would describe as white,

abcut 28-30 yrs old with long dark hair came to us and stated she

was a Doctor.    She then took over the cardiac massage.   We then

carried on for about five minutes after which time she said, "There's

nothing more we can do for him, we'll have to move along."

At this time, I saw that there was an ambulance alongside us, so I

left the casualty to be loaded into the ambulance.

I then went back to the Leppings Lane end of the pitch, where I again

treated fans who were in shock by loosening clothing and giving

re-assurance.

At about 3.50 pm (1550) my attention was drawn by a Police Officer who

I can't describe to a man who I would describe as a white male, about

50 years old, brown hair, going bald, about 5'8 tall.      I could see

that he had a cut about an inch long to the back of his head, this
TOILER                  JOHN    EDMOND                                         10


was bleeding.

I examined it and decided that he required treatment in the First Aid

Rocm so began to walk with him towards the First Aid Room, together

with the Police Officer.       As we got to the Spion Kop end of the

grcund, several fans within the crowd still on the terracing began

shcuting abuse at him, but I do not know exactly what was said.          The

man with me tried to turn to answer them back, but I advised him to

keep walking with me.

As we arrived at the First Aid Roan, we were directed to the gymnasium.

As we aproached the gymnasium, I was asked by someone possibly a

Steward to look at a supporter who was sat down against the gymnasium

wall.    I went to him and would describe him as a white male, about

lata teens, about 5'9 tall, with auburn hair.        He stated he felt

winded, so I examined him and could find no injuries.         I loosened

tight clothing and re-assured him.         I stayed with him for a short

while then when I was satisfied he was alright, I left him.

It was at this point     I was offered a drink of coffee, which I

accepted.   I then went back out onto the pitch.        I looked at my watch

for the first time and saw it was 4.05 pm. (1605) I saw that the

Spion Kop was now empty of fans.         I walked back to the Leppings Lane

end, where there were still some people about.        I just checked around

and asked if people were alright and gave re-assurance where I could.

I did not treat any more fans after this.

Once the pitch was clear of people, I began collecting blankets and

property around the pitch and returned it to the first aid roan.           I

waited until everyone was clear of the ground, which was about 6 pm

(1800) at which time     I left in one of our ambulances.

During the incident,     I was not aware of how people were getting onto

the pitch because I was so involved in treating casualties.
        TOILER                  JOHN   EDMUND


        I vvish to add that whilst giving mouth to mouth resuscitation to the

        first unconscious casualty I dealt with, after each breath the

        casualty did vomit.     This was a mixture of food and fluid which

        tasted and smelt of beer.      It was in such quantity that on each

        breath, I had to use a bandage to wipe it away before being able to

        giva the next breath.

        During the whole incident, I could not really comprehend or believe

        what was happening, it was if I was in a dream.

        I have marked by means of an X the position which I started my duty

        on a photocopy map of the Hillsborough ground.

        I would describe myself as a white male, 42 yrs old, 5'10 tall,

       medium build with brown hair going grey, neatly cut around the ears

       with a parting on the left.        I am clean shaven and was wearing a St.

        John's Uniform consisting of a black jacket, trousers, both with St.

        John's insignia and carrying a white shoulder bag.

                                                             J.E. TOWLER SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME                 DATE:    070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

m  :CERS SIGNATURE
Incident    IC2    270390 OP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER S3302

                                                                              Station

Surname               EASON

Forenames             PAUL ANTHONY   JAMES

Age                   32                        Date of birth

Address


Occupation            STATION OFFICER

Telephone

IC                    Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

•s                                              Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses               Use                       Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                 050589                                                     Signed


           PALL ANTHONY JAMES EASON STATES

           1.   I was b o m on                                  I am a Station Officer

           stationed at Longley Ambulance Station, Sheffield 5.

           2.   I have been employed by SYMAS since 2nd October 1978.       (021078)       I

           was a Qualified Ambulanceman at Batemoor Station until August 1982.

           (0C0882)    I then transferred to Middlewood Ambulance Station,

           Sheffield for 14 months.     I was then promoted to the position of

           Leading Ambulanceman at Maltby Ambulance Station where I remained

           until September 1986.     (000986)    I then transferred to Parkway

           Ambulance Station in Sheffield as a Leading Ambulanceman and I was

           promoted to position of Station Officer at Longley in May 1987.

           (0C0587)

           3.   I am qualified to perform the full range of ambulance duties.          I

           do not however have extended training.        My training has included a two
                                                                   PAGE     2
                                                                   S3302

week induction course, the six week residential course at Markfield

Training Centre, Leicestershire and twelve months on the road

experience.     I gained the Millar Award (DHSS Proficiency Award).

4.   Longley Station is just under two miles east of Sheffield

Wednesday Football Ground.       Because of its close proximity to the

football ground the previous Station Officer at Longley was nominated

as Liaison Officer for that stadium.

5.   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club provides two season tickets for

me and a second Liaison Officer, Station Officer Higgins, in the south

stand.     One or the other of us or both of us will attend all the home

league matches.     Our seats are in the south stand above the players

tunnel.     South Yorkshire Police are aware of the seat numbers of our

tickets.     For big matches (e.g. sesni-finals and league games where

large crowds are expected) we take an ambulance to the ground (with

crew) and position it at the point marked by a green rectangle on the

plan attached.     We also have a back up ambulance, with crew, stationed

at Middlewood Ambulance Station in standby.

6.   When attending matches we each take a pocketphone radio.      Before

the start of any game it is our practice to carry out a radio test to

ensure radio communications with the Control Unit at the SYMAS H.Q.,

in lyfoorgate Road, Rotherham.

7.   The match on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) was the F.A. Cup

seiri-final.   We were told that the tickets reserved for us for league

matches would be sold for this particular match and we would have to

make our own arrangements if we wished to attend.      On the Tuesday

before the game I telephoned Inspector S. SEWELL at Hammerton Road

Police Station in Sheffield and I informed him of our decision to

attend the game in any event, as Liaison Officers.      We always liaise

with him before each game to inform him of our intentions.       I told him

where we would meet him and the time in order that he could arrange
                                                                     PAGE      3
                                                                     S3302

access for us.   Although I was not present at last year's semi-final

I understand from Station Officer Higgins that the same problems were

encountered then so far as our tickets were concerned.

8.    After telephoning Mr Sewell, I contacted          \ the secretary of

Mr MacKrell (the secretary of the Football Club), at Hillsborough and

cor firmed our arrangements made with South Yorkshire Police and her

response was "lovely."

9.    I was asked by Assistant Chief Jones to ensure that I, Mr Higgins

and the extra duty crews arranged for the match should each have

pocketphone radios.    We decided between us that we would leave one

vehicle at Middlewood Ambulance Station on standby (one mile to the

west of the ground, outside Middlewood Hospital) and the other vehicle

would be used by Mr Higgins, the crew of that vehicle and me to travel

down to the ground.    The ambulance left at Middlewood was intended to

be backup - the idea being that there should always be one ambulance

on station at Hillsborough.    If that ambulance had to be used then

the backup vehicle would be brought down from Middlewood to replace

the vehicle in use.

10.    We all met at Longley Station at 1350 and shortly after that S.O.

Higgins, and Q.A.           and Q.A.             and I proceeded to the

ground in one ambulance.    We arrived there at 1410.    We met Inspector

Sewall of South Yorkshire Police and parked our ambulance inside the

Per.istone Road entrance in the position marked by a rectangle on the

plan attached.    This was close to the gymnasium which, in accordance

with the SYMAS Disaster Plan for Hillsborough, would be used as a

casualty clearing post in the event of such problem.      We asked

Inspector Sewell how things were going and he said they were O.K.        The

ambulance radio was operating satisfactorily.

11.   At 1445 we proceeded to the point marked on the plan by an X

(between the North Stand and the Spion Kop). We checked the pocket
                                                                   PAGE       4
                                                                   S3302

radios and they were all working.     At the point marked by a X there

were a few St John's representatives and sane police officers.

12.    I clearly remember that the match kicked off at 1459, i.e. one

minute early.     I always look at the stadium clock at the time of kick-

off . At the time of kick-off Q.A.             Q.A.               S.O.

Higgins and I were all standing together at the point marked by a

grean X. 13.    At about 1505 we noticed what we took to be a scuffle

occurring in the middle of the standing session at the Leppings Lanen

end of the ground.     Q.A.              and I walked along the asphalt

track by the side of the pitch (along the side of the North Stand) to

investigate. As we got closer it appeared that there had been seme

overspill of spectators.      When we reached that end of the ground there

wera more people actually moving onto the turf and seme sitting along

the length of the touchline. People were getting agitated.        Someone

then drew our attention to a fan who was injured.      This was in the

area just behind the lefthand goal post at the Leppings Lane end.        We

had proceeded round to the middle of the Leppings Lane end and we

attended to the injured fan, a youth who appeared to have a fractured

leg.    At this stage I thought there was a scuffle going on inside the

enclosure.     More people however started to emerge around us.    I think

that it was about this time that the game was stopped by the referee.

14.    We needed a fracture-pac to put on the youth's leg, and a

stretcher.     I would normally have used a pocketphone to Control who

would then have contacted S.O. Higgins with my request.      I tried the

pocketphone but it did not work.      I moved away from the stand thinking

that might help reception but it did not.     There was no reply from

Control.     I now understand that Control was receiving me but I could

not receive them.

15.    By now people were getting angry and frustrated and they tended

to take out their anger and frustration on those in uniform by hitting
                                                                        PAGE        5
                                                                        S3302

out and aiming kicks. I was struck on the right side of my chest and

I noticed that Q.A.                   and seme of the policemen in the

vicinity had kicks aimed at them by spectators.        I still, at this

stage, thought there had been a fight on the terraces and that

spectators were coining away from the terraces to escape the fight.

16.   When the spectators started getting aggressive I pulled Q.A.

            and me back to our original position.       We walked back.         I

advised S.O. Higgins of what was happening and I told him that my

pocketphone was unserviceable. I said there was a youth with a broken

leg and there had been a disturbance.       Q.A.              |, Q.A.

S.C. Higgins and I then walked back to the Leppings Lane end with

fracture- pac and stretcher, first aid bags and a bag and mask (an

instrument for resuscitation). When we arrived back at the scene the

situation had worsened.     This was two or three minutes from when we

had left it. We were still not aware of precisely what was happening

but it was increasingly obvious there were a lot more angry and a lot

more injured spectators.     Both S.O. Higgins and I were thumped and

subjected to verbal abuse.     Q.A.                and Q.A.             applied

a splint to the youth's leg.

17.   The situation was becoming increasingly ugly.       I took S.O.

Higgins' pocketphone off him to see if it would work but it would not.

I wanted now to bring the other vehicle from Middlewood to Leppings

Lars as a precaution.     Because I could not get through S.O. Higgins

returned to our ambulance to use the ambulance radio.         Again we were

subject of punching and abuse.    While S.O. HIGGINS was away I moved

back to about half way towards the half way line and looking at the

Leppings Lane end I saw that people were being pulled from the

terraces into the seating area of the west stand.       Other fans were

staggering out of the enclosure or over the top of the fence and many

spectators were falling/lying down.        I went down again to the Leppings
                                                                      PAGE     6
                                                                      S3302

Lars end and saw there were people crushed against the fence.         By now

the police had started to arrive in large numbers.

18.   I knew having worked with S.O. Higgins that he would by now have

started setting up a casualty clearing point where casualties could be

brought for assessment and I knew according to our disaster plan that

would be the gymnasium.

19.   A spectator then approached me and asked me to look at a little

boy whom he thought was dead.       He pointed at a group of people

surrounding the body of a small boy on the pitch.       I approached the

grcup and a man who said he was a doctor was working on the boy.         He

said he thought there was a chance for him.       I used the pocketphone

repeatedly but to avail.       I told the doctor I would summon assistance.

I ran back to our ambulance.

20.   Prior to running back to our ambulance I saw that Ambulancemen

           and              were attending to fans laid on the pitch.      I

told them to keep eye contact with me so far as they could since I

wished them to make sure they knew exactly where I was.       Q.A.

                 was on his knees giving mouth to mouth resuscitation on a

patient.    There was a gang of youths around him.     One of those youth

kicked Q.A.                 repeatedly on his side and legs as he gave the

mouth to mouth treatment.       It was at this stage that a policeman told

me he thought that seme fans were dead or dying.      This was now stating

the obvious.

21.   I knew that S.O. Higgins had returned to the ambulance but I did

not have confirmation of what he had done.      My intention in returning

to the ambulance was to declare a Major Incident in accordance with

our disaster plan.      On arrival at our vehicle I contacted Control and

declared a Major Incident.       I said that I was confirming to Control

that there was a Major Incident developing.       I cannot be certain of

the time but my conversation with Control will have been recorded and
                                                                     PAGE     7
                                                                     S3302

tiirad.    I was advised by Superintendent Ray CLARKE of Control to

switch to channel 1.     Previously we had been on channel 2.    Channel 1

is our emergency channel for major incidents to ensure no other

traffic inpedes the traffic on that channel.     This will have to be

checked on the tape but I think I asked for more vehicles and was told

they were on their way already.     I think I asked for them to come to

our Penistone Road end location in accordance with the Major Incident

plan.

22.     S.O. HIGGINS was in the back of the ambulance surrounded by

live casualties.     I told him I intended to return to the Leppings Lane

end and would then radio with an up date.     By then I think, but cannot

be certain, that I had the crews pocketphone.        S.O. HIGGINS told me he

had established a casualty clearing post at the gymnasium.       At this

tiira Leading Ambulanceman Flack arrived.    He had come from Parkway

Ambulance Station.     He asked what was happening.     I informed him about

the child on the pitch and I tried to point out where he was.        The

police were now forming a line across the pitch.       We could not see the

child where we were but, carrying a stretcher, we ran across to where

the child had been.     This was in the area marked adjacent to the words

"Player's Tunnel" on the plan attached.     The child was there.    We

loaded the child on to a stretcher.     L.A. FLACK'S colleague had driven

his ambulance after us and across the pitch.     We placed the child on a

stretcher in the ambulance and the ambulance drove off with L.A. Flack

and the child.

23.     I then spoke to the same doctor once more.    I told him that if he

was a doctor and wished to help he should make his way to the

gyrrnasium and consult S.O. Higgins.    I do not know if he heard me but

do not think he did what I suggested.

24.     I then approached Leppings Lane end and started the process of

trying to re-assess the situation.     There was general chaos and
                                                                  pact :    8
                                                                  S3302

mayhem.     When I arrived at the Leppings Lane end I saw people crushed

against the fence.     Some were being dragged out by police through gate

2.    Seme were climbing over the fencing.    Some were being pulled up

onto the stand from the terracing.     Somehow someone had made a hole in

the wire fence and some people were escaping through it.      I did not

realise at that time that people at the front of the fence must have

been standing on bodies beneath them.

25.     I was on my way back to our ambulance to report and I saw Deputy

Chiaf Hopkins (at the point marked with an U on the plan). We went

back onto the pitch and I gave him an up date on what I had seen and

dor a and warned him to be careful because of the aggression in the

crcwd.     He told me to make sure that the Major Incident Tender vehicle

was on its way in accordance with the disaster plan.      I

returned to the ambulance and radioed that request to Control and was

informed that that vehicle was already on its way.      My request and

tiira of it will have been recorded.    I then went into Penistone Road

and began marshalling ambulances which were by now arriving.

26.     Under our disaster plan ambulances entering Hillsborough are

supposed to arrive at the point marked with a red X on the plan and to

leave by the point marked with a red Y.      We could not however do this

because of parked vehicles.     There were hire vans which the police had

used.     There was also a jail van in the way.   This meant that one

could not proceed by vehicle to exit point Y from point X, within the

ground.     I do not know if the hire vans had arrived before or after

the incident started.

27.     Our ambulances were coming from the south along Penistone Road.

There was enough space to reverse two ambulances side by side through

the entrance X.     There was room for two banks of two and I marshalled

vehicles in this manner.     I held the arriving vehicles in Penistone

Road until I could get them into the ground.
                                                                   PAGE      9
                                                                   S3302

28.   S.O.           :hen arrived with the Major Incident vehicle.    This

vehicle is a mobile control and support unit full of equipment.      I

marshalled him into the sp»ace marked with a Z.

29.   Divisional Superintendent DALE and Assistant Chief Metropolitan

Ambulance Officer JONES then arrived, separately.    Mr DALE asked me to

up date him and I told him what I was doing.    Mr DALE then went to the

gyrrnasium to liaise with Mr HOPKINS (Incident Officer in Charge). I

was still marshalling vehicles and all the time the ambulances were

being loaded and sent on their way.     The next time I noticed Mr DALE

he was at the exit marked with a Y.     He must have been to the

gyrrnasium.   He began marshalling vehicles in through the exit Y.    This

allowed us double the number of vehicles to be loaded with casualties.

30.   Q.A.              arrived with a mini bus ambulance and I arranged

for him to park on the pavement and told him to stay with his vehicle.

The intention was to use the 10 seater mini bus for transporting

walking wounded.    I told Mr JONES of the availability of this vehicle

for walking wounded.

31.   Then Mr JONES asked me to re-locate myself and vehicles still

arriving at the scene to the Herries Road Bus Depot and to treat this

as an ambulance parking point (ceasing use of point red X). The

Herries Road Bus Depot is about 200 yards away.    Vehicles assembled at

the Depot would operate as a standby pool and we kept vehicles there

until they were required.

32.   I managed to locate another pocketphone and assembled a convoy of

ambulances which proceeded to the Bus Depot.    At the Depot I contacted

Control via the pocketphone and told them that I was stood by there.

As vehicles arrived I stood them four abreast in an open area at the

Depot.   I sited sitting case vehicles (i.e. vehicles for walking

wounded) and West Yorkshire Incident Vehicle (with extra equipment in

the back) separately within the area.    I then gathered together L.A.
                                                                       PAGE 10
                                                                       S3302

FLACK,           J         and         and told them that L.A. FLACK was

staying with me as a relay and advised the others to make sure the

crews stayed together as to attempt to maintain morale.         I asked L.A.

         to complete a list of vehicle fleet numbers and respective

services at the garage.      L.A.         did that.   The vehicles stood by

were 13 SYMAS, 5 West Yorks, 4 Derbyshire, 1 Yorks and 1 Notts, i.e. a

total of 24 vehicles.

33.   I was starting to became concerned about the number of vehicles

arriving at the Bus Depot.       The incident appeared to be coming to a

cor,elusion and same vehicles might have been required for other

emergency duties.      I tried to contact Control by pocketphone to

suggest this but I could not transmit on the pocketphone.         I could

however hear Control calling me.        I do not know why this was the case.

After about a minute I got a poor contact with Control using a

Barnsley ambulance on site.         I was asked by Control to contact them on

a landline.

34.   I took L.A.           with me into the Bus Deport Garage to find a

telephone.     With the help of garage staff I was given access to a

marager's office and I made contact with Control.         I was connected to

Mr PAGE who instructed me to ensure that either Mr JONES or Mr HOPKINS

contacted him by Vodafone as soon as possible.         I had no ccmnunication

with site so I told L.A.             to despatch a runner to the ground with

the message.     I believe the message was carried by Q.A.

35.   We could not maintain an open line so I agreed with Control I

would ring in every ten minutes.        After about ten minutes L.A.

informed me that the vehicles at the garage were to be dispersed and I

was required at the gymnasium.        I proceeded to the gymnasium by

ambulance and once there I was briefed with other Officers by Mr PAGE.

Mr PAffi decided that Assistant Divisional Officer MDRLEY, Station

Officer              and   I should remain at the gymnasium and carry outa
                                                                      PAGE 11
                                                                      S3302

body removal programme if and as necessary.       The gymnasium was now

full of bodies and we were told that we were now talking in terms of

over 90 bodies.

36.   Mr Jones then advised me that all bodies were to be ranoved to

the Medico Legal Centre in Sheffield (the Public Mortuary).

37.   Assistant Divisional Officer MDRLEY, S.O.              and I

discussed the situation.     Mr MDRLEY became Officer in Charge for the

rearoval of the bodies.    S.O.            was made responsible for radio

car munications and I was to ensure that the bodies were loaded and

conveyed with a policeman with each body.       There were three bodies per

ambulance. We did this all night from the first release of bodies at

2130 up to 0528.    By 2130 eleven bodies from Northern General Hospital

and one from Royal Hallamshire Hospital had been transferred to the

gyrrnasium. I believe this was on the Coroner's instructions.

38.   In all we removed and transported 94 bodies and accompanying

police personnel between 2130 and 0528.       Mr Hopkins declared the

incident closed at 0530 and I returned to Longley Station to organise

equipment cleaning.    I left Longley for home at 0640 on Sunday 16th

April.   (160489)

39.   ST JOHN'S

      During the mayhem on the pitch I saw a very young girl (I would

estimate she was about 10 years old) in St John's uniform.       She was

with male casualty who appeared to be dead.         It is clearly a

distressing matter that young volunteers are present at a football

match when they might be exposed to a situation such as that.

40.   RED CROSS

      Sometime between 2230 and mid-night (0000) when we were busy

transporting the bodies a Red Cross vehicle gained access to the area

adjacent to the gymnasium.        In it there were two ladies whom I took to

be nurses, one gentleman and a young child.        I asked the man what he
                                                                            PAGE 12
                                                                            S3302

        thought he was doing and he said he was from the Red Cross.     I said

        this was a mortuary and not a proper place for a child and I told him

        to move on.     He moved and parked his vehicle behind the gymnasium.    I

        do not know if the child was then left in the vehicle or not.

        41.     PRESS

                There are some terraced houses along Penistone Road whose gardens

        back on to the car park adjacent to the gymnasium.     A press man took

        photographs with the aid of flash as we loaded bodies into the

        ambulances.     I arranged for a police officer to deal with him.   We re­

        located the Major Incident tender vehicle across the line of vision

         from the gardens to the ambulances.




                                                         P ANTHONY EASON SIQ'IED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          1IME:               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPOFT




                                                                                      3540
Incident    102   270390 OP8Q64          DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                            STATEMENT NUMBER S997

                                                                                Station

Surname

Forenames

Age                31                        Date of birth

Address


Occupation        AMBO OFFICER LONGLEY

Telephone

IC                Height                     Build

Hair colour

Hair type

ils                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                        Accent

Number of Pages

Dated             060589                                                          Signed


                             states:-

           1.           I was b o m on

           2.           I joined SYMAS in May 1982 (000082), and I am a qualified

                        ambulance man based at Longley.     I attended an initial two

                     week training course at Fairfield in Rotherham, and

                        thereafter attended a six week residential training course

                        at Markfield just outside Leicester.     After one year of

                        service, which is really a probationary period, I obtained

                        the Miller qualification.     I followed the six week

                        residential course with a further two week driving course

                     at Markfield in September 1982 (000982).        Since

                     qualification, I have attended a post-proficiency course.

                        I have no paramedic training.

                        I was on duty on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489).        My
                                                               PAGE
                                                               S997

     shift started at 1000 hours (1000) and I was attendant for

     the day.   Ambulanceman             was the driver and our

     vehicle had call sign Sierra 405.     I drove to Longley

     Station direct from home and arrived at approximately

     0950 hours (0950).   I recollect that the first part of my

     shift was fairly routine.

4.   At approximately 1300 hours (1300) I recall that Control

     informed us to return to Longley.     We were at the Northern

     General Hospital at this time and arrived back at Longley

     some time around 1310 hours (1310).     When we arrived

     Station Officer Paul EASON was already present, whilst

     Station Officer HIGGINS arrived some time shortly

     afterwards.

5.   Mr              and I were aware that we were required for

     Semi-final duty at Hillsborough.    If there had been no

     Semi-final I would not have worked on Saturday 15th April.

     (150489)   Station Officer EASON had asked me a few days

     before the Semi-final to ascertain whether I would be

     willing to attend the match on duty, and I was more than

     willing to attend.

6.   Prior to leaving Longley, our ambulance vehicle was fully

     checked, and in particular we made sure that it was

     equipped for energency duties. Mr                drove the

     vehicle, I sat in the attendant's seat and Station

     Officers EASON and HIGGINS were sat in the rear.    We left

     Longley just before 1400 hours (1400), and I recall Station

     Officer EASON radioing Control as we were setting off to

     Hillsborough.

7.   Our route to Hillsborough took us past Herries Road Bus

     Depot, onto Leppings Lane, round by Parkside Road and along



                                                                      3542
                                                               PAGE
                                                               S997

     Penistone Road.    We parked in the first corrugated entrance

     gate leading to the gym, which is marked A on the

     attached plan.    The vehicle was parked over near some

     fencing.     I recollect Leppings Lane was crowded with

     supporters, and Mr               had to drive very slowly

     through the crowds in order to gain access to the ground.

     I would say that we arrived at the ground at approximately

     1410 hours (1410).

8.   As far as I am aware, we were the only SYMAS ambulance

     inside the ground, although a St John's Ambulance vehicle

     may have been parked in the ground near to the

     police control unit.

9.   All four crew members left the ambulance after parking, and

     we all put on our fluorescent yellow jackets,    Mr

                    and I were given a short briefing by Station

     Officer EASON, namely that we were at the ground for major

     incidents and that trivial injuries such as cut fingers,

     were to be left to be dealt with by the St John's Ambulance

     Brigade.     Whilst stood in the area around our parked

     vehicle, I recall seing a number of fans being taken away

     by police officers, and quite clearly a number had been

     drinking.     Our emergency equipment was left in the

     ambulance, and at around 1445 (1445) hours Station Officers

     EASON and HIGGINS, Mr                and I all walked down

     between the North Stand and the Spion Kop and stood at a

     point adjacent to some fencing at the end of the North

     Stand.     We had a full view across the pitch and the West

     Stand.     This was my first time on duty at Hillsborough this

     football season and I did notice a wheelchair ramp adjacent

     to the North Stand.     Although we ranained at this point



                                                                      3543
                                                             PAGE
                                                             S997

      until the start of the football match, I recollect seeing

      the players come onto the pitch, at which point in time

      there was nothing untoward happening in the West Stand.

10.   Following the kick off, I first noticed some supporters

      trying to climb over the fence behind the goal at the West

      Stand end of the ground.    Station Officer EASON said he

      would go down to that end of the ground to check out the

      situation, and both he and Mr              proceeded to walk

      down alongside the North Stand.    Both Station Officer

      HIGGINS and I remained at our location next to the North

      Stand initially, although Mr HIGGINS then went back towards

      the ambulance, presumably to inform Control of the

      situation.   I continued to monitor the situation at

      the West Stand end from my position, and noticed that the

      number of fans spilling over the fence onto the pitch were

      greatly increasing.   At this point in time, I was not able to

      see whether the gates to the fencing behind the goal had been

      opened.   However, from my position I did see one supporter

      come onto the pitch and collapse inside the goalmouth.

11.   I could also see a couple of fans run over to one of the

      Liverpool players, presumably to inform him that there was a

      problem within the crowd.   Some more fans came onto the

      pitch and began to wave their arms.    I focussed my eyes on

      the fans coming onto the pitch, and also continued to look

      out for Station Officer EASON and Mr              . Mr HIGGINS

      returned to my location very quickly, and at this time the

      players were still on the pitch.

12.   Within moments ambulanceman              hurriedly came back

      to my location and said that there were people injured

      within the West Stand, and a couple had possible fractured



                                                                       3544
                                                             PAGE
                                                             S997

      legs. Mr             I[said that the first aid bags were

      required, together with splints and a stretcher cot.

      Mr              and I went to the ambulance to pick up this

      equipment, and I instinctively put a bag and mask onto the

      cot.   We wheeled the cot down alongside the North Stand as

      quickly as possible, at which time the players were nearing

      the players tunnel to make their way off the pitch.

13.   Approximately two thirds of the way down alongside the

      pitch, we began to pass supporters who were on the pitch.

      They were clearly distressed and shocked.    Mr

      and I took the cot down to a casualty near one of the goal

      posts, who had a suspected fractured leg.     I did not come

      across Station Officer EASON at this point in time.

      Mr              and I managed to get the casualty in a

      fairly comfortable position, and Mr            [ Iwas able

      to put a splint on the casualty's leg.    At that very same

      moment I was requested by a supporter to look at another

      casualty.   As I made my way over to this casualty I can

      specifically recall large numbers of hysterical

      supporters and many crying for help.     As I reached this

      second casualty I found him to be on his feet but holding

      his ribs.   He was genuinely shocked and winded.    I made a

      quick examination of him, made sure he was not in danger

      and told his friend to take him up the field and sit him

      down for relaxation purposes.   I made this decision

      because there were clearly more serious injuries to attend

      to.

14.   I began making my way back to the goalpost area, although

      many supporters continually asked me to look at injured

      friends and relatives.   At this stage I did not realise



                                                                     3545
                                                              PAGE    6
                                                              S997

      that a large number of supporters were crushed against

      the fence behind the West Stand goal.   However, as I

      made my way over to the fence directly behind the goal,

      I saw for the first time a number of supporters crushed

      against the fence.   Some were in a vertical position and

      many were clearly dead. I did notice one supporter

      crushed against the fence and who was in great pain.

      I advised this supporter to keep as calm as possible.

15.   At this stage, a number of police officers were bringing

      out bodies from the gates, which are marked B on the

      attached plan.   Whilst some of these people were still

      alive, a large number were clearly dead.    I

      immediately went back to the cot, collected the bag

      and mask and went back to the area where police were

      bringing out casualties from the gates.    As the police

      were laying down bodies on the pitch, I began to try and

      resuscitate the casualties.    Unfortunately, none of the

      casualties I treated had any pulse, and despite every

      effort to resuscitate them, there was no hope for these

      people.

16.   At some stage I found Station Officer EASON at that end of

      the pitch, and informed him that there were a number of dead

      bodies.    Mr EASON was actually trying to use his radio

      handset, but was obviously having problems contacting

      control.    I then proceeded back into the melee of crowds on

      the pitch in an effort to resuscitate even more people using

      my bag and mask, whilst police officers gave cardiac

      massage.

17.   I recall seeing one large man being brought out through the

      gates, and although still breathing, was clearly breathing



                                                                          3546
                                                             PAGE      7
                                                             S997

      in a bad way.    I told the police officers who were carrying

      this man to lay him on his side, and with the help of the

      police I helped to put this man onto an advertising hoarding

      and then a group of supporters carried him down the pitch

      towards the gymnasium area.

18.   I lost all track of time whilst I was on the pitch, although

      within a fairly short time I noticed a number of other

      ambulance men on the field attending to casualties.     I also

      recall at some stage seeing a St John's ambulance vehicle

      and a SYMAS vehicle driving down alongside the North Stand

      to collect casualties.

19.   At a later stage, I came across Station Officer EASON again,

      who was still having problems with his radio handset.      I

      then ran back to our ambulance vehicle, and at this time I

      noticed that a lot of supporters were clearly angry and were

      hurling abuse at the police.     The police had actually formed

      a cordon across the pitch, obviously to prevent supporters

      going up to the Nottingham Forest end.     I was allowed

      through the cordon by the police and when I got back to the

      ambulance I collected a radio.    On my way back to Mr EASON,

      I came across Alan HOPKINS who was making his way back

      to Mr EASON.    We found Mr EASON together and Mr EASON began

      to advise him in detail of the situation.

20.   I proceeded to attend even more casualties, although it is

      very difficult to remember exactly how many casualties I

      treated.   Somehow I worked my way back to the ambulance at

      some stage, and saw Mr EASON who was helping an asthmatic

      patient.   I took this patient off Mr EASON and assisted him

      back to our ambulance.    When we arrived back at the vehicle

      I noticed that there was a casualty already inside the rear



                                                                           3547
                                                                PAGE    8
                                                                S997

      on a stretcher cot, and I recollect seeing a doctor and two

      other people trying to resuscitate this person.     I put the

      asthmatic casualty into the attendant's seat in the cab as

      the second cot in the vehicle was nowhere in sight.

21.   Mr             then returned to the ambulance on his own,

      and I told him to get into the vehicle.     I got into the

      driver's seat and drove the vehicle as quickly as possible

      up to the Northern General Hospital.     I made a point of

      continually talking to the casualty sat in the attendant's

      seat to mate sure that he was conscious, even though he had

      difficulty in breathing.    We actually had a police

      motorcyclist escort up to the Northern General and within a

      matter of minutes had arrived at casualty department.

      As soon as I brought the vehicle to a halt, the rear doors

      were opened and medical teams were waiting to receive

      both casualties.     The stretcher patient, who was the

      more seriously injured, was immediately taken into the

      hospital   with Mr               in assistance.   I asked for a

      nurse to come over and assist with the asthmatic patient sat

      in the attendant's seat, and with the help of this nurse

      the asthmatic was helped into the casualty department.

      When assisting with this casualty, I came across Mr WARDROPE,

      an Accident and Emergency Consultant, and Mr WARDROPE told

      me to take the asthmatic patient into a cubicle where

      hospital staff took over.

22.   I went back to the ambulance and met up with Mr

      We loaded two cots back into the rear of the vehicle and I

      drove directly back to Hillsborough.    We did not bother

      radioing Control because we knew that we were required at

      the ground.   I drove back down Penistone Road and into the


                                                                            3548
                                                          PAGE   9
                                                          S997

ground through the entrance marked A on the attached plan.

I actually reversed into the ground under the guidance of

Mr                I also recollect that Alan HOPKINS was

also directing vehicles into the ground at this time.        I

parked the vehicle just inside the entrance to the ground,

and immediately proceeded to the gymnasium with a cot in

order to collect another casualty.     When I arrived at the

gym, I quickly collected a casualty, and received a quick

assessment of his injuries by a doctor in attendance.

This particular casualty had chest injuries, a possible

broken arm, and he was also on a drip.     He was helped onto

the stretcher cot and I wheeled the cot back to the

ambulance.   When I arrived back, Mr               was

already in the rear of the vehicle with another casualty.

I received some assistance to put the second cot and

patient into the ambulance.   Mr               [remained in

the rear of the vehicle whilst I got back into the

driver's seat.   As I was driving off I noticed

David JONES in the immediate vicinity, and asked him

which hospital I should take the casualties to.     At this

time, some ambulances were being directed to the Royal

Hallamshire and I was directed to this hospital.     I had a

fairly clear road to the Royal Hallamshire, and the journey

took approximately 10 minutes from Hillsborough.     We were

directed to the clinic entrance where the not so seriously

injured were being dealt with, whilst cardiac arrest

patients were taken into the casualty department.        I was

assisted by another ambulanceman to off load one patient

from the ambulance and Mr                continued to attend

the other casualty in the rear.    By this time the casualty



                                                                     3549
                                                                 PAGE   10
                                                                 S997

      I was taking into the hospital had been diagnosed as having

      a fractured arm and chest injuries, but he was conscious.

      Once I had informed a nurse of the casualtie's injuries,

      medical staff took over.

23.   I proceeded back to my ambulance vehicle and assisted

      Mr                 to bring the other casualty into the

      hospital.    Mr              and I loaded the casualty onto

      a hospital trolley, wheeled him into the hospital, where

      medical staff took over.

24.   Mr                and I then loaded the two cots back onto the

      ambulance, and as we were loading the second cot we came

      across      _____________ who told us to park up on

      Netherthorpe Road and await further instructions.     We

      contacted Control, informed them that we were going down to

      Netherthorpe Road on standby as requested.     Netherthorpe

      Road is only approximately half a mile away from the Royal

      Hallamshire.      We were the first ambulance to park up on

      Netherthorpe Road, followed by a number of other vehicles

      very shortly afterwards.     We then received a call from

      Control and were advised to relocate at Herries Road Bus

      Depot, again on standby.     When we arrived at the Bus Depot

      there were a number of other ambulance vehicles present.

      At this point, we were able to have a short break and

      relax for a few minutes.      Station Officer EASON then

      informed all crews at the Depot that all injured

      casualties had been removed frcm the football ground

      and there only remained fatalities in the gymnasium.

      Mr EASON directed the first three ambulances to the

      gymnasium inside the ground, and ours was one of these

      vehicles.    I would say that the time was approximately



                                                                             3550
                                                                               PAGE     11
                                                                               S997

                    1740 hours (1740).     I assumed that we were being directed

                    down to the ground in order to remove bodies.      We drove

                    into the ground at a point marked C on the attached plan

                    and pulled up just adjacent to the gymnasium.      At this

                    stage one or two ambulancemen were caning round each

                    vehicle requesting body bags and were taking the bags

                    into the gymnasium.

         26.        Mr   _________and I remained at this point for sane time

                    before David JONES briefed all ambulance crews within our

                    vicinity.     Mr JONES enquired as to which crews were on

                    which particular duties, and as our shift was 1000 (1000)

                    to 1800 hours (1800).    Mr JONES advised that we were stood

                    down from duty, and were told to return to base.       I

                    drove back to Longley with Mr               ,   arriving back

                    just after 1830 hours (1800).     The vehicle was refuelled, we

                    made a note of missing equipment and then signed off at

                    1840 hours (1840).


                                                                               SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:                DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPOPT




                                                                                             3551
Incident    102   270390 OP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER    S996

                                                                             Station

f tlame

Forenames

Age                                          Date of birth

Address


Occupation        AMBULANCE OFFICER LONGLEY

Telephone

IC                Height                     Build

Hair colour

Hair type

m
Facial hair
                                             Complexion



Glasses           Use                        Accent

Number of Pages

Dated             060589                                                       Signed


                     I was b o m on 10.2.60. (10021960) I am a qualified

                     ambulance man.This involves a two week induction course

                     followed by six weeks basic training and two weeks driving

                    course. You then spend 12 months on the road and go

                    back for assessment. If you pass you are then a qualified

                    ambulance man. I have been in the service for about 6 and a

                    half years. After every five years you have to go back to

                    the regional training school at Leicester.      There is a two

                    week residential course and a local course for one week.             You

                    have to go every five years to maintain your qualification.

                    Before the ambulance service I was

                                  I was ar                with no medical training.

                    I also worked with the Red Cross before joining SYMAS.           I

                    learned basic first aid with the Red Cross.

                                                                                               3552
On the Thursday and Friday I was on a shift of 1400 to 2200.

On Saturday I was supposed to be off for the day.        I was

asked by Station Officer EASON if I would cover the football

match and I agreed.     I had never done a football shift

before.     It was explained that this was a big match and

that we wanted to put cover on for it.     EASON asked me on

Friday.     We were told to meet at the station for 1345 on the

Saturday.     I arrived a bit earlier so that I could get

something to eat.     I saw EASON and qualified ambulance man

             I was the driver down to the ground.

EASON, Station Officer HIGGINS and myself all went down in

one ambulance.

HIGGINS directed the way.     We received no direct briefing as

to what to expect.     I was not aware of any 'Hillsborough

plan.' I did know about the major incident plan which

applies to any major incident and deals with the

relationship between the police and other authorities.           I

knew that the first thing for a crew to do was to set up

first aid posts and sort out where vehicles were coming

from.     We were to assess the situation with regard to

numbers and types of injuries and inform control what

vehicles were required.     We should advise on the best

access routes and set up a casualty clearing point.       We

should then liaise with senior fire officers and police

officers until someone of a higher rank arrived to take

charge.     The first vehicle should always stay and that is

initially regarded as the command vehicle.

We set off to the ground at about 1400.     It took 10 to 15

minutes to get there.     Herries Road was busy with fans in

cars.     We parked in the north stand Spion Kop area.     Station
                                                          PAGE      3
                                                          S996

Officer HIGGINS told me to park there on the way down.         We

did not try to get the vehicle any further towards the pitch

than that.     It was about 1410 to 1415 when we arrived.      We

then chatted while the station officers were checking their

portable hand sets to see if they worked.      Apparently there

was static on them.     At 1430 we all walked to the front of

the pitch and stood in the comer next to the police, St.

John's Ambulance men and the press.       The view was good.    The

Spion Kop was already full and the north stand was already

full.   The west stand was half to three quarfters full and

the south stand about half full.     The west stand was filling

in the middle but not towards the sides.      We stood and

chatted and just observed the crowd.       I returned to the

vehicle every five to ten minutes to check that it was OK.

Nothing happened prior to kick off and kick off took place

at 1459.

At about 1506 I saw people spilling on the pitch behind the

Liverpool goal out of the west stand.      All four of us were

standing at the time.      I said to EASON that there was

something going on up     at the top end and we could already

see some people lying     on the pitch.   We decided to go and

investigate.    I was thinking it was the usual idiots

invading the pitch.     EASON and I went up the pitch side line

in front of the north stand and a few police officers

followed us.    The game was still continuing.     I think it was

about 1507.    We saw a lot more people spilling on to the

pitch as we walked up and when we got to the comer of the

north stand you could see lots of people on the floor

rolling about and climbing over the fence.       The police were

initially trying to stop them going on to the pitch.        There


                                                                        3554
                                                        PAGE
                                                        S996

were now probably 50 to 70 people on the pitch.     We went

further round and got to just before the goal posts when a

fan lashed out and hit EASON and then hit me and ran off.

We then moved to the 18 yard box to avoid being hit again.

EASON used his portable radio to call control to ask control

to call HIGGINS and          who were back at the ambulance

and tell them to bring the basic equipment down and a

stretcher and fracture straps as it looked like a few people

had broken legs and other injuries.     At this stage I still

did not think that we were dealing with fatalities.      I

looked at the west stand and could see police standing up to

the fence.   Fans were running out on the pitch and the

Forest fans were chanting.   People were still climbing over

the top of the fence and the police and fans were now

helping to drag people over the fence.

I do not know whether EASON got through with his message but

the next thing was that             came up to where we were

standing and he was not carrying anything.     EASON then told

         and myself to go back and fetch stretchers and frac

packs.   This was now about 1510.    By this stage the match

had stopped and the players were going into the tunnel.        We

jogged back to the ambulance and got one stretcher, one frac

pack, a bag mask resuscitator, portable oxygen and first aid

bags containing, dressings, airways and general first aid

equipment.   Station officer HIGGINS said he would get the

other stretcher ready and the frac packs and bring them down.

We did not radio control and I do not know if Higgins or

Eason called.   We all went back up the pitch this time

diagonally across it.   It was now chaos in the west stand.

People were all over the pitch and climbing over the


                                                                    3555
                                                          PAGE       5
                                                          S996

fencing.   I still did not know why they were trying to get

out though it did cross my mind that there might have been a

surge in the crowd.     It was now about 1512.     I could see

people lying on the pitch and I did not think in terms of

fatalities.

I went up to the goal mouth where EASON was waiting for us.

A person was on the floor against the post.        EASON said he

had suspected broken leg.     I treated him with the frac pack

which took about one minute.     I then looked up and saw

people giving mouth to mouth resuscitation on the floor.

The people were mainly police and St. John's ambulance.          I

got up and went to my first aid bag to get some airways out.

A policeman came up to me and asked for some airways for

mouth to mouth resuscitation and gave him one.

I set off to see what I could do and put in about six or

seven airways on various people within a very short space of

time.   All these people were being tended by the police or

St. John's ambulance.     It was now about 1515.     I then saw a

young boy on the floor with the policeman so I went over to

help.   I put an airway into the boys mouth and told the

policeman to do a cardiac massage while I did mouth to

mouth resuscitation.     Then a crowd of fans surrounded us and

kicked me a few times.     They were definitely kicks and not

accidently bumping into me.     I then saw fans carrying

advertising boards as stretchers.      They fell over onto us

and we shoved them off and continued to treat the young boy.

There was no response from him.       I went back to my bag to

see if there were anymore airways and found that the

stretcher had gone together with the bag and masks.

Apparently            had taken it.   I left the young boy with


                                                                         3556
                                                                  PAGE        6
                                                                  S996

      the policeman - I believe that the boy was now dead - and

      went to see if there was anyone I could do help.

      By this time I realised there was a major incident

      happening.     I saw EASON and he told me that there were ten

      vehicles on their way.     This was now about 1520.     I

      presumed that EASON must have managed to get through to

      control.     I went back to the ambulance to see if there were

      any more airways.    As I got back to the vehicle I saw that

      the doors were open and two people were in the back working

      on a casualty.            was also there.   Another ambulance

      had now arrived and was parked by the side of ours.         I went

      back into our vehicle and gave mouth to mouth resuscitation.

                  hen went into the drivers seat and was about to set

      off when someone said that there was an asthmaticc in a

      distressed state.     We put him in the front seat and then left

      with the police escort up to the Northern General which is

      the nearest hospital.     This was now about 1530 to 1535.         It

      is about two or three miles away and is straight up Herries

      Road.

10.   We had no problems getting out with the police outside

      directing us and stopping other traffic.        We arrived at the

      hospital about five minutes later and went straight into

      casualty.     They were already expecting us.     There were

      already four or five ambulances there and fans in casualty.

      I took the patient to the plaster roan and gave him to the

      casualty staff and then went back to my vehicle.        I put a

      spare stretcher back on the vehicle in order to get back to

      the ground.    We had a police escort back to the ground.

11.   It took us five minutes to get back to the ground and again

      there was no problem in access.    When we were back in the


                                                                                  3557
                                                                   PAGE
                                                                   S996

      yard by the gym            went into the gym which was the

      casualty clearing point.     He returned later with a trolley

      and a man with chest injuries on it.      We loaded him on to

      the ambulance and then left for the Hal lamshire.      We had

      heard from someone that the Northern General was full.          It

      took about five minutes for us to arrive at the gym, get

      loaded and set off again.     Hallamshire Hospital is about

      five miles away. Again we had a police escort and I think it

      took us about 10 minutes.     We had no problems en route.          We

      were met by someone at casualty and were then directed to

      orthopaedic and unloaded the patients to the casualty staff.

12.                   the Standards and Efficiency Officer told us not

      to go back to the ground but to stand by on Netherthorpe Road

      dual carriageway.     This is about one and a half to two miles

      away.     She did not say why we were to wait there.    We made

      our way there without a police escort and it only took us a

      few minutes.     I then radioed to control and said that we were

      standing by as instructed. They       acknowledged my message.

      Another vehicle parked up behind us.       Control then told us to

      proceed to Herries Road bus depot and stand by there but not

      to go anywhere near the ground.       I do not really know what

      time it was but it may havebeen       around 16.30 (1630).     It

      took us another five to tenminutes to get to Herries bus

      depot.     I backed the vehicle up.   There were already about

      20 vehicles there and EASON was directing things.       He told

      us to stand by.     We kept seeing vehicles coming in and

      out.     About 20 minute later we were told that the first

      three in the line were to     got to the gym.   We were one of

      them.     It took us about five minutes to get to the gym.

      There was easy access.     Mr David JONES was there and


                                                                               3558
                                                                              PAGE     8
                                                                              S996

                     appeared to be in charge.     There were about six

                     vehicles parked around.     We parked and then went to

                     get a drink from the police.    Mr JONES then told us to

                     return to the station.    This was about 1805 to 1810.    We

                     arrived at the station at about 1825pm (1825) and I signed

                     off at about 1840pm (1840).

         13.         My vehicle call number is Sierra 405.    The ambulance carries

                     standard equipment of two trolleys, scoop stretcher, two

                     frac packs, bag and masks, resuscitators, suction unit,

                     oxygen cylinder, pain killing gas and first aid kit,

                     including airways.




                                                                              SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:              DATE:   060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

O N C E R S SIGNATURE:

END OF REPOFT




                                                                                           3559
incident      IC2   270390 OP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                            STATEMENT NUMBER S771

                                                                            Station

      lame           PHILLIPS

Forenames            GLYN

Age                  34                      Date of birth

Address


Occupation           MEDICAL PRACTITIONER

Telephone

IC                  Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

•
Facial hair
                                             Complexion



Glasses             Use                      Accent

Number of Eages

Dated               150589                                          G PHILLIPS Signed


             STATEMENT OF DR. GLYN PHILLIPS WITH REGARD TO EVENTS AT SHEFFIELD

             TO EVENTS AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB, HILLSBOROUGH

             SHEFFIELD, ON SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989.

             I am Dr. Glyn Michael PHILLIPS of

                          a fully qualified medical practitioner having qualified

             frcm Leeds University in June 1980 (000680).    My qualifications are M.

             B. Ch.B M.R.C.G.P. D.R.C.O.G.

             I arrived in Sheffield at about 2.00 pm (1400) on Saturday, 15th

             April 1989 (150489) with my brother and two friends.    We parked about

             half to three-quarters a mile frcm the ground and then walked to the

             Leppings Lane end of the ground.    I noticed that the pubs were open

             with fans relaxing outside with drinks.   The pubs all seemed to have

             been open on the route frcm the motorway to the ground.    I

             specifically remember thinking that this would not have been the case
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S771

in Scotland where I now live and work.

At about 2.10 pm (1410) we arrived at the ground.    Many fans were

locsely congregated and moving freely about.    The turnstiles were

quite quiet with approximately ten to fifteen people in each queue.

My carrier bag was searched by a Policeman.    Once inside the

turnstile it was again easy to move about freely and my young brother

bought a programme.     My carrier bag was searched again by a Policeman

inside the turnstile.     I visited the Gents and then we made our way

to the terracing - the centre section.    Walking through the tunnel to

the terracing was not difficult, there was no pushing or crowding at

that stage.   On reaching the terrace we found that it was already

quite full.   We decided to move to the right (looking at the pitch)

away from the tunnel.

Twc of us reached the point about ten yards (10 yds) frcm the pitch

fence and realised we were separated frcm the other two.    On seeing

them higher up we made our way up to the crowd to join them about

fifteen to twenty yards (15 to 20 yds) away frcm the perimeter fence

and five yards (5 yds) frcm the fence separating the centre and side

sections of the terracing.

Between 2.20 pm (1420) and 3.00 pm (1500) we gradually became more

and more tightly packed.     Much more so than even in a tight crowd on

the Anfield Kop.   It became so tight that occasionally surges of

pushing and pressure did not actually cause any movement of note.

Occasional groans of pain were heard.     I specifically mentioned to my

friend "It's so tight in here that we are not even surging at all,

just oscillating more or less on the spot."

I noticed that despite this increase in pressure in the centre

section, fans on the other side of the fence (ie. in the side section

to our right) were moving about freely and that section did not

appear to be filling at all.
                                                                 PAGE        3
                                                                 S771

I looked up from time to time to the front of the stand above and

behind us - there was a Police Sergeant there observing the

terracing but not really doing much.

A faw policemen on the pitch side of the perimeter fence did not seem

to have noticed (1) how tight we were packed and (2) that the side

section was noticeably more empty.

Fans began to express their discomfort by criticising the ground.       It

brought no response in terms of action from the police.

I vaguely remember a tannoy announcement asking us to move down to

the front - there were ironic jeers frcm the crowd in response to

this.

The game started.     I didn't feel any surge in terms of movement -

just another noticeable increase in the by now abnormal level of body

pressure all round.     People stood on barriers in front and shouted

"Get back, get back."     This was impossible, we were all pinned

stationary by the pressure from front, sides and back.

Policemen at the perimeter fence at last seemed to notice the

problem. The gate was opened.     A policeman tried in vain to pull a

fan out.   I could not see the game which had started never mind what

was happening on the terracing below us.    The policeman looked very

worried and seemed to shout into his radio as he looked to his left

and my right.   I got the impression he was saying "Stop it, stop it,

step it" - I assumed he meant the match.

Of the six minutes of the match (I heard later it was six minutes) I

rerramber less than twenty seconds.    I was so intent and occupied by

our safety that watching the match was impossible.     I tried to keep

an aye on my young brother who was pressed firmly against the side

fence a few yards away.    He seemed okay but I couldn't get near him

anyway.

Fans seemed to spill over the front perimeter fences but they were


                                                                                 3562
                                                                  PAGE
                                                                  S771

walking and running although obviously shaken.

The match stopped and many police arrived at the perimeter fence.

Fars next to the side fence had begun to climb over in small numbers

to reach the side section of terracing.    A very distraught young man

on the other side of the fence (he had previously been in the centre

section) shouted "Get over the fence - they're getting squashed at

the bottom."

One by one fans climbed over. I followed my brother over and by then

I saw the first of the injured or dead being lifted out at the

frcnt.   I immediately headed for the pitch gate.   At the gate there

wera two or three policemen inside the terrace and one or two on the

trackside.     I shouted "I'm a doctor, let me on the pitch."   I was

pushed away as a body was passed through (having been lifted over the

sica fence and carried to the gate in the side section where I by

then was situated). I put my foot on the wall and a policeman called

me as I leapt up.    My head struck the crossbar of the gate with a

heavy blow.    Adrenalin coursing through my body rendered the blow

virtually painless but I felt unsteady for a few seconds.

I irade my way on to the pitch and reached a body near the goal line.

Sarabody was crouched over it.     I asked is he breathing, has he got a

pulse, the answers were no.     I saw he was cyanosed and was

pulseless.     I knelt next to him thumped and thumped his chest hard

thrae times.     I commenced mouth to mouth resuscitation and instructed

the man next to me to give cardiac massage in the ratio 5-1.     I made

a conscious decision "This man was one of the first out, therefore,

giva him a decent chance at cardiopulmonary resuscitation."

As we continued to give CPR I shouted to nearby policemen to find

out if we could get a Defibrillator and some oxygen.    We continued

with CPR and I discovered my assistant was a male nurse.

We were by now surrounded by milling figures in black - policemen and


                                                                           3563
                                                                    PAGE
                                                                    S771

policewomen.    A distraught teenage fan came over and put his face up

to that of the body and yelled words like "Gome on mate, don't die,

you can't die, you're a Liverpool fan."     I was told that there was no

Defibrillator but I was given an oxygen cylinder and informed that it

was switched on.     I pulled the flimsy ventimask off the tube and put

the open tube in ray own mouth to enrich the oxygen in the air I was

giving to the patient.

We continued with CPR.     I soon realised nothing was coming out of the

tuts.    The valve was turned on and I looked at the gauge which

shewed an empty tank.     I discarded the tube.

Pecple kept coming up and shouting advice and I kept informing than

that I was a doctor and knew what I was doing.

A gentleman with a blazer and tie indicated he was a doctor and gave

encouragement.

Ten minutes passed.     The patient seemed to have lost some of his

cyanosis but he was still pulseless.     At ten minutes I said "Five

mora." By now there was a cacophony of sound around me and frcm the

terracing.     However, as I was surrounded by people mainly standing,

I could not see anything that was happening at the front of the

centre section.    A distraught young fan was making it difficult for

me to concentrate and I asked a policeman to "Get rid of him." He

gently escorted the fan away.

At about fifteen minutes I was about to say to a policeman to cover

the body when his heart sprang to life and he developed a good

pulse.   He was still not breathing so I continued to ventilate him.

A policeman asked if I needed a stretcher and I said yes.     One

arrived and we lifted the man on to it.    We lifted and started

towards the ambulance which had arrived behind the goal.

As I stood up I saw for the first time some suggestion of the scale

of the casualties.    To get to the ambulance we had to step over about


                                                                           3564
ten bodies.   They mostly looked like young men, some had their heads

covered with Police raincoats.

We had to stop every few paces so I could give the patient a breath

into his lungs.     As we lifted him into the ambulance I saw the bodies

of two young men already in there.     I continued to ventilate him with

mouth to mouth resuscitation and he began to make his own breathing

efforts.

It is almost impossible to express my thoughts at that time.    No

words will do but it felt like a chaotic nightmare overloading all my

senses.

I told the ambulance man and a police sergeant that the man was

seriously ill and needed a hospital "Now." The ambulance man said

he couldn't get out.    This added to the frustration - not helped

by my thoughts that in view of the length of time he was pulseless,

it would probably be kinder if he died.     I am sure he must have been

sevarly brain damaged by that time.

I left him lying on his side breathing on his own and asked a

policeman to try to get him to hospital as soon as possible.     I said

I would go to see if I could help somebody else.     It seemed at that

tirra that the perimeter fence was obscured by policemen and some fans

trying to get people out of the terrace.

I searched for somebody needing help.     I stopped a group of fans

lifting a body on a makeshift stretcher, some of them seemed to be

trying to do CPR.     I saw that it was a boy aged about 14. I said to

them that if they wanted to give him a chance, they should stop and

do the resuscitation properly.

They put him downand I started mouth to mouth - filling his lungs

with air.   A girl next to me did the heart massage.                  ~|

                     and he was obviously dead so we stopped within

about 60 seconds.
                                                                  PAGE       7
                                                                  S771

I looked desperately for somebody not dead but seriously ill who needed

help.   I could not find anybody in that category in the goal area.

They were all either dead or okay with nothing in between.      I looked

up and saw three or four groups of people at the other end of the

pitch giving CPR.   I ran to the other end.

The first body I came to was a man about 25 years old.     A dark haired

young woman in a Celtic football shirt was trying to give him CPR.       I

asked "Has he a pulse," she said "I don't think so."      I started

giving him mouth to mouth as she did the cardiac massage.     After a

short while we swapped over.     Opposite me his friend (or brother?)

was beside himself with overwhelming grief and distress.     He was

shouting words like "Come on, you're not dead" and looking at me and

shouting "Keep going, don't stop, don't stop.”

I said to the girl quietly "He's gone.” She replied calmly but

obviously very sadly "I know."     His friend (or brother) was so much

in despair.   Another young doctor took ray place doing heart massage.

It was hopeless.

I want to the other two or three bodies.      People were doing very good

cardiopulmonary resuscitation but it was obviously too late for than.

I said to a photographer that I hoped that the papers were going to

"Hammer this ground for what happened today." I told them ray name and

about the absence of equipment.    They took a photograph despite me

telling them not to.

I went to the side of the pitch (opposite the players tunnel) and saw

quite a few people propped up against the hoarding with somebody

helping them all.   I shouted that I was a doctor and did anybody need

any help.   All I heard in reply was that they were all okay.    The

only people I had seen carried up the field were dead so I headed

back to the Leppings Lane end.     I passed through the line of policemen

across the centre (what were they doing, I thought - not much!).


                                                                                 3566
                                                                     PAGE    8
                                                                     S771

As I went through I asked four or five of them if they could tell me

where there might be injured people I could help.      The general reply

was that they couldn't and that they were sorry.

I am fairly sure that I went back into the goal area at the Leppings

Lara end.     I have to admit that by now I was angry, confused slightly

and feeling quite helpless.     I did definitely ask a policewoman "I am

a doctor, can you tell me where the injured may have been taken so I

might help?"     No she could not.

There did not seem to be much I could do at that end.        Some people

lying down with people helping said they were okay.       I could not find

anybody seriously ill needing help.     Just dead or seemingly minor

injuries and shaken people.

I hsaded towards the other end again.     Quite a few people asked me

how I was - I remembered my head and my face was now covered in

blcod.     I kept saying "I'm okay" but I really didn't feel okay.

I asked the police again where I should go.       They did not know.

By now the combination of having been in the crush, trying to do

resuscitation on hopeless cases, trying to find others to help, the

absolute cacophony and confusion, the lack of information frcm the

police and the bang on my head became too much.       I felt very angry

at the way we had been treated.      I knew who was to blame - the

Police.     I felt compelled to tell some senior Liverpool football

club officials not to let them blame the fans for this.

I vant up the players' tunnel saying "I'm a doctor.       I need to see

sovabody in authority frcm LFC." These words opened the police

lire.     Outside the changing rooms it was very confused.    Lots of men

in suits, blazers and ties.

I saw Jimny HILL (BBC) and forced him to listen to my account of what

happened.    He looked pale and very concerned.    Then a man said "Will

you come and say that on the air?"     I said "Why?" but agreed to.     He


                                                                                 3567
                                                                    PAGE
                                                                    S771

tock me a few yards to the laundry.     He put headphones on and wrote

dovcn ray name.   He shouted into a microphone "Tell Peter to hand over

to me now!"

Next he was talking and introducing me, and then shoved the big

microphone up to ray face.    I felt awful, angry and upset but I just

started talking.     The last words I said were "It's an absolute

disgrace." I meant the way we were allowed to get so tightly packed

and on the pitch the total lack or organisation and equipment after

disaster struck.     I said on the air that I had seen eight to ten

dead.     In retrospect I had probably seen about fifteen so I thought

prcbably twenty to thirty were dead overall.     The radio man said

thank you in a very sombre voice.     I said "Was that going out live."

He said thank you again and shook ray hand.

I want out and saw Kenny DALGLISH.     I told him what had happened and

that he must not let the fans get the blame.     I told him that the

ground (Hillsborough) was "Shit."     He told me that LFC were not happy

about the ground being used but these things were out of their

control.    He was very shaken.

A linesman or the referee showed me into their room to get cleaned

up.     I did this and inspected the split in ray scalp - it needed two

or three stitches but that could wait I thought.     I remember

apologising for getting blood on a towel - how ridiculous!

I want back on the pitch.     All the bodies had gone.   I climbed back

on the terrace up to ray brother and friends.    I saw policemen in the

now almost empty centre section collecting belongings.      I told the

lads what had happened on the pitch.     All of a sudden for the first

tirra I felt a searing pain in ray head and said "God, ray head hurts."

At no time at Hillsborough did I realise people had died in the

tur,nel. At no time did I see anything to substantiate claims that

policemen were assaulted or bodies were looted.     I saw brave young
                                                                              PAGE      10
                                                                              S771

         far.s trying to save lives hopelessly.        I saw brave lads organise

         themselves to make makeshift stretchers to carry the dead.         I saw

         scut a   police desperately trying to save lives.     I also saw some police

         standing idly - not knowing what was happening or making any attempt

         to find out.

         I did not see at any time any fan (whether before or after the brief

         gaira) misbehave deliberately in any way.

        Aftar the game had been abandoned we left the ground via the centre

         section on the tunnel.         Remembering the fan we had resuscitated I

         gave a policeman my name and address.        I felt it very unlikely that

         he would have survived and reconciled myself by the fact that if he

        had he would have been brain damaged.




                                                                G M PHILLIPS SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           FLACE:

           TIME:                DATE:      080589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                             3569
                                                                            STATION

                ANDREW   JOLYON
                BYRNE

ADDRESS
                                      NOTTINGHAM, NOTTINGHAMSH

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 41

OCCUPATION:     CONSULTANT ANAESTHETIST


Who states:- This statement consisting of 000 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 120589                                                    A J BYRNE (SIGNED)



          I am a Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery and a Fellow of the

          College of Anaesthetists.

          On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I attended Sheffield Wednesday

          Foctball Ground in company with

          ana

          We arrived in Sheffield at about 2.20pm (1420) and parked the car just

          off Herries Road by the Northern General Hospital.       Traffic was

          congested but nothing unexpected.

          We walked to the South Stand and were seated in row 'S', numbers 36-

          40, which is near to the Leppings Lane end, arriving in our seats at

          2 .50pm (1450).

          Having sat down, I looked around and noticed that the pens behind the

          goal at Leppings Lane appeared full.    By that I mean that when people

          pushed from the rear there was a rippling effect down the terracing.

          I also noticed that the wings of the terrace were relatively clear.

          I didn't see anything else untoward, until the game started.

          After a few moments, I noticed that people were climbing over the

          perimeter fencing behind the goal at the Leppings Lane end.       More and
BYFNE                    ANDREW   JOLYON                                   2


more began to climb over and I then saw a Police Officer run onto

the pitch and speak to the referee.

As a result of this the game was stopped and the referee ushered the

players from the pitch.

There was no announcement over the tannoy system as to why.

There were more and more ccming over the fencing and I saw several

Policemen pushing them back and I thought it must be either a pitch

invasion or opposing fans in the wrong end.

I then noticed someone lying on the pitch and this person was being

given external cardiac massage (CPR). Shortly after this I saw an

ambulance come onto the pitch and fans were running to collect

advertising hoardings and put people on them and stretcher them away.

By this time there was a large number of people on the pitch, some

lying down, others milling around and a line of Policemen were across

the width of the pitch.

It was approximately 10 - 15 minutes after the game had been stopped

that I realised there was a major incident taking place and

myself and the other two Doctors made our way down to the pitch with

the help of a steward.

We got onto the pitch and split up.

I   Vvant   to a male who was being given C.P.R. by someone and I asked for

equipment and was handed a portable resuscitator.      To all intensive

purposes this man was dead but I decided to continue with treatment.

We continued for at least five minutes and a fan          came to us and

asked if the man was all right and stated           he was      his cousin.    I can

only remember he was late teens, early twenties.

After attempting (CPR) someone came with a stretcher and I said that

he was dead, and after assisting to placehim in an ambulance, I

approached a Police Officer and asked for something useful to do as by
BYFNE                   ANDREW   JOLYON                                   3


this time I could see that all bodies were being treated with (CPR).

I   Vvastaken to the gymnasium and was shown to the point where the
injured were.     There was absolutely no equipment available and

therefore my treatment and diagnosis of injuries was extremely limited.

I directed a number of seriously injured people to be     taken to

hospital and assisted the less seriously injured.

I Vvas then approached by a senior Police Officer, and    asked tostart

certifying the dead people as there may be some still     alive andalso

to clear space.

There was a Police Officer allocated to each body and they were

instructed to put the time of death being certified on paper alongside

the name of the deceased.

They were also instructed to note the name of the doctor as there were

a number of doctors in the gymnasium.

The bodies were laid out as best as possible in three or four rows.       I

was accompanied by a Senior Police Officer and I carried out a formal

examination of each body.

I pronounced life extinct and the senior Police Officer instructed the

Officer with each body as to the number and time.

I have been shown a list of names and body numbers and to the best of

my knowledge and recollection the following names and body numbers are

the bodies I examined and pronounced life extinct.

I have used the tern CPR during this statement and this is an

abbreviation of Cardio Pulmonary Resuscitation;

 B6     Ian David WHEELAN.

 B7     James Robert HENNESSY.

B12     Roy HAMILTON

B13     Colin WAFER

B23     Peter BURKETT
BYFNE                   ANDREW   JOLYON                                   4


B34      Jonathan OWENS

B44      Carl Darren HEWITT

B45      Nicholas JOYNES

B46      Carl BROWN

B47      David William BIRTLE

B55      Michael Nicholas HEWITT

B59      Gordon Rodney HORN

B6C      Christopher James TRAYNOR

B69      Gerald Martin BARON

B7C      Alan McGLONE

B72      Michael David KELLY



After completing the examinations I noticed that a large number of

doctors had arrived with equipment.       I spoke to a senior Police

Officer and after leaving my personal details, was allowed to leave.

I iret                     in the gymnasium and we eventually found the

other two of our party back at the car.

We then returned home.

I have listed a number of things that I feel very strongly about in

the supporters' questionnaire that I have also completed, and feel

these should be brought to the attention of Lord Justice TAYLOR.




                                                                              3573
        BYFNE             ANDREW   JOLYON                      5


                                            A J BYRNE SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   120589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:        PC




                                                                   3574
                                                                          STATION




ADDRESS:
                          WIGAN, LANCASHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:           dRSE


Who states:- This statement consisting of 015 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 200789                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am a Liverpool supporter and have a season ticket for the Kop at

           Anfield.   On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I travelled to

           Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, to watch the FA Cup Semi Final

           between Liverpool FC and Nottingham Forest FC.

           I did not travel to the game in an organised party, just with a group

           of friends on a coach.    We had tickets for an Eavesway Coach, from

           Ashton in Makerfield.     I met          Graham RICHARDSON from Wigan in

           Billinge and we then travelled on a small bus to Ashton in Makerfield

           where we met the large coach to take us to Sheffield.     In Ashton in

           Makarfield we met up with another friend, Vincent FITZSIMMONS.

           I have known             Graham and their family for years as friends.    I

           hava known Vincent for four or five seasons, through travelling to

           Liverpool games with him on Eavesway Coaches.     He was more of an

           acquaintance than a friend.

           Aft ar catching the coach in Ashton and setting off at between 1130

           (1130) and 1145 (1145) hours, we travelled directly to Sheffield.

           Howaver, we were subject to long traffic delays in Stockport where I

           believe there had been a car crash and later on I think the coach
driver a wrong turning.    At one point I saw a sign saying

Sheffield 13 miles and then later on a sign saying Sheffield 21 miles.

I would think in all we were delayed for about two hours, leaving at

abcut 1130 (1130) as we did, we did not arrive in Sheffield until

abcut 1445 (1445) hours.    When we arrived in Sheffield there was a

procession of coaches all arriving late.    We were driven along

Penistone Road towards the ground and when we got to the traffic

island at the top of Leppings Lane we expected to be let down by the

driver.   However, the Police would not let the driver stop and he

drove round the island and back up Penistone Road and stopped near to

a railway bridge over the dual carriageway, where we were let off the

coach.

A lot of the fans on the coach were angry with the driver because

we were late and also because some of the coach drivers had let

their passengers off near the island. I remember distinctly

seeing                           jetting off one coach near to the

island before the Police closed the coach door.

Onea we had got off the coach the four of us         Graham, Vincent and

I then jogged to the ground.    At the time there were people

running, some like us jogging down and others just wandering down

slowly.

It was apparent that we were not the only people to have arrived late,

there were hundreds of people making their way to the ground in

a steady stream.   Coaches were still arriving after ours.

I remember seeing even at this late stage there were people sitting on

walls drinking from cans of beer and lager, apparently in no hurry

to get to the ground.     I did not see any fighting or

drunkenness on the way to the ground.     I would describe the crowd

making their way to the ground as excited and boisterous, as they knew



                                                                           3576
the kick off was imminent, but I did not see any trouble.

The four of us arrived in Leppings Lane outside the entrance to the

ground itself at about 1450 (1450) hours.

When we arrived at that point there were a set of outer blue gates

which the Police were just closing as we arrived, to try and regulate

the crowd between the outer gates and the turnstiles.    There was a

mass of people extending back from the outer gates into Leppings Lane

forming a line between the comer shop on one side and the bridge over

the River Don on the other.

         Graham said that they were going to wait for the crowd to

thin out, but I said if we didn't hold our ground within the crowd

we'd never get' in.   We then all joined the crowd outside.

The crowd at this time was very irate at the delay and worried about

missing the kick off.    I remember saying to one Police Officer on

horseback that it was a ridiculous situation.    He replied, "Don't

worry, kick off's delayed till quarter past."

I think he was trying to calm everyone down outside.

A lot of people were being abusive towards the Police because of the

situation outside.

There was a lot of pushing and shoving outside the outer gates but I

was not worried for my safety, just concerned about missing kick off.

I have been in situations like this before at Football matches, but

you can tell some people were worried,            Graham for example whc

wanted to move back but I persuaded to stay in the crowd.

The Police were opening and closing the outer gates to control the

flew of people into the area iirmediately outside the turnstiles, but

the pressure became such that people started to be crushed up against

the outer gates and on one occasion when they opened the gates

they were unable to close them again because of the pressure of the
crcwd outside.

We then made our way into the area between the outer gates and the

turnstiles which had filled up and came to a standstill inside the

gatas.

We gradually made our way forwards in the crowd.    I could not see

where I was going and did not see where the turnstiles were exactly.

Then after three or four minutes I found myself through the gate at

the right of the turnstiles nearest to the River Don, Gate 'C'.

I was behind            Graham RICHARDSON and Vincent FITZSIMMONS was

slightly behind me.     I remember thinking in the area outside that I

would not get and then suddenly finding myself inside the ground.

In the area outside the turnstiles I started to think people would get

hurt because it was so packed.    Once inside this area you had no

chance to change your mind and move back because of the pressure of

pecple from behind.

People were not getting through the turnstiles quickly enough and if

the gate (Gate 'C') had not been opened then people could have been

killed outside.

One a the gate was open there was not a sudden rush into the ground.

We walked in calmly.     I was then surprised not to have to hand my

ticket in.     I still have this full ticket for the Lappings Lane

Terrace, value #6.00, which I had purchased for #6.00 from Anfield.

The ticket number is LL2 21 39.

I do not remember seeing any stewards outside the turnstiles.        I only

reiramber seeing a couple of police officers mounted on horseback and

one of these in particular.    He was shouting at the crowd and trying

to control it.    The crowd however were ignoring his directions and

generally being abusive towards him.

I knew which set of turnstiles I had to enter through because
              knew where to go.

Ones we got through the gate (Gate 'C') I remember seeing the centre

tunnel leading to the centre pens (Pens 3 & 4) of the terracing.      I

did not see any signs and it did not appear there was any other way

onto the terraces.

I cannot remember seeing any police or stewards anywhere in the

concourse behind the turnstiles or in the tunnel, though I did not

lock for any.

Just before we entered the tunnel I remember looking to see if all

four of us were still together.

           Graham were slightly in front of me and Vincent was to my

left.

I had free passage along the tunnel.

When we got to the end of the tunnel I remember being able to see the

goal on the pitch and GROBBELAAR and BEARDSLEY wanning up.

As we entered the terrace I went into the right hand pen (Pen 3) and

lost sight of the other three.     I did not see ________Graham again

until back on the coach and never saw Vincent again.

The terrace was very packed but there were two girls in front of me at

the entrance to the terrace who pushed their way over to the right.       I

reiramber thinking if they can push in then I can.    I then pushed

forward and to the right to try and get a better view.

I started to move forward within the crowd in the terrace and then the

crowd built up that much that I was carried over to the right

diagonally.     I was then forced by the crowd against the end of a crush

barrier.   My left leg was caught against the left hand upright of the

barrier and my groin and genitals were crushed into the barrier and I

was bent forward over the barrier.     I was in intense pain and

convinced that my pelvis was about to crack.     I was screaming out in
agcny and the man directly in front of me managed to turn to face

me and tried to push me back off the barrier.

I was just about to pass out when the crowd suddenly eased for a

second.   The man pushed me back and I was able to slide around the end

of the barrier to my left and in front of it so that the barrier was

behind me.

I produce a plan of the pens 3 and 4 of the Leppings Lane Terrace (Exh

   ) (Ref       |. On this I have marked a '1' to show the position I

was caught against the barrier.

The pressure then increased within the crowd and I was forced again

over to my right towards the side fence between the pens (Pens 3 & 2).

I was moved to the side by the crowd until I came to a point I have

marked '2' on the plan.   At this point my feet suddenly became trapped

and I was still pushed by the crowd so that I was forced over to my

right side, still facing towards the pitch at an angle of 45 degrees.

I was unable to move at all and my arms were pinned by my sides.    It

was as if I was paralysed, the pressure was such that I could not move

my body or limbs at all even though one of my elbows was being pushed

into the chest of a girl behind me.

She was screaming at me to move my arm but I could not because of the

pressure.

I was unable to breathe properly and slowly going over at more of an

angle.

I rsmarter seeing a fan on the perimeter fence next to a policewoman.

He appeared to be looking directly at me and shouting move back.    I

triad to shout at him that I could not but did not have the breath to

do 30.

I cannot say what time this was in relation to the game or real time

but I remember telling the person in front of me to pass a message to
                                                                            7


the front to delay kick off so I obviously did not think at this time

that the game had started.

I then remember thinking about my family and starting to pray to

myself in my head.

I slowly seemed to be going over and I then remember thinking I was

going to eventually go down to the floor and be   killed.

The pressure was intense and I could    not breath properly   at all.

Then suddenly I was able to free one    of my arms and I grabbedthe

collar of a leather jacket a man was    wearing in front of   me.I then

managed to hold myself off the floor.

All of a sudden after what seemed ages the crowd literally creaked

forward and it suddenly seemed to me that everything went quieter.      A

lot of the people within the crowd stopped screaming.    Certainly the

girl who was behind me stopped screaming, though to this day I do not

knew if she died or fainted.   I never saw her at all.   I could just

feel and hear her.   I got the impression there were two girls behind

me and from their accents they were definitely Liverpudlian.

When the crowd creaked forward you could actually hear a noise within

the crowd like a ship creaking, not the noise of screaming or shouting.

I did not see anything on the pitch at all apart from the teams

warming up and cannot give any idea of times involved when I was

involved in the crush.   Everything was unreal and I thought I and

everyone else in there was going to die.

Then the pressure which had been intense began to ease from behind and

I was able to get to my feet when someone pulled me up and to the side

frcm behind.

My initial reaction was just to get out of the terraces but then the

crowd started to thin in front of me and I could see the twisted

barrier that had broken in front of me and piles of bodies.    My
                                                                          8

instincts as a nurse then took over and I decided to wait for a short

while to make sure there was not a surge forward again within the

crowd and then got to see what I could do to help.

Aftar a short while I went forward and helped move a number of dead

bodies from the pile of people near to the broken barrier.

In particular there was a girl at a position I have marked '3' on the

plan.   She was face down on top of the pile of bodies.    I pulled her

across and off the pile of bodies.     Her body was limp and I pulled her

by her coat.    As I did so the coat must have been open because her

head fell forward and hit the floor.

She was wearing blue jeans

               When I turned her over she had severe facial injuries,

particularly mouth injuries, which were clearly from there extent not

caused by her head hitting the floor.

        and had clearly died.

She was in her late teens or early twenties, slim build with long

reddish hair.     I seem to remember she had large gypsy type earrings

but I cannot be sure.      She was    wearing a   tan or fawn leather jacket

and baggy blue jeans.      She was    obviously    dead and I did not attempt

res uscitation.

I then made my way to a large man who was in the same pile of bodies.

He was face down with his head towards the pitch and his legs and body

going up the steps of the terracing.     There was a lad with him

shcuting, "You're not dead."

I then turned the man over      and   moved him    to the side of the pile to a

position I have marked      '4' on the plan. I could not move him far

because he was very hefty.

I tried to revive him with mouth to mouth resuscitation for about five

minutes before it became obvious that he could not be helped.
                                                                           9


He again had mouth injuries

He had a stud earring and light wavy hair.    He was about 13-14 stone

and in his thirties, early thirties.     I cannot remember what he was

wearing.

By the time I gave up ray attempts to revive this man, police had

started to enter the pen.     I remember in particular one police officer

whc was only young but very good.     He was going round checking the

bodies for pulses and helping as best he could.

Whilst I was helping this large man, the police officer came over to

me and asked if I had taken his pulse because if you tried to

resuscitate someone still alive you could kill them.     I explained I

was a nurse and he then moved on to help where he was better needed.

He was very good and was directing people to help those who had a

chance and who to leave.

I then helped a lad who had been under the first girl, I moved him to

abcut position five and tried to revive     him. However, his eyes

had burst blood vessels within them and after about five minutes. I

stepped trying to revive him.

I iryself was in a state of shock and very fatigued and having to crawl

on tty knees.

The lad was about 16 or 17 years of age wearing jeans, slight build

but I cannot describe him further.     He was wearing training shoes.

I remember about the first man, the large man, that there was a man

with him as I said who kept on calling out a name.     I cannot remember

properly now but I think it was either

Up until I stopped trying to revive the young lad everyone I had seen

or helped had been dead.    I then saw a young lad right at the front of

the pen in a second pile of bodies.

I could see he was alive but there were     deadbodies on top of himand
                                                                              10


all you could see were his head and an arm.     Someone shouted to bring

ray attention to him.

A policeman, myself and two other men then began to pull bodies off

the pile to try and release him.     It was very hard, the bodies were

all tangled and it seemed to take ages to free the lad.     We had to

move and rearrange three or four bodies out of the way.     This was

really hard by this time because everyone was really fatigued from

either the crush, assisting people or both.

Once we had freed the lad he was passed over the railings to the

right.   It had taken four of us to pull him out of the pile, two on

each arm and I think there is a strong possibility that both his arms

wera dislocated by our efforts to free him.

I would describe him as in his late teens early twenties, with dark

hair, he was clean shaven.      I cannot remember his clothing.   I was

pulling at a belt to get him out and nearly ripped one of my finger

nails off, but I cannot remember if it was this lad wearing the jeans

and belt or one of the dead bodies I tried to move out of the way.

I then helped to move and pass some dead bodies out of the pen but by

this time I had became so exhausted that I was having to crawl on

my knees.

I then got out of the pen because I was that tired I was of no use in

there and got out either through the gate or a      gap in the fence.     I

am not sure which.      I tried to get my breath back for a short while

and then I saw three people trying to put a dead body onto a pair of

step ladders which were being used as a stretcher.

The person who had died was a male, not young fairly hefty in at least

his 30's, I cannot describe him further.

We carried him from the running track behind the goal to the gymnasium

behind the North stand, either one of the men or both of the men at
                                                                         11


the front of the step ladder were Policemen and knew where to go.

I was still what can only be described as 'shagged out' and stumbled

as we carried the man to the gymnasium which was being used as a

temporary mortuary.

We laid the man out inside and I then went out of the gymnasium, near

to the doorway just outside I saw two lads about in their late

twenties or early thirties, one of them was aggresively upset and

the other one appeared dead,     I then tried to resucitate him.   I

continued with the aid of the lads friend for about five minutes.

When I was approached by a man who said he was a Doctor.     He asked

me how long I had worked on the lad and then quickly examined him.       He

then said it was pointless to carry on.

I would describe the dead man as white, dark haired, clean shaven,

medium build, I cannot remember his clothing.

I do not know why he had been left outside the gymnasium and not taken

inside.

I then went back into the gymnasium to try and see if my friends was

amcngst the dead.     I looked at a couple of bodies, but was then

askad to stop by the Police, I did not see anyone I knew.

I then went to the far end of the gymnasium to see if I could help

there as there were about six or seven injured people.     I then stayed

with a man who had a suspected broken femur.     The man was from_______

and said that                                      I am not sure but I

believe his name may have been

I stayed with him for about twenty minutes whilst he was examined by

first one Doctor and then a second who placed him on a drip.       I stayed

with the injured to make sure none of them collapsed and stopped

breathing.

When the Doctor started to set up the drip I left the gymnasium and
                                                                          12


mad a my way back through a Police cordon to the terraces.   There were

still a lot of people within the terraces and lots of shoes and

personal effects which people had lost.

I ranember whilst in the gym a fight had developed between Police and

sorraone who had tried to get in to see the deceased. I didn't get

involved in this at all.

On the terraces there was an incredible amount of anger directed

against the Police and the Police were very tolerant and restrained.

Under different circumstances there would have been a lot of people

arrested for their behaviour towards the Police.

I looked for my friends on the terraces    and could not find them.   I

eventually made my way out and back to the coach which I got back to

at about 4.55 pm (1655) having left the gymnasium at about 4.30 pm

(1630).

There I found                              but did not see Vincent

FITZSIMMONS who I found out on Sunday 16 April 89 (160489) had died.

I would like to say that the crowd on the terraces at 4.30 pm (1630)

was that hostile towards the Police that it had got to the stage of a

possible riot situation.     I had not seen any disorder at all through

the day until this time.   This decided me to leave the ground as I

thought there could be trouble.

I didn't see anyone drink alcohol within the ground.




On the day I was wearing a

                           At the time I had a                and
                                                                                  13




        I believe the main cause of the tragedy was the sheer volume of fans

       overwhelmed the Police.     With hindsight I believe it could have been

       diverted if fans had been diverted away from the centre tunnel to the

        sides of the terraces.

        There were serious problems outside before the game and people could

        have been crushed. However once through the gate there was no panic

        and the disaster could have been diverted by clear directions.

        I went to the FA cup final at Wembley and I was shocked to see people

        drunk and pushing outside the turnstiles there. Some people had

        obviously not learned the lessons of Hillsborough and I do not wish to

        attend football matches again at this moment in time.

        I produce a grid of the pen three (Exh         ) (ref      on this I

        have marked a '1' where I was caught against the barrier and a number

        '2' where I was trapped by the weight of the crowd.

        I did not see the barrier break within pen three, I just saw that it

        had broken afterwards.     It appeared to have folded over as opposed to

        snapping off but I cannot say what time it happened.



                                                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:     200789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:      P<d
                                                                          STATION




ADDRESS:
                                            OTTINGHAMSH,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:       AMBULANCEMAN


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by roe, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 310589                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am                           a single man, aged          and an

           ambulancemen employed by Nottinghamshire Area Health Authority, a

           position I have held for four and a half years.     My heme address is



           I am stationed at                   ambulance station and have been

           throughout my employ with the authority.    As part of our basic

           training refresher training we are taught up to date resusitation

           techniques and I am fully conversant with the methods used. I have

           been a regular supporter of Nottingham Forest Football Club for

           abcut nineteen years and have regularly attended matches involving the

           clubs team at heme and away.     I am a season ticket holder and obtained

           a ticket for the Nottingham Forest F.C. vs Liverpool F.C. F.A.

           Challenge Cup semi-final match at Sheffield's Hillsborough ground by

           using my season ticket vouchers, from Nottingham Forest.    The ticket

           cost me about six pounds and was for standing in the Spion Kop.

           On the day of the match, Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I

           travelled up to Sheffield in my brothers car, with him

           of_____________            Nottingham, and a friend of his whose name
I think is                    I do not know his address), and set off

actually from Nottingham between 10.45 am and 11 am (1045 and 1100).

We did not encounter any traffic hold ups either on the motorway or

onca on the outskirts of Sheffield itself, and we stopped in the

outskirts before reaching the ground at a public house for food and a

few drinks.   I cannot recall seeing any other supporters in this pub,

it was a bit out of the way and off the main track.    We had reached

this pub on Sheffield's outskirts at about 12.30pm - 12.45 pm and

(1230 - 1245) stayed in it for about an hour.

My brother then drove us to a side street close to the ground and

parked.   It was about 10-15 minute walk to the ground near to a

recreation ground, which we walked across to go towards the ground,

Unfortunately I do not know the name of the street.    We parked up ay

abcut 1.50pm (1350) and arrived at the turnstiles to the Spion Kop end

at about 2.10pm (1410), having walked up Penistone Road to approach

that end. En route to the ground I did not see any fighting disorder

or drunkness nor can I recall seeing any fans drinking alcohol.     We

did encounter about four or five different Liverpool fans

(identifiable by their accents) near to the Spion Kop, who were asking

pecpie for tickets to buy.

I entered the ground on reaching it, via a turnstile and without

difficulty.   There were hardly any queues at all and I had not

experienced any difficulty in finding my entry point.     My brother

knew how to get into the Kop and so we had no difficulty, either, in

finding our match viewing point.    I reraesmber seeing small numbers of

Police Officers inside and at the entry point, but I would not say it

was being over-policed at all.     I cannot recall seeing any Stewards.

We took up our match viewing position in the Kop end at about 2.15pm

(1415) and I noticed even then that the opposite end standing area



                                                                           3589
                                                                         3


middle pens were full, whilst the side pens were empty by comparision.

It mist have been overfull, or certainly became so between this time

and 2.30pm (1430), because I could see supporters climbing over the

fences into the adjoining side pens in a steady stream.   This movement

out of the central pens continued up until at least kick off time,

into both side pens from those central pens.

The match began roughly on time and it was around this time I remember

seeing one or two people lying behind the Liverpool goal, and people

clinbing over the perimeter fence onto the pitch at the Leppings Lane

end. This would have been around 3 pm (1500).

Frcn this time onwards more and more people were climbing over from

the Leppings Lane standing area's central pens onto the pitch, and I

thought some trouble was brewing.   It would have been around this time

that someone ran onto the pitch from the opposite end, to the referee,

and the match was stopped.   It would have been about 4 minutes,

in fact, after the match had started.

I can also recall seeing a surge of people in these central pens, from

where it orginated I do not know, but it started from the middle and

proceeded in a sort of "S" shape to the left side of the goal (as I

locked at the Liverpool goal from my standing point). There was no

surge backwards just this "S" surge forward, and it happened about a

minute after kick-off.

As itore people came onto the pitch, after the match had been stopped,

I fcagan to feel that there was something seriously wrong, and so at

approximately 3.20 pm (1520) I decided to go onto the pitch to see if

I could assist.

I irade my way to the back of the Spion Kop and approached a gateman,

identified myself as an ambulanceman, and was let onto the pitch.There

were some casualties at or near the Spion Kop end at this stage
                                                                          4


and I went amongst them to see if I could assist any.

I found a man unconscious and not breathing, lying on his back already

being resusciated by some Liverpool fans.    I relieved and took over

frcii these, and began external heart massage and then mouth to mouth

resuscitation in an attempt to revive him.   I was assisted at some

stage by a white female of about 25 yrs, of medium ht, 5'8"-91', (5'08"

- 5'09")   slim build, attractive looking, wearing a green and white

locped "Celtic-type" sports shirt, and had a Liverpool accent.   I

continued for about five to ten minutes during which numbers of fans

around were rushing around panicking, without any direction or

organisation.   I decided that I could possibly assist someone else who

was injured or unconcious, more so than this man, and as there were

others around me who were also capable of resuscitating casualties.     I

stepped and someone else took over.

I can describe the casualty as a white male, 25-30 yrs, 5'10",

medium build to well built, with mid-brown straight mid-length hair,

cleanshaven, wearing a red Liverpool F.C. Football shirt and possibly

jeans.

I do not know what happened to this man, I last saw him in the care of

soire other people who as far as I was concerned were as capable I was.

I then continued looking around for other casualties to help or assist

and found a man lying, again near to the Spion Kop end, on his back

being resuscitated by a supporter.    I asked him, a white male who I

cannot further describe, if he wanted to be relieved and I took over

mouth to mouth resuscitation.   A white female of about 20-22 yrs, of

medium height and stocky build, who I cannot further describe, helped

by giving the man external heart compression (cardiac compression) as

I worked on him.

This continued for about 3-4 minutes during which time there was no
__________________________________                                       5


improvement in his condition, his colour had been ashen and it did not

improve, and there was no pulse.   As I had been working on him someone

nearby had asked how long we had been trying to resuscitate him and

when a friend replied, "Twenty minutes", I realised that it was

prcbably inpossible to revive him and so we stopped, and gave up

trying. This man was eventually carried-off on a make-shift stretcher

by some Liverpool supporters towards the North Stand.   I can describe

hiir as a white male, 25 yrs approximately 5' 10", medium build with a

slight "beer-belly", I think with brown hair of medium length,

cleanshaven, wearing a grey or brown T-shirt (I cannot say what else

he was wearing).

After this I went to the gymnasium at the back of the North Stand to

see if I could assist anyone else further and found a number of

casualties in the temporary mortuary.   One of these a white male, of

about 16 years, of average weight and build, with brown hair, possibly

wearing a red liverpool football shirt, was conscious but had

a drip in his arm.    I helped to carry out on a trestle table to

awaiting ambulance.   He was put onto a stretcher before being taken

by ambulance crew.

Following this I helped generally by assisting "walking-wounded" onto

transport and checking other casualties who were conscious.

I actually left the stadium at 4.15pm (1615) and rejoined my brother

and his friend at the car.   In my opinion the following problems were

highlighted:-

(i)   There seemed to be a total lack of first-aid facilities and

      coverage available.

(ii) There was a total lack of communication apparent between the

      ground authorities and police, and the crowd and the ambulances

      attending the incident although there could have been
                                                                                  6


                considerations taken into account about possible crowd trouble,

        (iii) The crowd crush in the pens was apparent long before the kick-

                off and someone in the police contingent must have been able to

                see this and then try to prevent the crush becoming worse than

                it was.

       In my view the action of the Police Officers on the pitch was

       corrmendable and many were getting involved in resuscitation as were

       the fire brigade personel present.



                                                                         IIGNED

  lTEMENT   TAKEN
            PLACE:

            TIME:               DATE:   310589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE         PC




                                                                                      3593
                                                                        STATION

              THOMAS
              HELLER

ADDRESS
                        SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 43

OCCUPATION:   GENERAL PRACTITIONER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 150689                                                 T HELLER (SI(2®D)



          I qualified as a doctor some 20 years ago in 1969 (000069) and I am

          presently in a general practice, my surgery being at                      ,

          Sheffield

          On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I was on call for a colleague of

          mine who has a surgery in Parsons Cross.

          At just after 3pm (1500) that day I was at home.    I switched the TV on

          and saw the snooker match being interrupted by scenes from the FA Cup

          Seiri Final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest being played at the

          Hillsborough Football Stadium.   I was under the impression at that

          tirra that a pitch invasion was taking place.   At that moment I had to

          go out to take my daughter to a party at Walkley.

          On the way there we were listening to the local radio station on the

          car radio, I think it was Radio Sheffield when I heard a request made

          for doctors who were urgently required at the Hillsborough Stadium,

          there was no further information given for the request being made.

          The time of this request was at about 3.20pn (1520).

          I hurried and dropped my daughter off at Walkley andmade my way

          quickly to the Hillsborough Stadium, on the way there I came up behind
HELLER                  THOMAS                                            2


a fire engine which I followed through various traffic lights

to the ground right up to the Leppings Lane entrance.

I parked my car on the pavement opposite the entrance to the ground

outside a tyre sales centre.

There were a lot of Police in the immediate area and one came up to

me, I made myself known to him and enquired where I was to go.

He made a call on his personal radio and then escorted me to the

gyrrnasium area.   I am not too sure of the route we took from Leppings

Lane but I believe that it was to the left of the West Stand and then

undar the North Stand to the gym, on my way there I did not see any

dead or injured fans.

On entering the gymnasium through a line of Police Officers who were

obviously holding back numbers of people crowding round the outside of

the door.     I was totally unprepared for what I saw in the gym, the

scene shocked me, there seemed to be bodies everywhere lying just

inside the door all the way over to the far wall.     I asked a policeman

what was to be done and he pointed away from the bodies to a section

of the gym divided from the bodies by a long screen, the type used to

divide sports halls.

I saw more bodies here, but I saw a group in the centre who were

unattended and obviously alive.    I stopped between two bodies and

knelt down.    A lot of things were going through my mind at this time,

as to whether I was doing the right thing, how was I to know that the

one I had chosen was the one that needed help most, what would happen

to the others if I stayed with this one.

I listened to his breathing and heart beat, his breathing was shallow

and irregular and hard to detect although I could hear breath sounds,

his chest was moving all wrong and the skin was not the right colour.

For some reason I took my stethoscope out of my ears and moved close
HELLER                 THOMAS                                               3


to his face.     I asked him what his name was, he did reply.    I am not

exactly sure but I think he said             [ also asked him how he felt

although he did not reply, he didn't have to I could see by the way he

was lying that his left leg and arm were broken.       I turned him onto

his side over onto his bad leg, there did not seem to be any

alternative.     I pushed my fingers onto the top of his tongue to

establish an airway, this seemed to help and his breathing seemed to

start again, his head was on the cold floor so I reached out for this

leather jacket and placed his head on it.

At this time there were still no proper medical facilities available

and the only thing we could do was to monitor his condition.

I had taken with me my two medical bags which contained my day to day

requirements as a general practitioner, of the equipment that I

carried I only found my diagnostic equipment and diamorphine any use

to me.

By this time I was aware of the presence of one of my colleagues in

the room, a Dr                      I was pleased to see a familiar face,

he assisted me with               I also tended other injured fans but most

of my attention was given to

Socn other doctors started to arrive, there was activity all

arcund me, then the medical equipment arrived as much intubation and

air ways as we could use.     Some sort of organisation

begins to take place, an ambulanceman issues the equipment we need,

intravenous drips are set up and we start working as a team.

I was aware of the presence of an anaesthetist in the gym and I asked

hirr to have a look at            for me as he was having difficulty

breathing.     The aneasthetist took out          airway and I saw that it

was blocked with blood, indicating that            was suffering from

internal bleeding.    We placed        on a stretcher and he was taken to
HELLER               THOMAS                                               4


an ambulance, the aneasthetist went with him.

I then began to put up 'Saline' drips on the injured fans who were

waiting to be conveyed to hospital.

At first the transfer of the injured from the gymnasium to the

hospitals was slow, then after a short while the ambulances arrived

and the injured were conveyed to the hospitals quite quickly.

As the most seriously injured were removed to hospital there was less

for us to do, but still there appeared to be no one organising the

medical staff available and it was left up to the individual person to

decide what had to be done next.

In a short period of time with the injured being taken away and more

medical staff arriving on the scene, we eventually out numbered the

injured fans and we had time to take account of the situation and the

events of the afternoon.

Scure of my colleagues later went to the local hospitals to assist

there.   I, after going home to wash and change, went to the

Hillsborough Boys Club to offer my assistance to the grieving

relatives and friends of the deceased.

Whilst at the stadium I did not actually certify any deaths.     I left

at about 4.30pm (1630) when all the injured had been taken to

hospital. Although I have a number of opinions and thoughts on the way

the situation was handled whilst I was present in the gymnasium, I

intand to liaise with my colleagues and we intend to issue a joint

statement when we have discussed the events of that day and put

forward any suggestions we might have which would help if a similar

situation should ever arise again.
        HELLER           THOMAS                           5


                                        T HELLER SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:               t>C




                                                              3598
                                                                              STATION

                RAYMOND
                CLARKE

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     CONTROL SUPT


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by roe, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 230989                                                       R CLARKE (SIGNED)



           RAYMOND CLARKE WILL STATE:-



           1.      I am 43 years old,                           I live with ray

                                        and four children

           2.      I am employed by SYMAS as Control Superintendent and I work from

           the Control Centre, Mborgate, Rotherham.         I joined the ambulance

           service in 1968 (000068) and I have worked through the ranks since

           then.     I have been in the Control room for 10/12 years and have

           gained considerable experience. I work a three shift rota.

           3.      On Saturday the 15th April 1989 (150489) ray tour of duty was 1400-

           2200 hours     but as usual I went in early to take over and be

           brought up to date by the earlier Superintendent.

           4.      The control room staff consisted of myself in charge, control

           officer on the emergency desk,                      Control officer on the

           outpatients d e s k , c o n t r o l         a s s i s t a n t s p n       1400/

           2200 hours,                   on days.   It was the usual shift staff.

           5.      From 1400 hours it was just routine, dealing with everyday

           incidents.     I was aware of the football match at Hillsborough as we
CLARKE                   RAYMOND


had been given information about it and I had made myself familiar

with the information.

6.    At 1506 hours    a police man contacted us by phone.       I spoke

to the policeman.     His voice sounded agitated.    He was very excited

but his words were something to the effect that a fleet of ambulances

were needed at the Leppings        Lane end of Hillsborough.   He said he

didn't know what it was but        there was a big incident.

7.    I also told him that the cover requested would be provided.          I

knew our officers at the ground would assess the situation.

8.    Almost immediately afterwards a message was received frcm the

Police Control at Sheffield to the effect that there had been an

incident at Hillsborough and a fleet of ambulances was required.           The

exact incident was not identified.

9.    We have an emergency channel frcm control to our officers at the

grcund, who have portable radios.        The   ambulances also     haveradios.

I did not test the portable        radios, but the tests would      havebeen

done when the officers at the ground began duty during the morning.

10.   I told                  to contact our officers at the ground to

get a situation report, and to mobilise a unit from the Middlewood

Ambulance Station, sending it to Leppings Lane.

11.   Radio messages had started coming in from our officers at the

grcund. I do not know the exact time, but they were reporting a large

incident in progress.     They did not say what it was, but we were told

there many people injured and more ambulances were required.

12.   At the same time the same information was coining in from police

control.   We were told that there were fatalities and many people

injured.

13.   Two off duty o f f i c e r s a n d                         lad by chance

corra into the office.     Before they arrived I had assessed what
CLARKE                   RAYMOND                                             3


ambulances were available, bearing in mind that we still had to allow

for routine calls.

14.     I satisfied myself that the control officers had kept back

sufficient cover and was left with several units, I believe eight, and

they were all despatched to Hillsborough.      They were sent from various

stations within South Yorkshire.

15.     Up to now everything was in order, response was good and

cormunications were good.

16.     I told             to start a log and record as much as she could.

                   started to involve himself in the control room work

mobilising vehicles and contacting other ambulance services, West

Yorkshire, Nottingham and Derby.

17.     They were informed we had a major incident at Hillsborough

Foctball Ground.      They were asked to mobilise whatever vehicles they

had available towards the South Yorkshire boundary.       They would be

used if required at the incident and if necessary to assist in routine

work.

18.     I had given             a list of control room staff and told her

to contact as many as she could and get them into control.

19.     It soon became obvious that we were dealing with a major

incident. Calls were coming in by radio and telephone about

Hillsborough and additionally routine calls were coming in and being

dealt with.

20.                     informed me that the emergency desk could not cope

with the volume of work, and I decided the incident fromthen on would

be run from      the major incident room, which is next door.

21.     Itold    the staff what was going to happen and with

went next door to the major incident room.

22.     I opened the emergency channel for the radio and this would mean



                                                                                 3601
CLARKE                 RAYMOND                                             4


that all or most of the calls connected into the Hillsborough

incident would come in to the incident room.

23.   I received calls from our units which were mobilised and en

route, I also received calls from other areas to confirm that their

units were mobile and available.

24.   I do not now how many ambulances were available from other areas,

but from the calls I took I knew there were quite a lot.    Calls still

caira in about the incident and demands from ambulances grew, so I

diracted ambulances from other areas to the ground with our own

units.

25.   A call from our Mr HOPKINS had come in and asked for the major

incident vehicle to be mobilised.    This vehicle is based at Rotherham

and it was mobilised at once, as requested.     The vehicle was reported

motile and corrrnunication with the vehicle was good.   It was directed

to the ground.

26.   I got reports from units sent to the ground to the effect that

they had arrived.     They reported when they were leaving and going to

hospitals. Some reported seriously injured people, but all kind of

messages came in.

27.   When the units had left the patients at the hospitals they

reported green, that is, empty and were sent back to the ground.

Casualties were initially taken to Northern General, but when we were

told that it was full all units were directed to the Hallamshire.

28.   From the feed back I got I felt that we were coping with the

situation.   The ambulances deployed to the football ground seemed to

be sufficient for the demand I did not have any requests indicating

that insufficient units were available.

29.   When the staff on the ambulances came over the radio they seemed

to remain calm.     They asked for orders and were given them.
CLARKE                  RAYMOND                                                 5


30.     The response to the call for control room staff was being

answered, and as they reported they were deployed to give assistance

where it was needed.     The routine work was being dealt with all the

tirra as well as the Hillsborough incident.

31.   All the time Iwas getting reports from our staff at the ground

and fairly quickly from this information all or most of the casualties

had been taken from       the ground.     The demandfor     unitsscaled down,

and when they were no longer required I began to "stack" them at two

locations, Herries Road bus depot and Netherthorpe Road.

32.     There was no point having empty ambulances at the ground, but

they remained at locations easily accessible to the ground should they

be further required.

33.     Mr Alan SMITH the Superintendent had answered our calls and

arrived at Control. I briefed him of the situation.

34.     The situation from the emergency control room began to ease.       At

sorre stage we were informed that all casualties had been cleared and

the incident began to wind down.

35.     During the incident at odd times I was unable to contact a

certain individual, but all messages that needed to get through got

through. It was possible that on those rare times when I couldn't

contact personnel they were busy looking after injured people.         I

would describe the overall    corrrnunication   throughout the incident as

gocd.

36.     I do not know how long the incident took.      It was so busy that it

was impossible to note the time, but I would describe the response of

the services as excellent, I was very proud of the staff.         They kept

calm and did a good job.

37.     As the incident began to close I left the emergency control room

in the hands of                   and a s s i s t a n t t o o k     over
       CLARKE                  RAYMOND                                            6


       frc:n

       38.     I went back into the main control room to ensure that the routine

       work was still going on and I found that it was.     It was very orderly

       and very efficiently run.

        39.    One of the extra tasks we had to perform during the incident was

       to anpty a ward at Hallamshire.    We moved several patients to the

       King Edward VII Hospital at Rotherham.

       40.     The request came from the hospital to move the patients and we

       used ambulances that we had available to complete the move.



                                                         RAYMOND CLARKE SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME:              DATE:   060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE




                                                                                      3604
Incident    IC2    270390 OP8Q64       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER    S3286

                                                                             Station

 umame              HOPKINS

Forenames           ALAN

                    52                     Date of birth

Address


Occupation          AMBULANCE SERVICE DCMAO

Telephone

IC                  Height                 Build

Hair colour

Hair type

                                           Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                    Accent

Number of Eages

Dated                                                                          Signed


           ALAN HOPKINS states

           1.   I am employed as the Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer

           for SYMAS.

           2.   My date of birth is

           3.   I am trained in ambulance aid, and every five years, I attend a

           twc week refresher course in ambulance aid.     I have attended

           management and supervisory courses.     I have attended major incident

           courses and been involved in major incident exercises.

           4.   SYMAS covers the areas of the district health authorities of

           Sheffield, Rotherham, Barnsley and Doncaster.    Every year we hold a

           major exercise in one of those four areas.     This involves principally

           the emergency services for that particular area but will also include

           the emergency services frcm the other areas.     If I am involved in an

           exercise I am not told that an exercise is taking place.
                                                                  PAGE      2
                                                                  S3286

5.   I joined the Sheffield City Ambulance Service as an ambulance man

in 1967. (000067)   In about 1973 (000073) I was transferred to Longley

Station.   In early 1974 (000074) I was appointed the Superintendent at

Corporation Street and Lodge Moor Stations.    In 1974 (000074) a

reorganisation of the National Health Service took place and it was at

this time that SYMAS was established. Shortly after that I was

appointed Assistant Divisional Officer (Operations) at SYMAS.       In 1987

(000087) I was appointed the Divisional officer (Operations) for

Nurrber 1 Division (which covers the Sheffield and Rotherham areas).       I

was subsequently transferred to the post of Divisonal Officer (Control

and Coranunications).   In 1988 (000088) I was appointed the Deputy

Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer.

6.   My normal official working hours are 0900 (0900) to 1700 (1700)

Monday to Friday but outside those hours either Mr PACE or myself are

on call.   The on call rota runs frcm 0900 (0900) on Monday to 0900

(0900) the following Monday morning.    During the week corrcnencing 10th

April 1989 (100489) Mr PAGE had been on call, but I had agreed that I

would do Mr PAGE'S on call duty on Saturday 15th April (150489)

because he was attending a course.     It is not at all unusual for he

and I to reach such an arrangement.

7.   Approximately two weeks prior to 15th April (150489) David JONES,

the Assistant Chief Metropolitan Ambulance officer (Operations) had

sought my approval for two ambulances to be deployed spiecifically for

the FA Cup Semi Final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.      This

was in addition to the two liaison officers who would be at the game

anyway. I discussed this request with Mr PAGE and subsequently told

Mr JONES of the approval.   One ambulance was to be stationed inside

the ground and the other at Middlewood Ambulance Station which is

approximately one mile to the north west of the ground.    We had

arranged for the same ambulance cover for the ground for the identical
                                                                       PAGE    3
                                                                       S3286

match the previous year and there had been no problems.

8.    When on call I carry a bleep and in addition there is a telephone

and radio in my car.      All messages to me come frcm ambulance control

at IVborgate Road, Rotherham.

9.    When on call it is only necessary for me to be contactable and to

be reasonably near to ambulance control.

10.   Although I was only on call I took my vehicle up to the Ml

motorway to Junction 33 because if there was to be an incident at that

tirre (lunchtime) it was likely to be on the motorway.       Nothing

happened there and so I went to control.

11.    I arrived at control at 1410 (1410).    I had a cup of tea and took

a couple of calls relating to routine admissions to hospital.          At 1430

(1430) a call came in from the liason officers (EASON and HIGGINS) to

say that they had arrived at the ground.

12.    At approximately 1506 (1506) I saw the pxolice line light up.

There is a direct line to control frcm the Police headquarters at Snig

Hill in Sheffield.     Superintendent CLARK took the call.     I heard him

say "What is it.     We've got liaison officers there" but he did not

seem to get a satisfactory reply.      He put the phone down and told me

thet the pxolice had said that they wanted a fleet of ambulances at the

Leppings Lane end of the Hillsborough ground.      I commented that

ambulances could not get into that end of the ground and I questioned

why they would want them.     The Police line then lit up again and this

tiire Control Assistant               took the call.   I heard her say

"What do you want ambulances there for, what's happening."       She did

not seem to get a satisfactory reply.      I contacted the ambulance which

was on standby at Middlewood and instructed it to go to the Leppings

Lane end of the Hillsborough ground to report what was going on.          I

kneiv that the liaison officers inside the ground would have

difficulty getting out to Lepjpings Lane and so would not be able to
                                                                 PAGE         4
                                                                 S3286

report on what was happening there.     I then told Superintendent CLARK

to contact the liaison officers to see if they had anything to repxort

and I then immediately left.

13.     As I left the control building Mr MDRLEY was arriving in a marked

Range Rover.     He was the duty officer that day and had been on the Ml

carrying out a similar roll to that which I had carried out at

junction 33.     I told him that there was an incident going on at

Hillsborough and we did not know what it was. I drove the Range Rover

to the ground.

14.     As we drove to the ground we could hear the conversations frcm

control to various vehicles, but not the responses from the

vehicles.     That is quite normal operational staff can only hear the

control end of each conversation.     Control were clearly sending more

anc more ambulances to the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough.        I knew

the ambulances could not get access into the ground there and I

rerramber corrcnenting to Mr MDRLEY that if any ambulances did try to get

in there they would be damaged.     The reason why ambulances cannot gain

access at the Leppings Lane end of the ground is that the entrances

are not sufficiently high to permit access.     I knew there

had been an incident some ten years earlier where an ambulance had

triad to gain access to the ground frcm the Leppings Lane end and the

top of the ambulance had been damaged.     I told Mr MDRLEY to radio to

control for all Trent ambulances to be made available as soon as

possible.    He did this and I heard the message transmitted from

control by            who finished the mesage by adding "particularly

Sierra mobiles." This was a reference to vehicles in the Sheffield

area.    This would put all ambulances on standby and would authorise

control to bring ambulances in frcm other areas to cover for the

ambulances in our area.    We arrived at the Penistone Road end of

Hillsborough at 1522 (1522).    We went there because I knew it was the
                                                                   PAGE     5
                                                                   S3286

only access into the ground which ambulances could use.     Attached to

this statement is a plan.    I parked the Range Rover in the position

coloured yellow.    In the position coloured green was the ambulance

which had been stationed at the ground but the ambulance men     were not

with it.    I do not recall seeing either of the ambulance men or

liaison officers at that time although I have subsequently been told

that one of the liaison officers spoke to me then.     I told Mr MDRLEY

to stay with the vehicle and not to move and I went onto the pitch to

see what was happening.

15.   There was a line of police across the ground roughly in line with

the edge of the penalty area in front of the goal at the Leppings

Lara end.   The Police were standing two or three deep.    They were

letting people through and there was a lotof people on the pitch on

my side of the police line with injured people on hoarding.     As I came

onto the pitch people started grabbing at me and shouting at me to

help; they were all spectators who were helping injured people.        I

ignored them.    I knew that the injured were coming frcm the Leppings

Lane end of the ground and that there were ten or twelve ambulances at

that end of the ground and I thought that they could not get access to

the injured.    The most important thing for me to do was not to

provide immediate help to the injured inxnediatley around, but to

supervise the whole of the ambulance operation.    I went through the

police line and the scene looked like a battlefield.      There were

people lying on the pitch and I saw others behind the fence with their

faces pressed against it.    I only stayed there for a few seconds and

ran back across the pitch towards the area where I had left Mr MDRLEY

and the Range Rover.    I believed that the ambulances at the Leppings

Lane end could not get to the incident from where they were and I had

to get them round to the Penistone Road end of the ground.     When I ran

through the line I saw a police officer carrying a little girl in his
                                                                  PAGE     6
                                                                  S3286

anrs. He stumbled, I tcx>k the child from him and continued running

towards the area where the Range Rover was parked.     I got to the ramp

between the north stand and the Kop and looked at the girl who was

quite obviously dead.     The policeman then caught up with me and I told

hirr to take the girl's body to the gymnasium which I knew, from our

standard plan for Hillsborough would be the mortuary/patient treatment

area.

16.     I went over to Mr MDRLEY in the Range Rover and told him to

contact control to get the major incident vehicle and ambulances to

attend the Penistone Road end of the ground.      I also asked him to tell

control to try to contact Mr PAGE at his home.     The major incident

vehicle is a ccjrnnjnications centre and a mobile store.    It contains

dressings, triangles for slings, tubes for intubation, stretchers,

helmets, protective clothing, body bags, and road cones amongst other

things.

17.     I then went to the gymnasium.   Outside the gymnasium were a group

of St. John's ambulance people.     They were aged about 14 and were

clearly extremely upset.     I went into the gymnasium where the scene

seemed to be one of chaos.     There were police officers in there and

alraady some bodies laid on advertising boards.      I had gone in there

to see if any of our staff were there; there weren't.      There was

nothing I could do in there and so I went back to the area where the

Range Rover was parked to find that our ambulances were starting to

arrive.

18.     The yard was full of Police vans which had also been there when I

arrived and these hampered vehicles entering the yard.      In fact, the

entrance marked on the plan as "main police access" could not be used

because it was blocked.    There were also police horses in the yard.

19.   The first ambulance which I saw arrive was driven by

with Mr FLACK as the attendant.     I told them to get their ambulance
                                                                     PAGE        7
                                                                     S3286

onto the pitch because I thought this would help to calm down the

crcvvd who would see that the ambulance services were present and also,

of course, be able to take some of the casualties away.

20.   Meanwhile Mr MDRLEY was lining up ambulances which were arriving

outside the ground.     The drivers stayed with the vehicles and the

attendants came into the ground, onto the pitch to help bring injured

pecpie off the pitch into the yard area.

21.   I sent another ambulance onto the pitch driven by

Station Officer HIGGINS then reported to me, he is one of the liaison

officers.     I told him to find the crew of the ambulance which was

parked in the yard which had been the ambulance originally assigned to

the ground.     The cots were not in that vehicle and I presumed that its

crew had gone onto the pitch, to the Leppings Lane end to help with

the injured.     I told him to find the crew of the ambulance, to get it

loaded up and off to hospital.     The ambulance itself was full of dead

anc injured peole who had apparently been brought there by the crowd.

Scrreone was trying to get into the cab and seemed to be looking for

the keys.     I told him to get out and he did so.   I began to unload

the back and was assisted by Station officers EASON and HIGGINS and

the two crew who had then come back.    We put casualties in the

ambulance and took the bodies to the gym.     The ambulance went off to

hospital.     They would have known to go to the Northern General

Hospital.   The emergency procedure is that all casualties are taken to

the nearest hospital (in this case Northern General) until

instructed otherwise.

22.   I recall that when we were trying to get               /ehicle onto

the pitch a St. Johns ambulance appeared at the bottom of the ramp.          I

had not seen the St. John's ambulance previously but I presumed that

it must have been on the pitch when I was there.     The St. Johns

ambulance became wedged    against the stanchions holding up the fencing
                                                                   PAGE      8
                                                                   S3286

on its right.    Our vehicle was backed off the ramp and then pulled

forward to let the St. Johns ambulance out.     The St. John's ambulance

forced its way off the stanchion and up the ramp.      It left the ground.

23.   I only saw three of our ambulances go onto the pitch.     All the

further ambulances were reversed into the yard so that they could be

quickly loaded with casualties before going off to hospital.

24.   The last occasion which I had been at the ground was a year

before when the same match had taken place.     I had attended then simply

to speak to the liaison officer.    Since then a wheelchair access ramp

hac been put on the ramp which went from the yard on to the pitch.

The wheelchair ramp was evidently to get wheelchairs into the north

stand.     The presence of this wheelchair access ramp had considerably

restricted the width of the ramp down to the pitch which had caused

difficulties both for our ambulances and the St. John's ambulance.

25.   I was then approached by Alan HORNSBY (the Assistant Chief Fire

Officer). He told me that he had forty men and that he had deployed

them to help bring casualties onto the pitch.     He asked what else they

could do and I believe I told him to continue what he was doing.      By

this time ambulances were arriving all the time.     I only saw those

amtulances which were actually coming into the yard and I did not know

how many there were outside the ground.

26.   I do not recall when the ambulances came off the pitch.

27.   I was then approached by Leading Ambulance man              at the

top of the ramp from the pitch to the yard.     He is a trained

paramedic and was the first one that I had seen.     I sent him to the

gyrrnasium where I knew there were already a number of injured as well

as dead.    I told him to check all the injured, do what he could do for

them immediately and decide upon the priorities for getting them to

hospital.

28.   I then went to the Range Rover and spoke to Control to find out
                                                                   PAGE     9
                                                                   S3286

where the major incident vehicle was.     I was told it would

be there in three minutes.    They also told me that Mr PAGE was on his

way to control.    The major incident vehicle arrived shortly

afterwards.       I understand that it had been directed by police off

Peristone Road onto the service road round towards the Leppings Lane

end of the ground.     I was also told that the police had been in the

road to prevent a disturbance between rival fans who were, by then,

leaving the ground.

29.   I instructed the driver of the major incident vehicle (Station

Officer            ) to position the vehicle in the position marked in

blue on the plan attached to this statement.     I took some body bags

frcm the major incident vehicle and was on my way to the gymnasium

when I met Mr Jones who had apparently come round from the Leppings

Lare end of the ground.     I was very pleased to see him.   I told him to

taka control of that area and to be responsible for getting the

ambulances in and out.

30.   I am not sure whether I took the body bags to the gymnasium or

whether I gave them to someone else but at about that time I was

approached by a Doctor.    He had been in the crowd and said he had

thrae other doctors with him.     I do not know who he was but he was 45/

50 years old and was wearing a short coat.     He said that they did not

have any gear.     I saw aLeading Ambulance man nearby (I do not

reirember who) and told him to take the four doctors to the gymnasium

and introduce them to leading ambulance man             who had his

paramedic equipment with him.     I told him to tell            to take

the doctors names.    Mr MDRLEY then approched me with four or five

ambulance station officers (not from SYMAS) who had been in the

crowd.    I asked them to help and bring casualties from the pitch.    Mr

MDFLEY gave them all yellow ambulance jackets and sent them onto the

pitch.    I do not recall seeing them again.
                                                                  PAGE 10
                                                                  S3286

31.   I then went back to the gymnasium and saw Chief Superintendent

ADC IS. I needed to speak to him to ensure proper liaison between the

ambulance and police services.    He told me that he had just spoken to

the coroner (I think by telephone or radio). He told me that the

coroner had said that the bodies should be taken to various locations.

In fact, the coroner subsequently changed his mind about this.     Whilst

in the gymnasium talking to Chief Superintendent ADDIS I noticed that

there was a medical team present and I was told that they were

frcm the Northern General Hospital.    I am not sure how

mar.y people were in the team but I recall that a coloured Doctor was

in charge and I also remember seeing two or three nurses holding

saline drips.    At this time we had just started moving the injured out

of the gym.

32.   By this time the police vehicles which had been hampering

entrance and exit from the ground had been moved.    Mr JONES and Mr

DALE had ensured a clear passage for ambulances.    Mr JONES came into

the gymnasium and told me that he had ten ambulances on Penistone Road

anc five outside the ground with a further twenty five in Berries Road

bus garage, which was the pre arranged overflow site.      He told me that

he was aware of eleven bodies on the circular road at the Leppings

Lane end of the ground although I was not clear as to whether he meant

inside or outside the ground.    I sent Mr Higgins with three ambulances

to the Leppings Lane end of the ground to collect the bodies which Mr

JOKES had told me about.   By this time we had ambulances to spare.

33.   The last ambulances took the injured away before 1630 hours

(1630).

34.   At about this time Chief Superintendent ADDIS told me that the

coroner had now decided that he wanted all of the bodies taken into

the gymnasium.   I arranged for a number of bodies to be brought back

frcm the Northern General Hospital and one frcm the Royal Hallamshire,
                                                                     PAGE 11
                                                                     S3286

I believe that these were all people who had died in hospital or en

route, with the possible exception of the people who had been taken to

hospital by the St. John's ambulance.

35.   Seme time later the coroner arrived and we discussed with

Chief Superintendent ADDIS the question of what to do with the bodies.

 The coroner decided that the bodies would be photographed by

Polaroid, that the bodies would be taken to one end of the gymnasium

and the photographs put up at the other end so that relatives could

lock at the photographs and then be asked to identify bodies if they

thought they recognised the photographs.    The coroner did not want

anybody to be moved prior to identification.     The gymnasium was

divided into three by nets to mate courts and we put blankets over the

net towards the east entrance of the gymnasium.     The bodies were kept

at the west end and the photographs put up in the eastern section.       Mr

PAGE arrived at about this time.

36.   I introduced Mr PAGE to Chief Superintendent ADDIS.    By this time

a number of ambulances were parked in the car park around

the gymnasium.     Earlier vehicles belonging to players and various

executives had been parked there.    There were ambulances from other

districts as well as Sheffield and Rotherham.     I arranged for the

ambulances belonging to other districts to be sent back.    Mr JONES

dealt with this.     I also told Mr JONES that I wanted just six SYMAS

vehicles in the back yard by the gym.

37.   Bodies were removed to the Medico Legal Centre at Watery Lane as

they were identified.    The Medico Legal Centre is approximately two

miles south of the Hillsborough ground.

38.   The number of ambulances was later scaled down to two or three.

39.   At about 2000 hours (2000) I went back to control where a number

of senior officers discussed the day's events.

40.   I then went back to the ground and by 0300 hours (0300) on Sunday
                                                                           PAGE 12
                                                                           S3286

         morning the number of poeple coming to identify bodies had gone down

         to a trickle.   The last of the identified bodies left the ground at

         0448 hours (0448) and then all of the unidentified bodies were also

         talon down to the Medico Legal Centre.

         41.    I closed the incident at 0530 hours (0530).




                                                              ALAN HOPKINS SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

           TIME:              DATE:   080589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

® ^ C E R S SIGNATURE:

END OF REPOPT




                                                                                     3616
Incident      IC2   270390 OP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                            STATEMENT NUMBER     S992

                                                                               Station

      tame          DALE

Forenames           TREVOR LEWIS

Age                  41                       Date of birth

Address


Occupation          DIVISIONAL SUPT

Telephone

IC                  Height                    Build

Hair colour



•
Hair type

                                              Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                       Accent

Number of Fages

Dated               060589                                                        Signed


             TREVOR LEWIS DALE    Date of birth                                States

             1.           I am employed by SYMAS as Divisional Superintendent

                      Operations working from Parkway Ambulance Station and

                      responsible for the Sheffield and Rotherham area.        I have

                      held this post for 2 years.      However I have 18 years

                      experience in total beginning with Sheffield City Ambulance

                      Service and then with SYMAS after the reorganisation of the

                      Metropolitan Districts in 1974 (000074).       I began as an

                      Ambulanceman in 1971 (000071) and later became leading

                      Ambulanceman at Batemoor Station.       I was then promoted to

                      Station Officer at Maitty and subsequently transferred to

                      Parkway.     I held the post of Station Officer for

                      approximately 18 months before being promoted to Divisional

                      Superintendent Operations.

                                                                                           3617
                                                       PAGE       2
                                                       S992

Apart from the Miller Certificate irty other qualifications

relate to Management and I hold the certificate of the

Institute of Supervisory Managanent.

My duties are to manage the Parkway Ambulance Station, which

is the biggest in South Yorkshire, and to oversee the

provision of manpower for all 7 Sheffield and Rotherham

stations.

I work on a 12 week rota which gives cover from 0600 to

2400.   I am required to work two weekends in every 12 weeks.

On Saturday the 15th April 1989 (150489) I was scheduled to

be on duty from 0800 to 1630 as Duty Officer.   The Duty

Officer is a kind of troubleshooter whose job it is to sort

out problems and fill duties when staff are absent.     I had

the use of a staff car to enable me to attend wherever

assistance was required.

During the week prior to the 15th April (150489) I had

worked normal shifts and had taken Monday, Tuesday and

Wednesday off in lieu of the weekend.

On the Saturday morning I arrived at the Station at 0800 and

attended to my administrative work and read the log.    There

was not a lot to be done at the Station so I drove to

control Headquarters at Heatherelose, Rotherham to see what

extra cover was being laid on in view of the football match.

I already knew that there were two extra crews on duty and

two officers attending at the match.

Later I drove around Sheffield to call at all local stations

close to Hillsborough football ground.   I was in the region

of the ground until about 1450 when I parked on Halifax Road,

about half a mile frcm the stadium, to watch the crowds.      I

noticed that there were a large number of Liverpool


                                                                      3618
                                                               PAGE   3
                                                               S992

     supporters trying to park.     I had no specific task at this

     stage, but was simply making myself available for any

     contingency which might arise.

8.   Towards 1500 I knew the match would be starting and assumed

     there would be no trouble once the game was under way.       I

     therefore began to make my way back to Parkway Ambulance

     Station on the other side of town.    On the way back I

     intended to call in on one of my staff who had retired after

     illness and, as a result of this detour, I was in the

     Frenchville area when I heard on the radio control responding

     to calls from Alpha's 3 and 4.     I knew that these were the

     call signs of the liaison officers inside the Hillsborough

     ground.    I could not hear both sides of the conversation

     since all that drivers are able to pick up is control

     speaking, and the radios cannot receive messages going into

     control from other drivers.     Nevertheless there seemed to be

     a lot of contact from Alpha 3 and Alpha 4 so I guessed there

     must be something wrong.     I therefore turned back towards the

     ground as a precaution.     I did not look at the time.

9.   I had also turned on Radio Sheffield and I heard the

     commentator announce that the game had been stopped.       When I

     heard this I radioed control for information.     They told me

     there had been some sort of incident but they did not have

     any further information.     As soon as I heard this, I drove

     as quickly as possible to Hillsborough, using the blue

     flashing light and siren.     On the way I continued to listen

     to the radio and heard the controller say something about

     Leppings Lane and the words 'you want them at Penistone Road

     then.'    From this I understood that there was an incident at

     Leppings Lane end but that Ambulances were being requested


                                                                          3619
at the Penistone Road entrance.     There was no contradiction

in this because I am familiar with the ground and knew that

the Penistone Road gate was the only access for vehicles

onto the pitch.

I was aware of a contingency plan relating specifically to

the Hillsborough ground.   Mr EASON and Mr HIGGINS regularly

attend at matches and Mr EASON had drawn up this plan in

liaison with the Police.    It was not part of my duties to

know this plan thoroughly or to be specially trained for it.

But I was aware that a plan existed and I knew of the

entrances and exits to the ground.

At same stage on my way to Hillsborough I heard the

controller order all crews to switch to ERC channel and I

obeyed this instruction.

I went straight to the Penistone Road end, approaching along

Herries Road and turning left onto the Penistone Road dual

carriageway.   I did a u-tum across a gap in the reservation

and approached the gate next to turnstile 77-88, below the

main Police access.    I parked the staff car on the central

reservation.   I do not remember what time I arrived or

whether I confirmed my arrival to control in the normal way.

The radio may have been busy.

I left the car and saw Mr EASON standing in the middle of

the road looking for ambulances.     I asked him how bad it was

and he said there were about 9 fatalities.    He also said

Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer HOPKINS and Assistant

Divisional Officer for Support Services MDRLEY had just

arrived and gone into the ground.

Gate 77-88 leads into a yard in the comer between North

stand and Spion Cop.   There were three ambulances already in
this yard when I arrived and space was cramped.      Mr EASON

was directing ambulances to reverse in because there was no

room to turn round.     A maximum of 4 ambulances could park in

this yard.

Mr EASON explained to me that they were backing ambulances

into the yard to load from this point and asked me to take

over his place.   He left me in the road waiting to receive

ambulances.   There was no traffic at this stage because the

Police were diverting it up Herries Road South.      I also kept

an eye on the ambulances already in the yard and supervised

some of the loadings.

Soon after I arrived I saw an ambulance approaching with

blue lights flashing and thought it was attending the ground.

It was stuck in traffic on Penistone Road above the diversion

and I ran up to a Policeman in the street and asked him to do

something about the traffic because I needed ambulances down

at gate 77-88 as a priority.     I then ran up to the ambulance

and said to the crew 'came on.     Get down here.'   They said

they already had a patient on board and I assumed they had

picked up a casualty from the ground, although I later found

out this was an urgent admission to Northern General Hospital

which was unrelated to the incident at the match.      The

ambulance moved off and I returned to the gate.      I was

approached by a Liverpool fan asking where the Royal

Hallamshire Hospital was and how could he get there as his

friend had been taken there by ambulance.     I quickly gave

him the information and then continued at gate 77-88.

The next thing I remember is that more ambulances were

arriving and I asked them to queue in the road while I

cleared the ambulances which were already loading from the
                                                              PAGE      6
                                                              S992

      yard.    There were still three ambulances in the yard, two of

      which were parked side by side with their backs towards the

      ramp which leads onto the pitch and the third was parked

      between them and the gate.     I found that the ambulance in

      front of the gate had been left by its crew without any keys

      and it was blocking the exit so that one of the ambulances

      behind it could not get out.     I therefore noted the fleet

      number of the vehicle and its call sign and went into the

      gym to look for the crew.     I knew that the gym was the

      designated casualty clearing area and therefore assumed all

      the injured were being taken there.     The first thing that

      struck me in the gym was the number of bodies on the floor.

      The next impression was the difficulty I had in locating

      Ambulancemen because both Ambulance Personnel and the Police

      were wearing blue shirts and HV jackets and it was difficult

      to tell them apart.     However, I knew which station the

      abandoned vehicle was from and, by looking for staff from

      that station, I managed to find the driver fairly quickly.

      I sent him back straight away to move his vehicle.      I think

      it was                  from Longley Station.   It was unusual

      for a driver to leave his vehicle because the Major Accident

      Plan requires every driver to remain with his ambulance and

      I had myself been repeating this instruction to crews

      arriving at the gate.

18.   While I was in the gym Mr HOPKINS saw me and asked me to get

      the Major Accident vehicle to the ground as soon as possible.

      When I came out of the gym I tried to radio control on my

      hand set using ERC channel but I could not get any response.

      The hand set appeared not to be working at all, although I

      had no idea what was wrong with it.     It was definitely


                                                                            3622
                                                               PAGE       7
                                                               S992

      switched on to the right channel.    I therefore set out back

      to the staff car to use the radio.    As I got back into the

      yard I noticed the ambulance which had been first in the

      queue to back in for loading had driven off and was just

      turning in Vere Road.    I said to a nearby Policeman,

      "Where's he going?" and he replied that he had sent them to

      Leppings Lane end.    I did not stop at that point to discuss

      why but went straight to the staff car and called control on

      the car radio.

19.   I think I got through to control but I could not understand

      their reply because there was so much static on the set.        I

      did not look at the time.    I was straining to hear what they

      said.    I asked for the Major Accident vehicle to attend,

      repeating this request a number of times.    I then said, "I'm

      not receiving you, I'm going back on the domestic channel."

      But I found the domestic channel was very busy and I was

      forced to switch back to ERC.

20.   While I was trying to get through, Mr EASON came over to me

      and asked me to pass on a further message to control.      I

      cannot remember what it was about.    I said I would do so if

      I could only get through but I could not tell through the

      crackling whether they were answering me or someone else.       I

      told Mr EASON that I was trying to get hold of the Major

      Incident vehicle and he said, "It's OK, the vehicles on its

      way.    Somebody's already been in touch."

21.   In between the static I heard control calling my call sign,

      Alpha 2, and understood he was asking me the number of

      fatalities.   From what I had seen in the gym I said, "About

      30."

22.   I then left the staff car to return to the gate and remember


                                                                              3623
                                                             PAGE     8
                                                             S992

      a Policeman shouting, "Right lads - dogs out."     There were

      crowds of people and the dogs were very excited.     I recall

      noticing an ambulance going into the main Police access and

      assumed he had been instructed to use that gate by the

      Police.   Mr EASON was with me and I said, "I'm going to see

      what's happening down there."   I found there were quite a

      few ambulances parked in the yard at the side of the gym and

      also Police minibuses.   Having taken a look I ran back down

      to Mr EASON because I had no means of speaking to him except

      direct.   Even if my hand set had been working it is not

      capable of three way conversations so that you can only

      communicate with control and not with other officers.      I

      told him I would stay down at the main Police access to

      supervise this other loading area, because the Police were

      sending ambulances in without any real method.     It struck me

      it would be better to be sending the ambulances in one gate

      and out through the other but this was not practical because

      it would have taken too long to clear the ambulances already

      parked in the yard by turnstiles 77-88 and there was also a

      Police riot van parked up between the North stand and the

      houses opposite which was blocking the way.   On the map it

      does not appear as if there is room to drive past the ramp

      entering the North stand but in fact it is possible to drive

      under the stand.   In any case it was impossible to stop the

      many spectators from loading injured fans into the

      ambulances.   The Police driver could have been anywhere.

23.   After this I stayed in the gym yard by the main Police

      access.   Ambulancemen were loading casualties all around and

      there were also many people sitting about in shock.     The same

      fan who was wanting to get to Hal lamshire Hospital came up to


                                                                          3624
                                                                PAGE
                                                                S992

      me again.   I don't know what happened to him.    Perhaps

      someone took him with them in the end.

24.   The next thing I remember was a call for stretchers.

      Attendants were taking cots frcm the ambulances with them

      into the ground.    I remember a group of Liverpool fans

      carrying a young lad on a hoarding and they wanted to load

      him directly into the ambulance on this board.     I stopped

      them and moved the boy onto a stretcher which I then loaded

      into the ambulance.   I think with the assistance of

              from Middlewood.     The boy was not breathing.     I went

      to the front of the vehicle to fetch a bag and mask and when

      I turned round                 had already put in an airway.     I

      pulled his chin back and started resuscitation and the bag

      worked well.                  gave him cardiac massage and I

      continued inflations frcm the resuscitator.      I knew the boy

      would need two attendants on his way to hospital and it was

      not possible for me to stay with him because I was needed in

      the gym yard.    I said to a nearby Policeman, "Can you drive

      - on second thoughts can you do CPR?" (i.e. resuscitation).

      He said he could so I told the driver to get in and

               book over my job while the Policeman carried on with

      cardiac massage.   I told them to get to the Northern General

      which was the nearest hospital and I knew they would not

      have to cross any traffic.    They also had Police outriders.

      I don't know who the boy was or what happened to him.

25.   I then noticed walking wounded were being loaded into two

      Police personnel carriers parked in the yard.

26.   In the back of another ambulance I saw a man with chest

      injuries struggling to breathe.    Someone was about to load

      another casualty on a stretcher next to him.     I could not


                                                                           3625
                                                              PAGE     10
                                                              S992

      see the driver of the vehicle and there were no keys in the

      ignition.    It is policy to take keys away if a vehicle is

      left to avoid theft.     I asked whose vehicle it was and was

      told                       I went into the gym to look for him

      and found him administering a drip.     He said the driver was

                       also of Middlewood, and I went straight out to

      find him.    As I left the gym Mr HOPKINS shouted at me to get

      some more body bags.     When I got back to the ambulance the

      driver was already there and appeared to have been in the

      vicinity all the time.     I asked him if he would be alright

      with the two patients and he said, "Yes."     I therefore asked

      a Policeman to drive the ambulance while the driver remained

      in the back with the patients.     The ambulance left with a

      Police escort.

27.   It was typical for attendants not to return to their

      vehicles after they had gone into the ground or the

      gymnasium.    They were detained to attend to casualties,

      especially if they were extended trained,

      for example, was a paramedic.

28.   Next I carried out Mr HOPKIN's instruction to request more

      body bags.    I cannot remember how I got back in touch with

      control, but I think I may have gone back to the staff car,

      because I remember going between two loading areas.     I

      managed to speak to control and through the static I pieced

      together their reply, frcm which I understood that a West

      Yorkshire vehicle was on the way with more equipment.

29.   After this time flew and I never looked at my watch.    Many

      casualties were being brought out by groups of supporters

      over whom we had no control.    The Major Incident Plan for

      Hillsborough specifies that the gym should be the casualty


                                                                            3626
                                                                PAGE   11
                                                                S992

      clearing post and I assumed that those casualties who were

      being taken into the gym were being assessed by doctors or

      paramedics in there.     However, because of the involvement of

      so many supporters many injured were being loaded straight

      into ambulances with the ambulance crews, to assess

      priorities.    I noticed that the doors to the gym were too

      narrow - you could only get one person through at a time.

30.   Other vehicles continued to arrive and in each case I

      instructed Attendants to take stretchers in while the driver

      remained with the vehicle.     The operation seemed pretty well

      organised because more crews were available and the number

      of casualties coming out of the ground gradually reduced.

31.   The next thing I remember is seeing                     Loading a

      12-seater ambulance which we call a 'Goldfish bowl' with

      walking wounded.    I said to him, "Is it full - are you

      sure?" and when he insisted it was I told him to drive off.

      I don't know where he went.     At some stage I had received a

      message frcm one of the crews that Northern General Hospital

      was reaching capacity and so I had been generally saying to

      crews that they should start taking casualties to the

      Hallamshire.

32.   By this time the two Police hire buses had left and had been

      replaced by ambulances with drivers waiting.     Most

      casualties had been moved by now with the remainder being

      stabilised in the gym.

33.   I went back into the yard by the turnstile 77-88 and saw the

      West Yorkshire Major Accident vehicle arriving.     Mr JONES

      was there and had been co-ordinating the arrival of

      ambulances at this gate, which he had instructed to queue up

      in the road outside.     Station Officer          and I helped


                                                                            3627
                                                              PAGE    12
                                                              S992

      the driver to off load the body bags and found there were

      only about a dozen.   I took them into the gym and I think it

      was then Mr HOPKINS asked me to check if there were any more

      walking wounded on the field.

34.   I went down to the end of the ramp and looked across the

      field.   There were still lots of people in the Kop applauding

      in a good natured way - as though clapping the efforts of the

      helpers - they were not shouting.   There were Police with

      dogs on the field in front of the Kop.   I scanned the field

      quickly but could not see any more wounded.    I don't recall

      noticing the Police line.   Everything had now calmed down.        I

      went back into the gym and Mr HOPKINS said he only need six

      ambulances from then on and the others should stand by at

      Herries Road bus station.   I took this message to Mr JONES,

      who was still lining up ambulances in Penistone Road.      He in

      turn asked me to take two ambulances round to the Leppings

      Lane end to collect 11 bodies and bring them back to the gym.

      Until then I had not been aware that patients had been

      collected from this end of the ground and presumed these

      bodies had been brought out from the back having died at the

      fence.   The first two vehicles in the queue were frcm West

      Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire.   Travelling on the footplate

      next to the driver I directed them to the roundabout at the

      end of Penistone Road and we turned left into Leppings Lane

      (Vere Road is fenced off during match days). When we

      arrived at gate C, Leppings Lane was beginning to clear.       I

      did not pay much attention because I had not known about any

      possibility of an incident outside the ground at this end.

      There were still people around but there did not appear to be

      any casualties and I did not see any bodies.   There was


                                                                             3628
                                                               PAGE   13
                                                               S992

      already an ambulance at gate C with its crew and Station

      Officer HIGGINS.   He asked why we had come and said he had

      already been sent to collect the bodies and that the job was

      complete. There was nothing further for me to do so I

      returned to Penistone Road end with the two "vehicles.

35.   When I got back to the Penistone Road end I was instructed

      either by Mr HOPKINS or Mr JONES to go up to Herries Road

      bus station to organise the ambulances waiting there.      I

      took the staff car and informed control on ERC channel where

      I was going.   There was still interference but I made out

      their reply that Alpha 4 (Mr EASON) was already there.      I

      therefore said I would not leave the ground and went back to

      Mr JONES or Mr HOPKINS and said there was no need for me to

      go.   I went into the gym to see if I could help and Mr

      HOPKINS ordered me to take Mr HIGGINS to the City Mortuary

      (the Medico Legal Centre) to warn them to prepare for 80 to

      90 bodies.

36.   We took the staff car and the traffic was appalling.     Nothing

      was moving in either direction anywhere around the ground and

      we made our way through between the lines of traffic using

      the flashing lights.   On the way to the Medico Legal Centre a

      young boy on a bike rode into the front of the staff car

      opposite Hillsborough Park.   Fortunately he was not hurt and

      the bike was also not damaged.   We dusted him down and

      followed him home on his bike to                Hillsborough.

      We informed the control of this detour and on this occasion

      the ERC channel worked perfectly well. We left the boy with

      his mother and continued to the Medico Legal Centre.

37.   On arrival we found a number of Policeman and Mortuary

      Attendants and told them to expect 80 to 90 bodies.      I stayed


                                                                           3629
for about 5 to 10 minutes and then left Mr HIGGINS and

returned to Hillsborough alone.

On approaching the ground I confirmed my arrival to control

and received a garbled message to go to Herries Road bus

station and set up a telephone line to Headquarters.       I

therefore diverted to Herries Road.     On arrival, Leading

Ambulanceman          approached me in my car and when I

explained why I was there he said the landline had already

been set up.   He said Mr PAGE at Headquarters wanted to

speak to either Mr JONES or Mr HOPKINS and they should get

in touch.   I therefore went back to the ground to take this

message, driving down to the roundabout at the end of

Penistone Road and reversing back down the dual carriageway

in the opposite direction to the one way sytem.    Penistone

Road was clear.

I drove into the gym yard and found both Mr HOPKINS and Mr

JONES in the yard.     I told them to contact Mr PAGE and they

went over to use the Vodaphone in Mr JONES Range Rover staff

car.   There was -very little left to do, except to help in

covering bodies with blankets or green stretcher sheets or

whatever was available.

Later I recall Mr PAGE arrived in his car with

They had a look round with Mr HOPKINS and Mr JONES and then

spoke to the staff.    He instructed Mr EASON,                 and

Mr MDRLEY to continue dealing with the bodies and asked me

to go back to Headquarters and arrange for some of the night

crews to come in on duty early to give extra cover.

Following this Mr JONES gathered everyone together and

sorted out crews on different duties.    He asked some to stay

to assist in the removal of bodies and sent others back to
                                                                PAGE   15
                                                                S992

      their stations.

41.   I then came back to Headquarters, arriving at about 1900, I

      managed to arrange for three crews to come in early at 2000

      two at Parkway and one at Middlewood.    After I had organised

      this a call came in and a message was passed to me that Mr

      HIGGINS was still at the mortuary and needed picking up.         I

      went to fetch him and we both returned to Hillsborough to

      assist where we could.

42.   When I was back at the ground a message came through on Mr

                    hand set that Mr Colin MOYNIHAN, the Sports

      Minister, would be arriving by helicopter at the Niagara

      Sports ground and an officer should be detailed to meet him.

      I volunteered to go.     This was about 2200.   I made my way in

      the staff car to the Niagara ground and made myself known to

      the Police.     I informed control of my arrival.     I then stood

      talking to Mr PATNICK (the MP for Hallam). The Assistant

      Chief Constable came to meet the helicopter.        I had my hand

      set with me and by this time we had reverted to channel 2,

      although I cannot remember when this happened.       I radioed

      control to ask when the estimated time of the arrival of the

      helicopter and they replied that the helicopter was coining

      and only an officer in attendance was required.       Mr MDYNIHAN

      landed at approximately 2210 and after he had left I

      returned to the ground.    I stayed with Station Officer

      HIGGINS and helped him loading the bodies into Ambulances.

43.   At about midnight Mr HIGGINS and I drove back to Longley

      Ambulance Station to collect our cars and stood down.       While

      we were still at the station.                   from Rotherham

      Station came in from the ground with a Renault vehicle which

      had seats wanting to collect a couple of stretchers.       We


                                                                            3631
                                                                        PAGE     16
                                                                        S992

                   told him to leave this vehicle and take an ambulance which

                   was available with stretchers already on board.   I believe

                   these were required to carry more bodies.

         44.       I went heme at about 0100.




                                                               T L DALE SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

           TIME:            DATE:   060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

E ^ b F REPOFT




                                                                                      3632
Incident    IC2   270390 OP8Q64         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER S1022

                                                                           Station

Surn
dumame

Forenames

Age                                         Date of birth

Address


Occupation        AMBO OFFICER LONGLEY

Telephone

IC                Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

                                            Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                       Accent

Number of Eages

 Dated             060589                                                     Signed


                        states :-

           1.        I am employed as a qualified ambulancewoman for SYMAS.

           2.       My date of birth is

           3.       On 15th April (150489) I was on duty from 0900 to 1730.

                    On the previous two days I had been on duty from 0800

                     to 1630.     On 15th April (150489) I was on duty with

                                         in vehicle with the call sign Sierra 407.

                                        was driving and we were on out patient

                    duty on the way back to Longley Station, where we are

                    based, at about 1510.     Control called us and told us to

                    go to Hillsborough Leppings Lane end.       We were told to

                    try to contact police control at the ground.

                    We approached Leppings Lane from the North.       It had only

                    taken us about three minutes to get there.      There were
                                                               PAGE    2
                                                               S1022

     several police officers on horses and several on foot

     around the ground.     I believe that we were the first

     ambulance to arrive in this area.

6.   I asked some police officers whether we were needed and

     they seemed surprised and were not aware that ambulances

     had been requested.    We were directed into the service

     road where a barrier of four or five movable metal

     barriers were removed to let us in.

7.   We stopped by the side of C gate.    I got out of the

     ambulance through the rear doors.     C gate was -very

     slightly open and I could see some movement behind it.

     Suddenly C gate burst open and a group of people came

     towards me carrying a young man with a chest injury.

     He was put into the ambulance.     Three other people

     (who were not injured) got in with him.     They may all

     have been relatives and I certainly understood that one

     of them was his brother.     A girl also got onto the

     ambulance with an arm injury.     I turned to go to close

     the doors and saw three people lying on the roadway at

     the rear of the ambulance.     I do not know how they got

     there.   They were not breathing and I told

                  to take our two casualties off the vehicle

     because the other three clearly required more urgent

     attention.    As I was getting off the ambulance two

     other ambulances pulled up behind us.                  got

     off one of them and ran up to ask how he could help.

     I told him he would have to take one of the three

     casualties which were lying on the ground,

     and his partner placed one of the three on a stretcher

     and I ran round to the rear of their ambulance to open


                                                                           3634
                                                         PAGE
                                                         S1022

the doors for them.     By this time there were people

everywhere and when I got to the rear of

ambulance there was already a person lying on the cot

in the ambulance with a policeman in attendance.

This patient was not breathing.     I cleared the patient's

airway with the assistance of the policeman by

manipulating the patient.     I then saw a fireman coming

across with resuscitation equipment which I started to

use.   I then left the fireman and the policeman giving

oxygen to this patient.

I returned to my own -vehicle to find that

cleared the original casualties (which had clearly not

been serious) from the ambulance.    There was now,

however, a teenager in one cot who was having severe

breathing difficulties and was semi-conscious and

there was a child of about 10 or 11 years old in the

other cot.   There were also two policemen on board.

The two patients who had been lying on the ground

were no longer there.

I gave the older casualty oxygen and we put him onto

his side.    I told the policeman to monitor him and then

turned to the other patient whom I tried to resuscitate

using a Brook airway.

I stayed in the rear of the ambulance whilst we drove to

the Northern General Hospital.    I assume that we drove

along the service road to get to Penistone Road.

When we got to Northern General we arrived at the casualty

entrance where they were clearly expecting ambulances.

Staff came out to meet us and there was one ambulance crew

stood by who assisted.    They took our patients in and then
                                                             PAGE      4
                                                             S1022

      brought our cots back.     We cleaned the cots and loaded them

      back onto the ambulance.

12.          radioed green at Northern General and he told roe that

      we had been instructed to take a medical team down to

      Hillsborough frcm Northern General.    We waited for less than

      five minutes for the medical team and we also took back one

      of the policemen who had previously accompanied us to the

      hospital.     There were two or three members in the medical

      team and they had 6 or 8 orange stacking boxes of equipment

      with them.

13.   We drove back to the ground and arrived at the Penistone

      Road entrance.     We reversed into the yard and the doctors

      jumped out.     I handed them some of the boxes and then took

      two boxes myself and got out of the ambulance.     By the time

      I had got out the doctors had gone and I did not know where

      they were but I was directed by a steward towards the

      gymnasium.     I went to the gymnasium and put the two boxes

      down in the middle of the gym floor.     There seared to be

      about 30 dead and injured in the gymnasium at this time.

      I was then told, possibly by            that our ambulance was

      wanted on the pitch.     I went back to the ambulance and there

      was a steward in front of the ambulance with             Before

      we drove onto the pitch I gave Mr HIGGINS some boxes which

      had been left in the ambulance and asked him to take these

      to the gym.    We drove onto the pitch to a position where

      there were two people attending a patient.    These two people

      were clearly either doctors or ambulancemen and I presumed

      that they had come frctn the crowd.   They had intubated the

      patient and were using a bag and mask.    They were also doing

      cardiac massage.     I formed the impression that the steward


                                                                           3636
                                                         PAGE     5
                                                         S1022

had wanted our ambulance onto the pitch specifically to

collect this patient.    We took our trolley off the ambulance

and loaded the patient, together with two policemen and the

two doctors/ambulancemen.    The bag and mask was then

connected to an oxygen supply so that the patient was

receiving pure oxygen.

       drove to Northern General with a police escort.      The

casualty was unloaded and we worked on him all the time,

giving oxygen and cardiac massage.    The patient was taken

into the hospital and I tidied up the ambulance and then our

trolley was brought back.    We left one of the policemen at

the hospital and returned to the ground with the two

doctors/ambulance men and the other policeman.     We received

a police escort to the Penistone Road end.

We joined a queue of ambulances in Penistone Road.    Mr EASON

was organising this.     Someone took both of our trolleys and

I followed them in.     There was no point in me waiting with

the ambulance if I could be doing something useful inside

the ground.

I saw an extended trained ambulance man struggling with seme

equipment that he was carrying.    He was going towards the

gym and I carried some of the equipment for him.    As I went

towards the gymnasium the policeman who had ccme back on our

ambulance came up to me and said that splints were needed

for another patient who was in the first aid room under the

north stand.   I gave the items I was carrying to a policeman

by the gym entrance and told him to take this equipment in.

I then went to the first aid room where some people were

loading a youth of about 19 years onto a trolley - this was

the casualty that the policeman had been referring to.      As
                                                                 PAGE    6
                                                                 S1022

      they had obtained a trolley they clearly did not need

      splints.   I ran back up to find our vehicle.    It had moved

      along the queue and I did not see it at first.    There was an

      ambulance in the yard and the patient who I had just seen

      was being loaded into that ambulance by the policeman and

      ambulanceman                         did not have a partner

      with him and asked if I would go with him to Northern

      General because someone had to go in the back with the

      patient.   I said that I would and the policeman and I got

      into the back of the ambulance.     I heard      radio to say

      that he was leaving the ground and going to the Royal

      Hallamshire Hospital.     The patient appeared to have a

      possible fractured pelvis and internal injuries.       I

      administered Entonox which calmed him down after a while.

17.   We were given a police escort to the fractures admission

      area at the Royal Hallamshire.     We unloaded the patient who

      was transferred to a hospital trolley with the help of other

      people.    I saw a doctor by the entrance to the hospital and

      told him of the patient's apparent injuries.

18.        -hen radioed green at Hallamshire and we were told to

      stand by at Netherthorpe Road.    When we arrived at

      Netherthorpe Road there were already a couple of ambulances

      there and another four or so turned up behind us.

19.   Later we called control    and were told to go to the B road at

      the Hallamshire to transfer patients to another hospital.

      We had probably been at Netherthorpe Road for something like

      30 minutes.

20.   We arrived at B road at the Hallamshire where

      was organising the transfers.     I would estimate that we

      arrived there at about 1650.     We only had one cot in our


                                                                             3638
                                                                          PAGE      7
                                                                          S1022

                   ambulance and so we transferred four sitting cases.    We were

                   waiting quite sane time before we left B road because porters

                   in the hospital were engaged on other duties.    Two patients

                   were brought down to us and I went to collect two myself who

                   came down in wheelchairs.

        21.        We transferred the four patients to King Edward's Hospital

                   on Rivelin Valley Road.

        22.        When we had unloaded the patients at King Edward we radioed

                   in and were told to go back to Longley, but we were called

                   again shortly after that and told to go to the intensive

                   care unit at Northern General to collect and transfer a

                   patient to the Royal Hallamshire for a CT scan with a team

                   of doctors.     We arrived at Northern General where we waited

                   to transfer the patient and Doctors team to Royal Hallamshire

                   transit ward.    At this point I believe we dropped the

                   policeman off at Northern General.    After delivering the

                   patient to the transit ward, we radioed control and were told

                   to return to base, this we did, returning the medical team

                   to Northern General, en route to Longley Station.

        23.        We arrived back at Longley at about 2020 and signed off at

                   2030.

                   Dated the 6th day of May 1989 (060589).




                                                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:      060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
Incident    IC2   270390 OP8Q64        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER    S3364

                                                                              Station

Surname

Forenames

Age                                         Date of birth

Address


Occupation         AMBULANCE OFFICER LONGLEY STATION

Telephone

IC                Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

A                                           Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                       Accent

Number of Pages

Dated             060989                                                        Signed


                                   states

           1. Date of birth is over 21

           2. My occupation is a Qualified Ambulanceman SYMAS.

           3. I started in the Ambulance Service with Sheffield at Corporation

           Street 1966 (000066).

           4. During my service I have attended a six week block course on

           ambulance aid at Cleckheaton Training School and thereafter various

           refresher courses.   I have attended the Markfield Training Centre in

           Leicester on about three occasions.      Fran attending the courses I am

           qualified to Miller standards.    I am stationed at Longley Ambulance

           Station at Sheffield 5.

           5. In addition to the ordinary ambulance training, part of which

           covers major incidents, there is also a manual on station giving

           procedures for such incidents.   To the rear of each SYMAS identity
                                                                   PAGE      2
                                                                   S3364

card there is a brief check list for 'First on scene vehicles' at such

incidents.   SYMAS also holds 'Dry run' mock incidents which are not

disclosed beforehand to test     response.   I have been involved in one

which was about two years ago.     I was recalled to duty and provided

back up cover for admissions and emergency calls whilst other crews

were on the 'Dry run'.

6. On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I arrived for duty and booked

in at Longley Station.     The vehicle allocated was Sierra 407.     I was

on duty that day with Qualified Ambulancewoman                 who was my

attendant.   We did the usual checks on the vehicle itself and its

equipment and then waited for calls.     On Saturday we were using the

nor-emergency channel for Sheffield and Doncaster on vehicle radio.

7. As far as I can recall we were asked to do an admission to St.

Luka, a discharge from Hallamshire and King Edwards non-urgent work.

We were busy with non-emergency calls until about 1300 hours when we

returned to station.     After lunch we dropped off a discharge patient

frcm the Royal Hallamshire and then confirmed to control that we were

clear.   We were told to return to station.

8. At the junction of Longley Lane and Herries Drive we received a

call frcm control.   As far as I can recall the call came through just

after 1500 hours.    My attendant crew member answered the call and the

message to us was - "To attend Leppings Lane entrance of Hillsborough

grcund as seme people have been injured" or words to that effect.

This was a red call so we had to proceed at speed and put on the

lights and sirens.   As far as I can recall we were told there would be

Incident Officers at the scene.     I already knew that my station

officer would be in the ground as duty officer.     This was routine

sirce the Bradford fire.

9.   I drove via Herries Drive, Herries Road and came down Leppings

Lars, turning left into the ground.     On arrival at the ground entrance
                                                                    PAGE    3
                                                                    S3364

there was a cordon of about three deep Police Officers.     I recall

there were about four mounted Officers in addition.

10. I drove towards the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground where

there was a temporary barrier across the entrance.     The crowd

appeared normal for a Saturday match.     I informed the Police Officers

that I had been told to attend and asked than what the incident was. I

die not actually receive a reply but the Officers at the barrier

moved it enough for me to get the ambulance into the ground.       I did

not see any other ambulances there and presumed we were the first on

site. 11.    As we entered the ground there did not appear to be

anything out of the ordinary.    In the immediate area (see plan area AG)

it was fairly quiet and it appeared to me that most people were

actually in the ground.    As I r e c a l l g o t out of the left side of

the vehicle and was walking to the rear. I got out of the vehicle and

asked people what was happening.    There was a girl holding her chest

and abdomen supported by a young man.     I assisted her into the

ambulance and at that time I noticed a sudden wave of people

caring from the direction of the ground. I do not know exactly

where they came from but they appeared to ccme from the left side of

the vehicle (point AG near West stand). I know they did not cane from

the rear of the vehicle i.e. the Leppings Lane entrance.     I realised

that there were a number of casualties.    Seme were being carried and

sore were being walked by colleagues.

12.   The casualties appeared headed for open space.    Some were put

on the floor.    There was a large male casualty who was loaded into the

vehicle.    The man was revived and he left of his own accord.     I

realised at this time that there were far more seriously injured

than those around us.

13.   As far as I can recall I radioed Control on the dcmestic channel

anc I asked for a least three other vehicles for this location which
                                                                    PAGE    4
                                                                    S3364

appeared to be the requirement at that time.

14.     I took the cots out of the rear of the vehicle.    A number of

pecpie including a uniformed police officer brought a young male

casualty and placed him on one cot.     I carried out a quick check and

he appeared not to be breathing.     I grabbed an airway from the vehicle

and inserted this and gave him a few inflations with the bag and mask

which revived him.     He was put on the vehicle with the bag and mask

and the police officer as escort.     The next thing I recall was that a

small child casualty of about 10 was brought out to me.       He appeared

to be worth giving treatment to.     An off duty doctor appeared and he

dealt with a number of casualties evaluating whether they were dead or

worth treating.

15. The child was placed on the second cot and placed in the vehicle

and I continued to work on him.     I then asked the police where my

attendant was.

16.     She then appeared and I said we had to get to hospital as other

vehicles would be wanting to come in.     She got in the back and I

drcve.     I had difficulty in moving the vehicle at first because

casualties had been laid out in the path of the vehicle.        I drove

round past the South stand and headed straight for the Northern

General via Penistone Road as this was the nearest hospital.

17.     We arrived at Northern General casualty to off load the two

casualties.     We contacted Control by radio at Northern General to say

we were clear and returning to Hillsborough.

18.     A Control Officer told us to wait and collect a medical team frcm

Northern General to take them to the Hillsborough.        I went straight in

to see a Charge Nurse and told him that I was to collect a medical

team for Hillsborough.

19.     There were three doctors and a medical staff available straight

away.     The casualty department was already busy at that time.    The
                                                                     PAGE      5
                                                                     S3364

mecical team needed an anaesthetist but he was not available at that

nor ant.                 ind I loaded the teams equipment into the

vehicle.     There was a short delay waiting for the anaesthetist and I

tock the opportunity to radio control and tell them our fleet number

which is written on the vehicle.     This was so that we could be

identified for equipment we were carrying rather than having to wait

in line.

20.     The anaesthetist arrived and we left to return to the ground.

Control told us to head for the Penistone Road gym entrance.         I drove

back to the ground down Herries Road South and up Penistone Road.

21.     Ambulances for casualties were lined up and I saw Station Officer

EASON who I knew from Longley Station.       He directed me to the

gyrr entrance.

22.     The doctors who we carried got out just inside the gym entrance

to the ground.     They made their way onto the pitch.     I left the

vehicle and followed them carrying the equipment from the ambulance.

23.     I saw a fire officer on the pitch and left the box of equipment

on the pitch nearby so that I could return to my vehicle.       On the

pitch I saw a line of police officers across and I could not see

beyond them.     At our side of the line of police (the Spion Kop) there

wera hundreds of fans stood around.        I returned to my vehicle near the

Penistone Road entrance.     I was approached by a number of police

officers and a man in a grey track suit who identified himself as a

Nottinghamshire Ambulanceman acting as a steward for the Nottingham

Forest supporters.

24.     The police said they wanted an ambulance on the pitch straight

away.    The man in the grey track suit said he would show me the way

onto the pitch.     He sat in the front,                was in the back and

I was driving and drove onto the pitch.

25.     I had difficulty in driving through the entrance and caught the
                                                                    PAGE     6
                                                                    S3364

rubbing strip on the side of the vehicle on the railing.        The nearside

mirror was pushed out of line.     I then drove onto the pitch.

We parked a short way onto the pitch by a casualty who was already on

a trolley and had been intubated.

26.   He was picked up by people nearby and we off loaded one trolley

frcoi the vehicle to make room for him and he was loaded in with a

doctor.     There were also two people with him.     I then left the pitch

via Penistone Road.     On leaving I was checked out by an Ambulance

Officer who took details of call sign, patient numbers and

destination.     We left the ground heading for the Northern General.       At

this time traffic was a bit heavy with supporters leaving.        On arrival

at Northern General we transferred him to a hospital trolley and the

doctor stayed with him.     We returned to the ground and gave a lift

back to two people who had accompanied the casualty and also two other

pecple who had been in the casualty department at the hospital.

27.   We were told by Control to return to Penistone Road and were

directed to the front of the queue and told to keep to the left side

by Station Officer EASON.     Because of an onccming vehicle I ended up

in the way of the other vehicle on the road and was ushered into the

main entrance.    We unloaded the trolleys and          book them towards

the ground.     I stayed with the vehicle.    I waited for 20 minutes

inside the Penistone Road entrance.      I received a message from Control

asking my location.     I told them my location and that I was without

trclleys. They said it was a request from Sierra 403 asking my

location.

28.   At this time I was single handed.      Control relayed that to my

attendant,                who was now on vehicle 403.     I informed the

incident officer of my position and he produced an off duty officer

              who became my attendant.

29.   I went back to my vehicle with               and shortly afterwards
                                                                    PAGE     7
                                                                    S3364

Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer HOPKINS and David JONES requested all

vehicles to form a fleet near to the rear of the gym.     As far as I can

recall the time would be after 1730 hours.

30.   JONES asked everyone in the group what shifts they were on.      We

were told that the Coroner wanted all bodies at one location, which

was the gym.

31.   We took a further break and then were told that there were about

twelve bodies at the Northern General and one at the Royal

Hal lamshire. He sent four vehicles for the twelve and he instructed

            and I to go to the Hallamshire where we were to contact a

police sergeant and to convey one body back to the gym with the

sergeant.

32.   On arrival at the Hallamshire there was a delay.    We were

informed of this by the Police Sergeant from Rotherham.        I took the

opportunity to clean the suction equipment and my airway equipment.

After about 20 minutes the body was ready for collection.       We loaded

the body onto the vehicle and returned to the ground informing Control

we were leaving.

33.   On arrival at the Penistone Road entrance we were informed that

the press were     in adjacent buildings with cameras    and     thatto avoid

them we should     reverse in under the North Stand. The body was then

off loaded and taken into the gym.

34. I was then informed by an Officer that there were two nore

deceased at Hallamshire and to attend and bring them back.       Control

was informed and we left for the Hallamshire with two Police Officers

for each body.     On arriving at the Royal Hallamshire for the second

occasion it turned out that the two in question were in fact on

intensive care     and not deceased.   We told Control   who     toldus to

return to station and on route we dropped     the two    police officers at

the Hillsborough ground.
                                                                         PAGE    8
                                                                         S3364

        35.     On arrival at the station we refueled the vehicle and noted in

        the log that it need rekitting. I then signed off at 2150 hours.

        Sicned



        Dated this 6th day of May 1989.




                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:    060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

    CERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPOFT




                                                                                     3647
                                                                         STATION

               SUSAN ELIZABETH
               DAVIES

ADDRESS:       SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE SERVICE
               COMMAND HEADQUARTERS, WELLINGTON ST, SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: OVER 21

OCCUPATION:    FIRE CONTROL OPERATOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 000 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 250789                                                S E DAVIES (SIGNED)



           I have been employed as a Fire Control Operator at South Yorkshire

           Headquarters for two years.

           My duties include accepting incoming telephone calls from other

           emergency services and the general public, recording such calls and

           despatching the appropriate fire appliance in respect of the incident

           in question.   I then maintain radio contact with the despatched

           appliances throughout the duration of incident.

           I raceived three weeks initial training followed by ongoing 'Watch'

           training. On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I was on duty working

           frcm 09.00 hrs to 18.00 hrs (0900 to 1800).   At 15.12 hrs (1512)

           I was in telephone contact with the Police Control Roan at Snig Hill

           concerning a house fire.   At 15.13 hrs (1513) the Police operator

           askad me for sane cutting gear for Hillsborough straight away.       I asked

           for the address of Hillsborough. There was no reply.    I had to ask

           thrae times for the address.    The address is required to provide

           me with a street and district to enable me to get out a pre-determined

           attendance from the computer.

           My Acting Senior Control operator suggested it might be Pennistone
DAVIES                   SUSAN   ELIZABETH


Road and the Police verified this.

I established with the Police that there had been a major incident

inside the football ground as a result of which I despatched six

puirping appliances an emergency tender and the control unit in

accordance with the Major Incident contingency procedures.

The first appliance arrived at the scene at 15.22 hrs (1522).      All

telephone calls and transmission over the air to appliances are

automatically recorded on audio tape and a transcript of the relevant

tirras has been produced to the Justice TAYLOR Inquiry to which I have

givan evidence.



INCIDENT - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND

SATURDAY, 15TH APRIL 1989 (150489)

TRANSCRIPT OF INITIAL CALL FROM POLICE TO FIRE SERVICE CONTROL



Tirra:    15.13.45 (1513)



Police:     Can we have cutting equipment please to Hillsborough

            straight away.

Fira:       Just a minute love.    Right, what's the address?

Police:     Cutting equipment at Hillsborough Football Ground straight

            away duck.

Fira:       Right, what... Hillsborough Football Ground?

Police:     Yes, Hillsborough Football Ground.

Fira:       What road is that on, do you know?

Police:     There's been a major accident love.    All the ambulances are

            up there.

Fira:       Yes, what road is it on love?

Police:     Er, I've no idea - Hillsborough Football Ground.
DAVIES                   SUSAN   ELIZABETH


Fire:     Well, what road is it on love, - do you know?

Police:    (To someone in background) Hillsborough Football Ground -

          what road is it on do you know?

Fire:      Penistone Road?

Police:    Penistone Road.

Fire:      Penistone Road.

Police:    Ok?

Fire:      Just a minute love, and what's exactly involved there?

Police:    It's a football - the big match - Liverpool v Notts

           Forest.

Fire:      Yes, but why do you want us love?      Is it ... you said it

           was an RTA.

Police:    No, no, no -     a major incident inside the ground love.

Fire:      A major incident inside?      Do you know exactly what it is?

Police:    No love, I don't.      They want all the cutting gear.

Fire:      For what?

Police:    Hang on a sec.

Fire:      What are they cutting - do you know?

Police:    (To someone in background) Fire Brigade says for what?

Tirre 15. 14.40 (1514)

Police:    (New voice) Hello?

Fire:      Hello love.     Now you want some cutting gear, what exactly

           is it for?

Police:    There's been a major accident at Hillsborough Football

          Ground where the semi final is.      The crowds have forced

           their way in - they've broken fences and the gates down.        I

           don't know exactly what it is but there are people trapped.

Fire:      Right love, OK love leave it with us.

Police:    Ok duck.
        DAVIES                SUSAN   ELIZABETH                       4


        Fir a:     Thank you love, bye.

        Tirra: 15.14.58.



                                                  S E DAVIES SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:     250789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                          3651
Incident    IC2   270390 OP8Q64       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER   S3002

                                                                             Station

f^name             HORNSBY

Forenames          A    D

Age                                       Date of birth

Address


Occupation        ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICER

Telephone

IC                 Height                 Build

Hair colour



•
Hair type

                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                     Accent

Number of Pages 2

Dated             170489                                                       Signed


           SOLTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE

           INCIDENT - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND - 15TH APRIL, 1989 (150489)

           REPORT OF AGO A. HORNSBY



           At approximately 1530 hours I received a telephone call from FCO

                   in Fire Service Control.    He informed me that they had a "

           Major Incident" in progress at Hillsborough Football Ground involving

           a large number of fatalities and casualties.     I informed FCO

           that I would attend the incident.

           On arrival at Hillsborough I was directed by the Police towards the

           Leppings Lane entrance and I parked my car at the rear of a fire

           appliance 100 yards (100 yds) from the Control Unit.     I

           ascertained from the Sub Officer in charge of the appliance that the

           Control Unit was in attendance at Leppings Lane but he had seen the

                                                                                        3652
                                                                 PAGE     2
                                                                 S3002

OiC. DO LOCKWOOD, proceed towards the Gymnasium where most of the

casualties were.   I handed my tally to the Sub Officer and asked him

to take it to the Control Unit for me and to inform them I was

proceeding to the Gymnasium.     Stn.O       accompanied me to the

Gyirnasium (the crowd at this time were inpatient and I noticed several

scuffles with the police).

On arrival at the Gymnasium I contacted ADO Robjohns and he briefed me

that there were approximately 50 fatalities and 70 seriously injured

persons in the Gymnasium and to the best of his knowledge all

casualties had been removed from the terraces, etc.    He could not at

that time tell me how the incident had occurred.     I walked round the

inside of the Gymnasium and met Stn.O. FLETCHER.     I ascertained that

all Fire Service personnel were all right and were standing by to

assist in first aid treatment.     I contacted DCAO HOPKINS who was

organising casualty handling in the Gymnasium and I asked if there was

any additional services he required from the Fire Service.    He replied

that the Fire Service had done a grand job and that no additional

services were required.   I contacted ADO ROBJOHNS and instructed him

to remain at the Gymnasium as OiC of the Advanced Control Point and

that the Fire Service Crews were to stay there with him.

Accompanied by Stn.O.            I went to the Police Station in the

grounds to ascertain any further details of how the incident occurred

and I was informed that three barriers had given way in one comer of

the "Kop".

I telephoned Fire Service Control from the Police Station and informed

them that there were possibly 70 fatalities and 30 seriously injured

and that the information was to be passed on to the Chief Fire Officer.

I then proceeded to the Control Unit and informed Fire Service Control

and all personnel on the fireground that I had taken over as OiC of

the incident.   I then proceeded to the Police Control Viewing Gallery
                                                                PAGE
                                                                S3002

to establish a contact with the Senior Police Officer.    An Inspector

was in charge of the Police Control and he informed me that ACC

JACKSON was OIC of the incident and he was located in the middle of

the football pitch.   I asked if there were any further casualties

requiring Fire Service assistance, to which he replied "No", and I

also asked if he required any additional Fire Service assistance, to

which he also replied "No".

Whilst discussing the incident in general a telephone message was

recieved in the Police Control from a Club Official requesting that a

carefully worded message to be transmitted over the Public Tannoy

System informing the crowd that the match had been abandoned.   The

senior Police Officer refused to transmit that message unless

authorised by ACC JACKSON.    He stated that there had been a lot of

skirmishes and with the current atmosphere he was afraid a riot might

ensue.

I left one officer, ADO GREEN (with fireground radio), at the Police

Control Viewing Gallery and instructed him to act as Liaison Officer.

I returned to the Contol Unit and issued instructions to all Fire

Service Personnel to either

          1.    Reportto theGymnasium and remain there.

          2.    Reportto theControl Unit.

          3.    Remainseatedon their appliances.

I instructed SDO SMOOTHEY to report to the Gymnasium and to ensure en

route that any Fire Services personnel he saw were informed of my

instructions.

The Chief Fire Officer arrived and I informed him of the situation

although at that time I was still unsure of how the incident occurred.

The CFO took over as OiC of the incident.

I remained on the Control Unit until the crowd had adequately

dispersed and then I accompanied the Brigade Photographer to the "Kop
                                                                           PAGE     4
                                                                           S3002

        end" where the injuries had been sustained and then we proceeded to

        the Gymnasium.     I ascertained from the DCAO, Mr.   HOPKINS, that no

        further immediate assistance was required of the Fire Service

        personnel and then contacted the CFO suggesting that, with the

        exception of 4 appliances and the Control Unit, all other appliances

        be returned to base.

        The CFO arrived at the Gymnasium and informed me that he had reduced

        appliances as suggested.     The CFO was briefed by ADO ROBJOHNS and Stn.

        0. FLETCHER.

        I was instructed by the CFO to contact the Senior Police Officer to

        see if they required any further assistance from the Fire Services -

        ACC JACKSON was contacted and he informed roe that our services were no

        longer required.




        A.L. HORNSBY,

        Assistant Chief Fire Officer.




        AH/JMT



        17th April, 1989.




                                                               A. HORNSBY SIOSIED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:


                                                                                        3655
Incident      102      270390 OP8064           DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                                STATEMENT NUMBER S2989

                                                                                       Station

      lame             SWAIN

Forenames              J

Age                                                Date of birth

Address


Occupation             FIREMAN 274

Telephone

IC                     Height                      Build

Hair colour

Hair type

                                                   Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses                Use                         Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                  170489                                                            Signed


             TO            CHIEF FIRE OFFICER

             FRCM          STNO SWAIN J 274                        OUR REF    06/2/2

                           RIVELIN VALLEY                                     JS/MR



                                                                   DATE    17.4.89 (170489)

             SUEJECT       INCIDENT AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY

                           FOOTBALL STADIUM ON THE 15TH APRIL 1989 (150489)



             On the 15th April 1989 (150489) I was Officer in Charge of Rivelin One

             appliance when we were mobilised to a major incident at Sheffield

             Wednesday Football Club.         On receipt of the call at 1516 hours, I

             proceeded to the Leppings Lane end of the ground.            On arrival I was

             unable to enter nearer than the iron railings at that end of the

             grcund because of the large numbers of police, public and amulances at

                                                                                                  3656
                                                                  PAGE
                                                                  S2989

the site.   I contacted control and requested that Damall Road

appliances attend at Penistone Road end.

As I dismounted from the appliance to speak to a police inspector at

the gate and an inmediate request was made for resuscitator in the

rear of the ambulance which we applied.

I asked the inspector what he wanted me to do and he attempted to

contact his superior by radio but with no success.

I then sent Fm         iown the road at the rear of the stand to

attempt to find a more senior police officer.   He returned to inform

me the most senior officer down there was a sergeant.   Further

conversations were made between myself and the police inspector as to

his requirements and at one stage he was of the opinion that our

services were no longer required.

I then sent L/Fm             and 1 Fm to look onto the pitch whilst the

inspector made further attempts to contact his superiors.

A police officer then emerged from the ground in seme state of shock

requesting resuscitators to be taken into the ground as there were

dying people on the pitch.    In view of this message I contacted

control by radio and made pumps 10 for resuscitation equipment.

At this time ADO ROBJOHNS arrived and I briefed him of the situation

and he took over the incident at this stage.

He then went into the ground to assess the situation for himself and

left me at the gate to liase with oncoming crews.    I then directed

five crews to the ground as instructed by ADO ROBJOHNS and DO

LOCKWOOD.   I also directed seme ambulances to the Penistone Road end

of the ground in the absence of anybody knowing the ambulance

requirements and Mr Robjohns repeated requests for ambulances to be

sent to that side of the ground.    I then went with DO Lockwood and

ACC Hornsby into the ground and cleared five crews from the pitch

back to their appliances as there was seme concern that the crowd was
                                                                         PAGE      3
                                                                         S2989

         getting restless.

         I cleared all personnel from the pitch and then went to the gymnasium

         to prevent further personnel from going onto the pitch until

         instructed to do so.    I then returned to my appliance and returned to

        bass at 1730 hours.




         StnO SWAIN J 274

         Rivelin Valley




                                                      STNO SWAIN J. 274 SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:              DATE:   160489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                       3658
                                                                             STATION

                DEREK
                HOUSLEY

ADDRESS:
                             S YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 30

OCCUPATION:     LEADING FIREMAN (943)


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 270689                                                  D HOUSLEY (SIGNED)



           I ann employed by South Yorkshire County Fire Serivce and I hold the

           rank of leading fireman a position which I have held for 4 months, and

           I currently work at Central Fire Station, situated in Wellington

           Street, Sheffield.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), my tour of duty was 0900 hrs to

           1800 hrs on Red Watch and I was nominated officer in charge of Central

           Fir3 Stations emergency tender with fireman 798              as

           driver.

           During the course of the morning a lecture was given by myself

           on first aid covering crush injuries and resuscitation to the shift.

           At 1516 hours that day the emergency tender was mobilised along with

           twc pumps from Central Fire Station, two pumps from Damall Road, one

           purrp from Rivelin Valley and one from Ringinglow Road to Hillsborough

           foctball ground, Penistone Road, Sheffield.    I attended along with

           firaman           on Central S, the emergency tender.

       We arrived at the Penistone Road entrance to the football ground at

           1522 hours.    My impression on reaching this point along with the

           tenders Central 1 & 2 was that we were not expected and no
HOUSLEY               DEREK                                             2


preparations had been made by the Police or stewards for our

arrival (eg. the gates had not been opened).

The officers in charge of the individual appliances dismantled the

tenders including myself, and attempted to gain information as to what

was happening and as to what was required from the fire service, from

the Police Officers and Stewards posted to the perimeter gates.

I approached a Police Officer myself and the only information I could

obtain was that there had been a pitch invasion/crowd trouble.

Station Officer FLETCHER ordered that the three Central Tenders were

to proceed along Riverside to gain access to the incident which was

believed to have stemed from the West Stand.

I irounted the emergency tender whilst sub officer        and Station

Officer FLETCHER ran in front of the tenders clearing the way for them

to follow.

The tenders central 1 and 2 were in front of us and we   followed

then along Riverside (the private road within the ground).   After

proceeding approximately 60 meters I realised that due to the height

of the emergency tender we would not be able to enter this way due to

a protrusion from the south stand which gave very little clearance for

us to pass under.

I informed station officer FLETCHER that we were unable to proceed as

our route was blocked by the stand and that we would gain access via

Penistone Road/Leppings Lane Station Officer FLETCHER acknowledged my

message and we proceeded to gain access in this way.

On route to Leppings Lane I heard via the radio that resuscitation

equipment was required at Leppings Lane end of the ground and at

arcund tis time we were stopped by a Police Inspector on Penistone

Road.   The Police Inspector appeared to be in radio contact with a

colleague but was unable to furnish us with any positive information
HOUSLEY               DEREK                                                3


so we proceeded on towards Leppings Lane.

On reaching Leppings Lane entrance of the football ground we parked

the tender outside on the main road behind ADO ROBJOHN'S vehicle and

proceeded to enter the ground taking with us a motivus resuscitator, a

spare bottle of oxygen and the first aid kit.     We had been informed

that the cutting equipment from the vehicle was not required.

Fireman           and myself made our way round to the rear of the North

Stand and we made our way through the seated stand full of spectators

on to the football pitch.

As we climbed over the fence onto the pitch we were immediately faced

with a casualty laid on the pitch with a group of around 6 or 7 male

persons around him.    A number of these people I could see were giving

mouth to mouth resuscitation and cardiac massage to the casualty.

Taking over the situation from the crowd, Fireman             ave oxygen

to the casualty from the resuscitator whilst I gave cardiac massage.

In Tiy own mind I thought the casualty was deceased but I did continue

along with F i r e m a n t o     administer oxygen and cardiac massage.

Whilst we did this a group of persons fetched an advertising board and

we transferred the casualty onto this and he was then carried

across the pitch to an area between the Spion Kop and the North

Stand.    Whilst we took the casualty across to this area Fireman

          and myself carried on rendering first aid to him.

Within minutes of reaching the area of the North Stand, and Spion Kop

an ambulance was found and we handed him over to the care of the

ambulance service.

I would describe this youth as being in his early 20's approximately

5'7"-5'8" and of medium build.    He had short straight mousey coloured

hair (with no parting).

He was clean shaven with a fair complexion I did notice the youth was



                                                                               366
HOUSLEY                 DEREK                                              4


wearing a watch on his left wrist with a dark coloured plastic looking

strap I did not notice any other jewellery on the youth or obvious

tattoos.     The youth had all his own teeth but I did notice that a

nuirber of the top set had fillings inserted.

The youth was wearing a light blue faded zip fastening jeans and a

dark coloured cotton round necked 'T' shirt which we did cut down the

front whilst administering first aid treatment so we could check the

breathing.     I did not notice the footwear the youth was wearing.

After placing the casualty in the ambulance together with Fireman

           [ returned to the football pitch and we assisted spectators by

giving oxygen to those having difficulty with breathing.     All of

these casualties were in front of the North Stand and I would say

there were around six in all.

By doing this Fireman[           and myself made our way over towards the

goal area in front of the West Stand with a view to assisting more

spectators in that area.

I overheard a message from Divisonal Officer LOCKWOOD on my hand held

radio to another member of the fire service that resuscitation

equipment was required in the gymnasium.     I contacted Divisonal

Officer LOCKWOOD and he instructed that Fireman            and myself

attend the gymnasium with the resuscitation equipment to assist with

casualties.

Upcn our arrival at the gymnasium we were directed by Station Officer

FLETCHER to two casualties who we gave oxygen and comfort one of the

casualties I believe had suffered broken ribs and the other had chest

and crush injuries.     A further two casualties were assisted from the

gyirnasium to waiting ambulances by myself and Fireman           we then

continued in the area rendering humanitarian service.     Approximately 5

minutes before the football match was officially abandoned we were
       HOUSLEY               DEREK


       instructed to return to the appliances where we were instructed

       to vrait.

       Sot a members of the public became agitated and upset that appliances

       and a staff car were blocking exits from the ground.     There was seme

       verbal abuse from the Public directed towards the fire service.      To

       alleviate the situation the staff car was moved to one side.

       A number of members of the public thanked us for what we had done.

       After the crowd dispersed we returned to the station arriving back at

       arcand 1720 hours.

       At no time whilst I was inside the actual ground did I see any

        spectators drinking alcohol.     There was no smell of alcohol on the

        casualty we were working on either, that I noticed.    The crowd in my

        opinion were well behaved and cooperative to any request made (whilst

        they were inside the ground).

                                                               D HOUSLEY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:    270689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                 I
                                    pC




                                                                                  3663
Incident    IC2      270390 OP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER   S2998

                                                                                Station

  rename             FLETCHER

Forenames            LAWRENCE   BRIAN

Age                  43                        Date of birth

Address
                                              S YORKSHIRE

Occupation           STATION OFFICER FIREMAN

Telephone

IC                   Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

m
Facial hair
                                               Complexion



Glasses              Use                       Accent

Number of Eages 2

Dated                 170489                                                      Signed


                                        Incident Narrative



           Hillsborough Incident



           The call to this incident was received at Control at 1517 hours

           (1517).    I proceeded with two pumps Central 1, Central 2 and E.T. (10

           mer).

           The route followed to the stadium was along Penistone Road, the route

           was reasonably clear, the weather was dry and sunny.

           On arrival at the stadium there was no one there to meet us which I

           expacted given the message said (major disaster).

           We drew the appliances to a halt just before the first set of gates

           into the stadium, I dismounted the appliance and asked a police

           officer where we were expected to go, he said he had no knowledge of

                                                                                           3664
                                                                 PAGE     2
                                                                 S2998

any incident or direction.     I asked a further police officer if we

could get in via the double gates, he said yes and irrmediately opened

the gates into the roadway down the side of the stadium, I went to a

gat3 adjacent to the entry gate, the police officer said they hadn't

called us and didn't need our assistance but perhaps we should go

further down the road, this we did.

I ran down the road to the end of the stadium where the police

observation box was situated and was shown the route to the pitch by

a Karshall.

I proceeded onto the pitch the crowd had not moved at all.    The pitch

arcand the area of the Leppings Lane goal area was full of people seme

casualties, scsne relatives and friends of casualties, people stood,

pecple kneeling, people laid down.    Many people in obvious shock this

included St Johns ambulance personnel, police as well as the fans.

Once on the pitch I asked several police officers who was in charge

and where the casualties were being moved to - they couldn't tell me.

It was clear to see that no rescues as such needed doing, but bodies

and casualties obviously needed removing from the scene.     I gave my

mer instructions to carry out first aid and resuscitation that

required doing and to try to be as selective as possible (there were

only five men available initially).

I spoke briefly to Station Officer SWAIN who informed me he was having

difficulty in getting to the incident.     I informed him I was at the

actual incident.    It was obvious to me we were going to need more

mer than the initial turnout and there would be an urgent need for

resuse itators. I then lost contact with him and my own drivers, I

sert a Liverpool fan with a message to my drivers to make pumps 10,

this he did, but in the mean time Station Officer SWAIN had already

sert the message.

At this point I contacted Fm          the driver of Central 1 and asked
                                                                          PAGE    3
                                                                          S2998

        hiir to try to get ambulances to the point where our appliances were as

        I knew this route was clear - this he together with Fm         iriver

        of Central 2 did.   Shortly after this Temp. Station Officer

        reported to me I asked him to go to the roadway were the appliances

        were parked and set up a casualty handling area, which he did, I then

        proceeded to try to get the most urgent cases transported to this

        casualty handling area, approximately 20 to 30 persons were

        transported by means of mate shift stretchers to this point,

        approximately 10 persons were taken off the field by ambulance.

        At this stage Firemen from Damall and Ringinglow were arriving and

        giving first aid.   This was also the time when ADO ROBJOHNS arrived on

        the field.

        ADC ROBJOHNS informed me that a temporary morgue had been set up in

        the gymnasium, I responded by having the obvious dead removed to the

        gyrr and the other casualties to the point I had set up.

        DO LOCKWOOD arrived on the pitch I gave him a brief report of the

        situation, he informed me he would go to the police control box

        overlooking the incident and set up a control point which he did.

        ADC ROBJOHNS informed DO LOCKWOOD that a casualty handling centre had

        been set up in the gym but there was a shortage of ambulances - the

        nurrber of serious casualties was quite low at this stage and the

        decision was made to move the remainder to the gym, and discontinue

        the casualty handling area I had set up and divert the ambulances to

        the gym.




                                                         L B FLETCHER SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:
                                                                        STATION

              DAVID
              LOCKWOOD

ADDRESS
                                            S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:   RETIRED FIRE DIVISIONAL OFFICER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 000 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 280689                                               D LOCKWOOD (SIGNED)



          I anti a retired Divisional Fire Officer I retired from South Yorkshire

          County Fire Service on 18th June 1989.(180689)

          Prior to my retirement I was stationed at Central Fire Station,

          Wellington Street, Sheffield as Divisional Fire Officer, a position

          which I held for 4 years.

          On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I was duty divisional officer

          for the West division of the South Yorkshire Country Fire Service.

          As duty divisional officer it was my role to supervise any fire calls

          received for the West Division.   As a matter of course I am informed

          of any serious incidents which occur on the division but I am

          automatically informed by the control of any incidents that the fire

          service attend if there are four pumps mobilised, if five pumps are

          required I attend the scene of the incident.

          On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I was informed at 1522 hours by

          the control that there was a major incident at Hillsborough football

          ground, requiring cutting equipment.   Six pumps and the emergency

          tender had been mobilised and as a result of this information I booked

          out to the football ground this bieng approximately 1524 hours.
LOCKWOOD               DAVID                                            2


Whilst on route to the football gorund I heard over the radio "make

puirps 10" and that resuscitation equipment was required.

My initial approach to the ground was via Penistone Road, where I did

encounter scsne traffic congestion.   I over heard on the radio that all

applicances were to attend Lepapings Lane entrance.

I proceeded to this area where I met station officer SWAIN (stationed

at Rivelin Valley), at the contact point.   Station Officer SWAIN

informed met that crews were inside the stadium and that Assistant

Divisional Officer ROBJOHN'S who was actually inside the ground was

requesting additional resuscitation equipment.

I instructed Station Officer Swain to assemble all crews and equipment

not already corrmitted into the stadium at the contact point and to

maintain contact with me by fireground radio.

I then proceeded into the stadium via the centre tunnel of the West

Stand where I was confronted by a scene of several hundred spectators

and Police on the football pitch. The pens in front of the

tunnel at this point were almost empty and I could see that there was

a natal barrier broken towards the front of Pen 3.    I made my way down

the terraces towards the gate at the front of pen 4 and onto the

pitoh from here I could see that there were casualties on the pitch.

As I walked through the terraces there were no fire personnel evident

to tie and I later realised that this was because they were down on the

pitch attending to casualties and therefore screened from any view by

standing spectators.

I proceeded onto the pitch and eventually located station officer

FLETCHER who informed me of the situation as he knew it at that stage

that was that seme casualties had been taken out to the Leppings Lane

entrance, but the majority had been and were being taken to the

gyrrnasium, at the Penstione Road entrance behind the North Stand.
LOCKWOOD                DAVID                                               3


I could see that first aid and resuscitation was being administered by

crews on the pitch.

I could find no senior Police Officer present on the football pitch so

I irade ray way up to the police control box.    When I arrived at the

Control Box I could see the whole of the ground and a number of

casualties being dealt with by fire service Personnel.

I entered the Police Box and identified myself and asked who was the

senior officer in charge.       I was told the Assistant Chief Constable

but they did not know where he was.       I also asked at this stage if the

senior officer of the ambulance service was available and I was told

that they did not know.     No Police Officer present in the control box

carra forward to identify himself or gave me any information on the

situation and I was virtually ignored as they busied themselves on the

telephones and radio.

Assistant Divisional Officer ROBJOHNS then contacted me by radio

stating that he needed men and equipment in the gymnasium.       I arranged

with station officer SWAIN by radio for this to be carried out and I

continued to co-ordinate movement of men and equipment from the

vantage point at the Police Control box.

On the arrival of the fire serivce control unit I requested an officer

with a fire ground radio to relieve me at the Control Box so that I

could report to the control unit in person.

I was relieved by Temporary Assistant Divisional Officer GREEN at the

control box and I returned to the Control Unit where I briefed

Assistant Chief Officer HORNSBY of the incident at that stage.

I accompanied the Assistant Chief Officer HORNSBY to the control box

and then we both went to the gymnasium to see how the incident was

being handled from there.       Assistant Divisional Officer ROBJOHNS was

controlling the incident from this point and everything seemed under
       LOCKWOOD              DAVID                                                4


       control so together with ACO HORNSBY, we returned to the control unit

        and briefed Chief Officer WRIGHT and Divisonal Officer HILLDRITH of

        the incident.

        It vtfas soon after this time that the crews returned to their

        individual appliances as we were no longer of any use at the ground.

        I would estimate that I cleared the ground at around 6 pn. (1800) The

        last of the tenders being stood down at 1720 hours.



                                                              D LOCKWOOD SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
^         PLACE

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE                 PC




                                                                                      3670
Incident    IC2   270390 OP8Q64         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER   S1401

                                                                              Station

it  lame
Snbic              BALDWIN

Forenames          DAVID    HAROLD

Age                                          Date of birth

Address


Occupation         UNIT GENERAL MANAGER

Telephone

IC                 Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

f t                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                       Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                                           Signed


           David Harold BALDWIN will say as follows:

           I am employed by Sheffield Health Authority as Unit General Manager to

           the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.     I have been in post since August 1985

           (0C0885) and before that time was Unit Administrator.      I have worked

           in the National Health Service since 1965 (000065).      I have over all

           maragerial responsibility for the day to day running of the Royal

           Hallamshire Hospital, which includes the operation and formulation of

           the Major Accident Plan.

           Within the framework of the District Strategy, the Royal Hallamshire

           Hospital, like the Northern General Hospital, has a Major Accident

           Procedure which governs the arranganents to be followed locally in the

           event of a major disaster.   The hospitals procedure will differ in

           detail from that of the Northern General Hospital, but the overall

           strategic framework will be the same.      The Major Accident Plan is

                                                                                         3671
                                                                 PAGE      2
                                                                 S1401

reviewed and updated regularly.

The Royal Hallamshire Hospital Plan provides for both the District

Control and the Hospital Control to be set up in the Administration

Offices on B floor of the hospital.

There is a separate telephone switchboard to the suite of offices.

There are administrative on call arranganents for the five

adrrinistrative staff, the most senior of whan is the Hospital

Adnrinistrator,_____________ The staff work a rota of on call duty-

covering twenty four hours seven days a week. The on call arrangements

are primarily in force to deal with a major accident.     I am not part of

the on call team but I am included in the cascade arrangements to be

called out, and my role in the event of a major accident is to attend

the hospital and ensure the three Hospital Control Points have been

established, ie the Hospital Control, the A & E Control and the Theatre

Control.    I am also responsible for leading the administrative response

to whatever needs and requirements arise from the emergency, for

example provision of staff, equipment, communications.     In effect the

Hospital Control is the nerve centre of the hospitals response to a major

accident.

On 15 April (150489) I was at work in the morning and returned home at

2.00 pm (1400 hrs ).     I turned on the radio to listen to the local

spcrts programme and it gradually became apparent that an incident was

developing at Hillsborough.    It initially appeared to be a crowd

control problem.   I realised the game had kicked off and had been

suspended and then I heard accounts of hoardings being t o m down to

make stretchers.   This was after 3.00 pm (1500 hrs).

I vcent to telephone the hospital to ascertain whether the hospital

had been made aware of any need to provide help, to what appeared to

be a serious incident.    However, before I could pick up the telephone,

it rang and                     one of the Hospital Administrators,
                                                                 PAGE      3
                                                                 S1401

announced he was phoning from home and that Mr CROSBIE, Consultant in

A & E had declared a Major Incident.    He confirmed he had contacted

the Hospital Administrator,                   This was at approximately

3.20 pm (1520 hrs).

I had no means of transport at that time, so immediately proceeded on

foct to the hospital, arriving within five or six minutes.     I went

imradiately into the Administration Unit and confirmed that admin

staff had established the Hospital Control.     I contacted Miss BOYD,

Assistant Matron and Senior Nurse on duty, to establish that a Nursing

Control had been set up and I established that similar arrangements

hac been made for a Theatre Control.     I then went to the Accident &

Emergency Department and made contact with Mr CROSBIE and a Police

Inspector who had just set up the Police Control.     I remained in

casualty until the first patient arrived and spent a large part of the

afternoon in that area until the last patient arrived at 5.01 pn (1701

hrs).    I left from time to time to check on arrangements in various

key points of the hospital and also to check back with the Hospital

Control.     For example, I went to the Out Patients Department to check

arrangements had been made to receive relatives and press and

volunteers.

When the first patient arrived the A & E Department was well prepared

in terms of staffing and equipment.    There was a large number of

consultant and senior medical staff in attendance as well as nursing

staff.     I was led to believe by Mr CROSBIE that a message had been

received that a stand had collapsed at Hillsborough football ground

and therefore he was expecting very different injuries from those

which actually arrived.    We soon learnt the injuries related to

asphyxiation whereas the Department had been prepared for multiple

injuries.

Throughout the afternoon I was concerned to act as a link man and
                                                                PAGE      4
                                                                S1401

con troller in those areas of the hospital where the incident was being

dealt with.   A junior member of staff was acting as a runner between

the A & E reception, Hospital Control and, later in the afternoon, the

Out Patients area (to relay information to relatives).

There was a continuous stream of casualties arriving over a period of

abcut one hour twenty minutes, the flow obviously being governed by

the availability of ambulances, and throughout this period there was a

steady stream of ambulances arriving.   Triaging was established at the

Orthopaedic entrance and the triaging of patients worked effectively.

I was not conscious during the afternoon of any need for additional

staff or equipment.   I do not recall any reference to a mobile team.

I was engaged in a constant process of review.    This was a reactive

process as those who were engaged in patient care could not cane to me

with information and I felt it was my duty to go and find out what was

happening in the various areas of the hospital.

Shortly after I arrived in the A & E Department the first and only

patient to die arrived in the resuscitation area of the A & E

Department.   He died shortly after and was   taken to the temporary

mortuary which was set up in the Seminar Room in the Orthopaedic

Clinic.

Contact with the Northern General Hospital was established via the

Hospital Control Points and there was free and open exchange of

information throughout the afternoon.

Shortly after the last casualty had been received (about 5.00 pm (1700

hrs)) the Liaison Police Inspector in A & E indicated he had

received a message that we were to receive forty dead bodies from the

football ground, and arrangements were made to receive them within

the Department.   There was some concern as to why the bodies should be

transported to the hospital if they were already certified and if

mortuary space was available at the Medico Legal Centre.   I queried
                                                                   PAGE    5
                                                                   S1401

why it was necessary to transfer the bodies with an Ambulance Officer

anc he left the A & E Control Roan to make further enquiries via his

radio link with Ambulance Control.    Although he personally did not

reappear, we received a message sometime later that the bodies would

not be sent to the hospital.

Police Liaison have a roan in the Accident & Emergency Department in a

Major Accident, and had set up telephone links in there.    They

appeared to be having difficulty establishing control.     There was a

Police Inspector in attendance and I introduced myself to him.      I

think there should have been an Ambulance Officer also but I was not

aware of one.     The Ambulance Liaison O f f i c e r , w a s

busy organising the transfer of patients out of the Department from

the Medical School entrance.

The first people to arrive enquiring of the injured and dead were

these who had been at the match or had been admitted into Casualty and

then discharged and were looking for friends and relatives.     Some

pec pie came immediately to the A & E Department and were re-directed

to the relatives reception area situated in the Out Patients

Department.     Other went straight to the main reception desk where

they were dealt with.     I set staff on to the task of information

gathering and exchanging information with the various agencies.

          Acting Director of Nursing Services, predominantly took

charge of co-ordinating information to relatives and also co­

ordinating volunteer efforts.

Subsequently, and throughout the night, people arrived from all over

the country.     Increasingly the switchboard in the main Control Roan

became more and more preoccupied with calls from relatives of people

whc had been at the match.    This continued until the early hours of

the morning.    I gather from the switchboard staff that callers were

car plaining they could not get through to the police emergency
                                                                  PAGE    6
                                                                  S1401

telephone number.   Unfortunately, many people got hold of the Hospital

Control telephone number, which is an ex-directory number, and the

Hospital Control had to deal with many enquiries from relatives.

Later in the evening we also dealt with long distance press enquiries.

I had no direct contact with the press during the afternoon but my

general impression was that they had been well organised and

marshalled in the Boardroom of the hospital where they had been

supplied with a bank of telephones.   Derek HULL, the Regional Health

Authority's Press Officer, arrived at the hospital in the late

aftemoon/early evening and co-ordinated the press activities.       I

gave a brief press conference at about 7.00 pm (1900 hrs), accompanied

by Mr CROSBIE, Consultant in A & E, Mr T MAPPLEBECK, District General

Manager, and Derek HULL.   We gave brief details of the number of

casualties and dead, the types of injuries and how the cascade call

out system had operated.

As activity in the A & E Department died down I spent time between the

A & E Department and the Hospital Control.   I went heme at about 1.15

am (0115 hrs) Sunday (160489), leaving the Hospital Control

switchboard manned by                 I returned at 8.00 am (0800 hrs)

Sunday (160489) and continued to man the Control and organise the

Prime Ministerial visit which was arranged for that day.

There are obviously a few areas where the hospital procedures could be

inproved upon but generally I was very happy with the hospital's

response to the Major Disaster.   I feel we could have had more

information to provide a comprehensive list of injured and dead for

relatives.   We had compiled a list based on the information at the

Royal Hallamshire and the Northern General but we did not know from

the police what figures they had and it subsequently transpired that

about forty people were being held in custody and who had not been

accounted for.
                                             PAGE    7
                                             S1401




                                D H BALDWIN SIGNED
 STATEMENT TAKEN
           FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                         36 77
Incident      IC2   270390 OP8064            DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                              STATEMENT NUMBER    S1402

                                                                                 Station

      lame           CROSBIE

Forenames            ALAN     COURTNEY

Age                                              Date of birth

Address


Occupation           CONSULTANT

Telephone

IC                  Height                       Build

Hair colour

Hair type

f t *                                            Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                          Accent

Number of Fages

Dated                250589                                                         Signed


             Alan Courtney CROSBIE will say as follows:

             I am a Consultant in Accident & Emergency at the Royal Hallamshire

             Hospital, Sheffield.        I qualified at          in 19         and my

             qualifications are MB, CHB, FRCS. I was appointed to this post on 6

             March 1989 (060389) prior to which Iwas a Senior Registrar at the

             hospital for five years.

             There are two Consultants in the A &E Department, myself and Mr D G

             FEF3USON,                            on 15 April (150489).   We work one

             week on call, one week off.       I would not normally have been on call on

             15 April but I was covering for                     sick leave.   There is a

             Serior Registrar in the Department, Mr M S HOCKEY, FRCS, and he is the

             first on call.    On Saturday 15 April (150489) there were three Senior

             House Officers on duty.       I believe it was a reasonably quiet day with

             sevan people in the Department.

                                                                                             3678
                                                                  PAGE     2
                                                                  S1402

I was walking in Ecclesall Woods on Saturday afternoon, 15 April

(150489).    I had been walking from about 10.00AM. (1000) and was

walking towards Hunters Bar when my bleep went off at about 3.12pm

(1512)   I had my seven year old son with me and we ran to a telephone

box at Hunters Bar.    This took no more than five minutes.   I

telephoned the hospital using the direct emergency line, and the

switchboard put me through to Charge Nurse Richard SMITH in the A & E

Department. The Charge Nurse told me the Police had telephoned and

askad the hospital to be on standby to receive injured people as a

stand had collapsed at the football ground.     I remember wondering what

'stand by' meant; if a stand had collapsed then it was likely to be a

major disaster.    I asked the Charge Nurse for further clarification

but he said he did not have any more details.     He confirmed again the

hospital were on stand by.     I told him I would cane to the hospital as

socn as I could and in the meantime he should find Mr HOCKEY, Senior

Registrar.

I had seen several ambulances going into town.

I inmediately ran with my seven year old son to

              where I knew my wife was visiting and would have her car.

This is about half a mile from Hunters Bar.    When we arrived we all

got into the car and my wife drove me as quickly as possible to the

junction of Clarkehouse Rd and Glossop Rd where I left the car and ran

to the A & E Department.     I did not notice any ambulances as I ran

into the Department.    I arrived a little after 3.30pm (1530).

Nurses were clearing trolleys and the part of the Department which

receives minor casualties had been cleared of patients.

I noticed two Policemen in the photocopying room, setting up a

telephone point as if responding to a major disaster.

I found Charge Nurse SMITH and asked whether he had received further

confirmation and he indicated he had not.     I told him we may as well
                                                                    PAGE     3
                                                                    S1402

work on the assumption that this was a major disaster and I asked one

of the clerical staff to tell switchboard that I was declaring a Major

Disaster.

I irade sane enquiries of the Police but they were not sure of the

position.     In the presence of the Police Officers I telephoned Jim

WAFDROPE, Consultant in charge of A & E at the Northern General.         I

telephoned his hone and was told by his wife he had already left for

the Northern General. This was at about 3.40pm (1540).        By this time

the first patient had arrived at the resuscitation end of the A & E

Department.     Mr HOCKEY arrived at this stage.    The Major Disaster

Plan provides for the A & E Senior Registrar, together with the

Orthopaedic Senior Registrar, Orthopaedic Senior House Officer & Sister

or Staff Nurse to assemble at the Orthopaedic Clinic entrance to triage

casualties as they arrive. The Accident & Emergency entrance should

be closed and all casualties should pass through the triage point.

My function in a Major Disaster is to set up a Control Centre in the

A & E Department to co-ordinate the reception, assessment and treatment

of casualties and liaise with the medical staff entering the Department.

I cid this, establishing the Control Centre in the secretarial office.

I recall having to unlock various doors, for example to the secretary's

office and the back door of the Department.        I handed out the Major

Disaster notices which are prepared ready in Mr FERGUSON'S secretary's

office.     The next thing I remember was meeting Mr DALY, Consultant

Phsyician, as he was about to leave the hospital, unaware of the

situation.    This was about 3.50pm (1550).   I told him a Major Disaster

had been called and he indicated he would irrmediately return to the

medical wards to clear beds.     By this stage the Department had received

twc patients.

Sore moments later Professor A G JOHNSON, Professor of Surgery, and Dr

E I EDBROOK, Consultant Anaesthetist, arrived in the Department and I
                                                                    PAGE    4
                                                                    S1402

directed them to intermediate and major injuries respectively.

A large number of medical staff of intermediate grades began to arrive

over the next twenty to thirty minutes and I distributed them around

the Department in accordance with their experience.

At about this time Mr HOCKEY began to receive more injured at the

triage point.    This was about 4.20pm (1620).    Ambulances were bringing

casualties to the usual A & E entrance rather than the Orthopaedic

Department entrance and I therefore dispatched an SHO to disperse the

ambulances.

There was a rush of casualties arriving at the Department between 4.20pm

(1620) and 5.00pm (1700).     These were dealt with and discharged or

adrritted as required.    I recall the first or second patient to arrive

in the Department had died and his body was placed in the temporary

mortuary (the Orthopaedic Seminar Rocm) and the door locked.

Mr HOCKEY continued to triage patients and I did not become involved

with this.    However, I was aware of the nature of the injuries and the

one fatality.    I could not tie together Charge Nurse SMITH'S account

that a stand had collapsed at the football ground with the small

nunrber of potential orthopaedic casualties.     Most of the casualties

appeared to have been crushed and I thought perhaps there had been a

stampede.    I did not examine or speak to any patients in depth.

There were more than enough medical and nursing staff to handle the

influx of casualties.

After about 5.00pm (1700) the flow of patients dried up and there then

caire a rumour that we were expected to take the transfer of up to

forty dead bodies from the football ground, for storage in our

temporary mortuary.     Sister P HARWOOD who was situated at the triage

point had been given to understand this was to happen and she had

passed the message on to me.

In fact the bodies never arrived and there was no cormunication from
                                                                 PAGE     5
                                                                 S1402

SYKAS.    Eventually I telephoned the Medico Legal Centre and a woman on

duty there told me the Centre had sufficient capacity to make the

transfer to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital unnecessary.

By the late afternoon, I had spoken with medical witnesses who had

core up to the hospital from the football ground and I learnt from

them that about seventy five people had died.

At about 6.30pm (1830), I informed Ambulance Control in Rotherham that

we were in a position to take routine emergency 999 calls. I made i t .

kncwn in the Department at about 6.50pm (1850), that I was declaring

the Major Disaster over and I dispatched nursing and medical staff

around the department to thank volunteers for their efforts and to let

them know they could return hone.   Until then people had been lingering

in the Department.

At about 7.00pm (1900), by prior arrangement, I met with Mr D BALDWIN,

Unit General Manager, and Dr D R PERKS, Chairman of the Medical Staff

Carrmittee, and together we toured the hospital wards to take stock of

the number of admissions and their disposition within the hospital.

G2 is the ward designated to receive patients from a Major Disaster.

It is normally an ENT ward.    It appeared that wards K2 and LI had also

taken patients.    I understood there were also seme transfers to the

Intensive Care Unit. The majority of patients were not seriously

injured and most had been admitted for observations only.I understood

at that stage that eighty patients had passed through the Department

that afternoon, of which twenty five had been admitted and only one had

needed intensive care.   This information was available to me at about

8.C0pm (2000). Throughout the afternoon I had no carmunication with

SY^AS,until an Ambulance Liaison Officer appeared after 5.00pm

(1700).   It would have been useful to have had forewarning of the

nature of the injuries to be expected, an accurate assessment of the

nature of the incident, an estimated time of arrival of the next batch
                                                                      PAGE    6
                                                                      S1402

of seriously injured patients, an estimate of the number of patients,

and it would also have been helpful to let SYMAS know of the

hospital's disposition.    I believe the Ambulance Liaison Officer was

assisting in the transfer of patients out of the hospital from the

Medical School entrance.   I did not see a Senior Ambulance Officer.

The Police Liaison were visibile but I did not have much contact with

them.

The most useful information I received during the afternoon was

frcm Jim WARDROPE at the Northern General Hospital. I think I made

direct contact with him on the Department's tie line at about 4.30pm

(1630) when the Department was very busy receiving patients.          He

confirmed to me he did not want any assistance but asked if I could

contact the Neurosurgical Registrar and request he attend the Northern

General Hospital.   Mr WARDROPE confirmed a number of people were

being ventilated and that there may be seme head injuries.        I

dispatched a Senior House Officer to find the Neurosurgical Registrar

and I understand he went to the Northern General.     I believe there

were seme transfers later in the afternoon from the Northern General.

Mr WARDROPE also confirmed he had requested SYMAS to divert cases to

the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

I iret with the press in the Boardroom for a press conference where I

gave purely factual information.

During the afternoon there had been no request for a mobile team.

Normally Ambulance Control would request a mobile team directly to the

Department, via the emergency telephone.     I had ensured that

appropriate equipment had been assembled by the ambulance door and I

believe there would have been more than enough staff to send two

tea ins, each comprising a surgeon, Anaesthetist and a trained nurse.

I spent most of the afternoon between the Orthopaedic entrance and the

major casualty part of the Department.     From there I had a good view
                                                                        PAGE      7
                                                                        S1402

         of what was happening within the Department and was therefore able to

        co-ordinate the Department's response to the disaster.

        My day ended at about 10.00pm (2200), when the Department was closed

         (it normally closes at 9.00pm (2100) on Saturdays).   By that time

         everything was very quiet.   I do not recall there being any relatives

         as they were gathered in a separate part of the hospital.




                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

           TIME:            DATE:     150689

® N E S S TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPOFT




                                                                                      3684
                                                                           STATION

                ROGER GRAHAM   STUART
                QUARTLEY

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:    ANAESTHETIST (DOCTOR)


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 121089                                              ROGER QUARTLEY (SIGNED)



           Qualification:- MBChB Sheffield 1984 (000084)

                         - Diploma of Anaesthesia London 1987 (000087)

           Present Post: - Locum Registrar in Anaesthetics, Royal Hallamshire

           Hos pital, Sheffield.

           Statement of my recollection of events of 15th April 1989 (150489) in

           connection with the Hillsborough disaster.

           I initially heard of the occurrence on the radio at approximately 1505

           (1505) whilst I was on call at the Northern General Hospital after

           which I attended the accident and emergency department to see if I

           could be of any assistance.   I made my way to the resuscitation room

           at about 1515 (1515), in which I saw the consultant in accident and

           emergency attempting to resuscitate




           Having ascertained my identity, the casualty consultant had me
QUARTLEY             ROGER GRAHAM    STUART                             2


relieved and asked that I attend the ground itself, along with a

casualty officer, we departed for the ground by ambulance, which was

loaded with medical supplies, at approximately 1530 (1530).

On arrival at Hillsborough we were led to the North West Comer of the

grcund, where there was a young victim lying on an advertising

hoarding, with several non medically qualified people in attendance

whc were attempting resuscitation.   The victim was quite intensely

cyanosed and not making any effective respiratory efforts.




I then asked a policeman where the seriously injured were located and

was escorted to an adjacent gymnasium in which the fatally injured

wera also located.   By the time I arrived, the injured all seemed to

hava medical attendants, so I thought I might be better employed back

at the Northern General so I obtained a lift back in a departing

ambulance.

Abcard this ambulance was a youth of 12-15 yrs, a male,




                                                                            3686
QUARTLEY             ROGER   GRAHAM     STUART                            3


I am not sure what time we returned to the Northern General A & E

Department but over the ambulance radio, it was declared that the

Northern General Casualty Dept was full, and further victims should

attand the Royal Hallamshire hospital.

The young victim was taken into the department and was attended by a

doctor, so I went to look where my services would be of most use.     I

spotted an operating department assistant in attendance of a male

youth, about 16 years of age, who was attempting resuscitation.




                             Further assistance then arrived in the form

of a further operating department assistant, a junior doctor and a

consultant in orthopaedics, Mr GETTY.




            after about 20 minutes he proved to be unresponsive to any

further resuscitative measures and he died.



                                                                              3687
       QUARILEY              ROGER   GRAHAM STUART                             4


       At this stage, there were two or three patients on intensive care, all

       of whan had assistance in the form of anaesthetists, so under Dr

       CLARK'S instruction I telephoned for further anaesthetic help in the

       form of Drs APPLEYARD, SHERRY, WELCHEW and STOCK all of whom I was

       abla to contact.

       When I returned to ITU there were about 8 patients all of whom needing

       artificial ventilation but there were insufficient doctors present in

       order that each patient had a doctor permanently in attendance.    I

       picked an unattended male youth of 12-14 years (Lee NICHOL)




                                                      ROGER QUARTLEY SIGNED

^^TEMENT TAKEN
”        PLACE:

         TIME:              DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE        JULIE APPLETON PS7844




                                                                                   3688
Incident    102   270390 OP8Q64       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER S1392

                                                                           Station

Surname            WARDROPE

Forenames          JAMES

Age                35                      Date of birth

Address            33, NORTHERN GENERAL HOS, HERRIES RD
                   HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE, S57AU

Occupation         CONSULTANT IN ACCIDENT & EMERGENCEY

Telephone

IC                 Height                 Build

Hair colour

Hair type

•s                                        Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                    Accent

Number of Fages

Dated                                                                       Signed


           Jairas WARDOPE will say as follows

           I am a Consultant in charge of the Accident & Emergency Department at

           the Northern General Hospital, Sheffield.   I have been a Consultant at

           the hospital since 1 May 1987 (010587), prior to that I held the post

           of Senior Registrar at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield.      I

           qualified in 19     any my qualifications are



           The Accident & Emergency Department is quite a busy one.   It had

           55,000 patients last year, of which 42,000 were new patients.    In

           terms of medical staffing, there are seven Senior House Officers, an

           Association Specialist (six sessions A & E, four sessions Fracture

           Clinic) and five GP Clinical Assistant Sessions.   I am the first on

           call, except every other weekend when one of the Orthopaedic

           Consultants takes the on call duty.
                                                                   PAGE    2
                                                                   S1392

Saturday is usually a busy day for the Department, especially in the

afternoon.     On Saturday, 15 April (150489) there were two medical

steff, of SHO grade, on duty and I was on call.     I had been into the

Department at 10.00 am (1000) on the morning of the 15th (150489).

The Department was fairly busy. At about 1.00 pm (1300) I telephoned

the Department from heme to let them know I was going to be out for

the afternoon as I planned to take my family to the park.     I

ascertained the waiting time in the Department was two hours, which

means it was quite busy.     I took my wife and children to Graves Park.

We were just returning, and were about 200 yards from our home in

             when my bleep which I had been carrying went off. I

arrived home within about a minute and telephoned the hospital

imrediately.     I spoke to Charge Nurse Batty, who indicated he had been

notified of some sort of incident at Hillsborough and that the

hospital was to stand by and to expect to receive some crush injuries.

He gave no indication of numbers or that a major incident had been

called.   He indicated that no patients had yet arrived and from the

details he gave me I thought perhaps the hospital would receive half a

dozen or so.     I knew the Department was fairly busy and I decided I

shculd go in to help out, but I did not think it was a major

emergency.

I immediately left for the hospital in my car.     The time on the car

clock, which is two minutes fast, was 3.25 pm (1525).     The journey was

very quick as the roads were quiet and I arrived at the hospital at 3.

35 pm (1535), according to the car clock.     I parked my car in the

Consultants' car park.     I started walking towards the Department, but

as I approached the entrance I saw three ambulances and I began to run.

I v.as met at the door by charge Nurse BAITY who informed me three

patients were undergoing resuscitation in the Resuscitation Room which

is adjacent to the side entrance.     I asked him whether he had
                                                                 PAGE     3
                                                                 S1392

implemented the Major Disaster Plan and he replied he had.     It was

obvious to me that it was necessary to implement the Major Disaster

Plen.

I want into the Resuscitation Room where there were three patients

undergoing resuscitation.   One was a ten year old boy who was being

attended by the Senior Paediatric House Officer.     I gather she had

been called when the Department were alerted to expect a paediatric

cardiac arrest.   A Senior House Officer from Rotherham, who had just

been passing the hospital, was resuscitating another patient and one

of my SHOs was working on the third patient.




Mora ambulances arrived almost immediately.    I went to the front door

with Charge Nurse BAITY to receive the injured, almost all of whom

wera dead or dying.   Seme were sent to the Resuscitation Room and I

then went to the Resuscitation Room myself to intubate with

endotracheal tubes.   I cannot now recall how many patients were in

that batch of arrivals.

I then returned to the entrance and stayed there until about 5.00 pm,

(1700), to triage patients as they arrived, and also to triage Doctors

so that they could be assigned to appropriate duties.

By about 3.45 pm (1545) a lot of staff had arrived in the Department

and the Resuscitation Room was fairly well manned.    I allocated

Doctors to the Resuscitation Rocm initially, and then into Ward 60

which had been cleared and which was acting as the receiving ward.

I realised the Resuscitation Rocm was becoming very full as almost all

the first lot of casualties required resuscitation and I therefore

sent one of the SHOs, Mr DUNCAN, to telephone SYMAS Control and

request cases be diverted to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

By this time Medical Record Staff had implemented the tagging system
                                                                    PAGE    4
                                                                    S1392

to identify the casualties.     Because' of the volume of patients

arriving staff were unable to use the coloured labels.

At about this time I started sending the dead on arrival direct to the

Plaster Room.     Previously, I had sent the whole batch of casualties,

including dead, into the Resuscitation Rocm to attempt resuscitation

in view of their age.

Also about this time, I received a request to send a mobile team to

the Hillsborough football ground.     The request came via

I realised everyone was very busy and that we could not spare

sufficient staff to send a mobile team immediately and I decided it

was more important to retain the resources within the Department.

However, by about 4.00 pm (1600) the position had eased such that I

was able to despatch two Doctors with an equipment box, in an

ambulance, to the football ground.     The staff who went were Dr

DAVIDSON, SHO, and an Anaesthetic Registrar.     The Department has a

specially prepared box of equipment for just such an emergency and

this had been checked and re- stocked only two weeks earlier.       As it

transpired, when the mobile team arrived at the ground there were

sufficient medical staff already there and the Doctors were sent back

to the hospital and only the equipment retained.

By about this time I think I was notified the Royal Hallamshire

Hospital were receiving about half the casualties.

After 4.00 pm (1600) the situation became more controlled and less

serious injuries were arriving in the Department.     These were sent to

the Physiotherapy Department which had been cleared to receive non­

urgent casualties requiring minor treatment or rest or awaiting

transport heme.    By about 4.30 pm (1630) the Department was becoming

much quieter.     I asked Dr R ELSON, Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon, and

Dr D EEMARDS, Orthopaedic Registrar, to attend the non-urgent

casualties in the Physiotherapy Department.
                                                                   PAGE
                                                                   S1392

Dr Tim SHAW, Consultant Anaesthetist, was in charge of the

Resuscitation Rocm.

The last patient I remember receiving arrived at about 4.45 pm

(1645).   He had fainted frcm the exertion of carrying bodies out        of

the ground.

At the time I did not know how many patients the Department had

received, although I knew at one point that about sixteen patients

were all undergoing resuscitation.     The Department is set up for ten

resuscitation patients and all the beds were being used.

The triage area was established m a r the side entrance to the A & E

Department.     In a major disaster the main entrance is closed and all

casualties are brought into the side entrance and thus through the

triage point.    The Resuscitation Rocm is inxnediately adjacent to the

triage area in room 23 and beyond that rooms 18 (Treatment), 16

(Anteroom), 14 (Plaster Room), 15 (Treatment Rocm), 57, 58 and 61

(Examination/Treatment Rooms) and cubicles were used.      Any casualties

whc did not require resuscitation were sent to the receiving ward,

ward 60 or if they were minor casualties, to the Physiotherapy

Department.     Only one patient required surgery -

Alirost all the resuscitation patients required intensive care and

therefore were transferred from the resusication areas to either the

General Intensive Treatment Unit or the Coronary Intensive Care Unit.

In the initial ten minutes the Department was overwhelmed by the

volume of patients requiring resuscitation.    I think this is due to

three factors, namely the speed of extraction of casualties frcm the

site, the speed of transportation to the hospital in view of its

proximity to the football ground, and the nature of the injuries.

I co not recall any desperate need of equipment.      I believe at one

tirre we ran out of oxygen flow meters, but these were provided very

quickly by the Supplies Department.    The hospital does not have a CT
                                                                 PAGE     6
                                                                 S1392

Scanner and one of the ventilated casualties required a CT scan during

the afternoon.   He was transferred to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

A further two patients were transferred during the night to the Royal

Hallamshire Hospital for CT scans.

By about 5.30 pm (1730) the Department was almost clear of casualties.

Nor,-urgent casualties were directed to the General and Maternity Wing

Physiotherapy Department.   The dead were transferred to the mortuary

which had been set up temporarily in the Orthopaedic Plaster Rocm.

The bodies were later transferred to the temporary mortuary which was

established at the football ground.

The Major Disaster Plan provides for patients to be labelled with

appropriately coloured labels once they have been traiged, so that,

for example, those requiring inmediate resuscitation should receive a

red label, those requiring urgent admission and surgery should receive

a tlue label, non-urgent a green label and dead a white label.    In

fact, because of the speed of arrival of the casualties in the first

twenty minutes, it was impossible for staff to use the coloured labels.

This did not make any material difference as staff were writing on to

the labels the patients" destination, once triaged.

I cnly had contact with the families of the patients later in the

evening.   I recall I was in the Control Rocm when one woman arrived

trying to find her husband and daughter.   I recall speaking to her and

telling her that her husband had survived but that her daughter was

dead.   The families appeared to be well marshalled on Level C, which

is the floor below the A & E Department.   I was not too conscious of

the presence of the press and media.   I think there were some press

outside the A & E Department but they seemed to keep well back from

the arrival area.   By the following morning I was able to calculate

that ninety-three patients had been through the Department, of whcm

fifty-five were admissions twenty-seven discharges and twelve dead.
                                                                          PAGE     7
                                                                          S1392

         Of the admissions fifteen were in intensive care, although by the

         following morning (Monday) that figure had dropped to eleven

         Sevan patients had been transferred to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

         The type of injury sustained by the casualties - traumatic asphyxia -

         is fairly uncommon.     In the two years I have worked at the Royal

         Hal lamshire Hospital I have seen only one such case.   The most common

        cause of this type of crush injury is fron a car falling on top of

         sorraone who is working beneath it.   The Department had approximately

         twenty-five to thirty traumatic asphyxia cases in the space of an tour

         and I believe handled the incident extremely well.




                                                                          SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           FLACE:

          TIME:                DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPOFT




                                                                                       3695
                                                                           STATION

               HILARY ANNE
               BROWN

ADDRESS:       C/O THE NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL,
               HERRIES RD, SHEFFIELD.

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     SISTER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 130989                                                   H A BRCWN (SIGNED)



           I am a Qualified Sister and Qualified in May 1985(000585) at

           Sheffield.    I have worked on the General Intensive Treatment Unit

           (G.I.T.U) in the capacity of Sister at the Northern General Hospital

           since April 1989(000489).

           On Saturday 15th April 1989(150489) I was working on the late shift,

           12.30pm(1230) through to 9pm(2100) on G.I.T.U.

           At approximately 3.15pm( 1515) I received a telephone call from Sister

           POfcER who at the time was at home, regarding a completely unconnected

           matter and during the course of our conversation she informed me that

           there was crowd trouble at the Hillsborough Football Ground.      I didn't

           really think anything of it at the time and together with enrolled

           nurse                I went for my meal break.   We had only been gone

           approximately five minutes when Senior Sister LANGAN (Ward 62A

           G.I.T.U.) approached us and asked us both to go to Accident and

           Emergency (A + E) immediately to assist with patients arriving frcm

           Hillsborough.   At that time I was not aware of exactly what had taken

           place at Hillsborough.

           Nurse           and I went straight to A + E.    There were several
BRCrtN               HILARY ANNE                                             2


patients already being treated, many of whom were being resuscitated

or at least attempts being made to resuscitate them.    I initially

assisted by fetching drugs and equipment required by the various

doctors and nursing staff present.

Aftar a short time I became involved with a patient brought in on a

stretcher, semi-concious, by an ambulance crew.    The man appeared to

require assistance, maintaining his airway.   I assisted with this and

eventually the mans condition improved and another member of

staff, who I can't recall, came and relieved me.   As far as I am aware

this man was later transferred to a ward and I believe he lived.

At this point I was approached by staff nurse       who informed me that

there was a patient (Adam SPEARRITT) that needed to be transferred to

G.I.T.U. together with Doctor QUARTLEY I brought the patient, on a

trclley, to G.I.T.U. and handed him over to Charge Nurse Robin HIBBERD

whc works on G.I.T.U.   I then returned to A + E and I believe Dr

QUA RILEY remained with the patient for a short time.   There was also

a student nurse with me when I brought the patient up to the ward.       I

do not know her name, I believe she is a first year student nurse and

I first made contact with her in A + E.    She remained with me

throughout the remainder of the afternoon.

I was involved in the majority of transfers frcm A + E to G.I.T.U.

At the time I transferred the first patient, who I would describe as,

a white male, aged approximately twelve years with brown hair, I

did not know his identity but I later learnt that he was Adam

SPEARRITT aged fourteen years and that he had died.     I had no further

dealings with him after having brought him onto the unit but I am

aware that he was in DR APPLEYARDS office for some time during the

course of late afternoon, early evening.

At the time I transferred Adam SPEARRITT frcm A + E to G.I.T.U. he was
        BRCWN                HILARY ANNE


        unconcious and requiring artificial ventilation.



        H A BROWN



                                                           H A BROWN SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:   130989

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE;

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:      APPLETON PS7844




*




                                                                              3698
                                                                         STATION

                MICHAEL   RICHARD
                OGLE

ADDRESS         ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT
                TOWN HALL, SHEFFIELD. S12HH.

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 050190                                            MICHAEL R OGLE (SIOffiD)



          (1)   My name is Michael Richard OGLE.    I have been employed by

          Sheffield City Council since 1966 (000066) in a variety of

          administrative posts.     I was appointed Principal Assistant in the

          Administration and Legal Department in 1982 (000082).    My duties have

          included the role of Emergency Liaison Officer for major peacetime

          emergencies since that time.

          (2)   Section 138 of the Local Government Act 1972 (000072) enables a

          Local Authority to incur expenditure in taking action which is

          calculated to avert, alleviate or eradicate the effects or potential

          effacts of an emergency or disaster involving destruction of, or

          danger to, life or property.

          (3)   Sheffield City Council has had an emergency peacetime plan at

          least since the 1960's (000060), although there is no statutory

          prevision requiring such a plan.    The basis of Sheffield City

          Council's emergency peacetime plan and my role as Emergency Liaison

          Officer has not changed significantly since 1982 (000082).    The demise

          of the South Yorkshire County Council in 1986 (000086) and the

          establishment of the South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority




                                                                                     3699
OGLE                  MICHAEL   RICHARD                                  2


wera not fundamental to the operation of the City Council's plan.

Obviously, the demise of the County Council meant that its functions

wera distributed to, for example, the City Council and the Joint

Authorities and there were, therefore, changes in the contact points

for these services.

(4)    The City Council's Plan is supplementary to the Police Scheme for

Major Disasters and although it will usually be brought into operation

at the discretion of the Senior Police Officer concerned, action can

also be instigated by any Senior Departmental Officer.    A major

disaster in peacetime may occur in many forms and so requires

definition to distinguish it from the routine incidents that are the

day-to-day sole concern of the emergency services.    Neither the

nurrbers of persons involved, nor the scale of the damage by themselves

would necessarily determine the involvement of local authority

resources and a major peacetime emergency is therefore defined in the

Plan as "any disaster or serious disruption of life arising with

little or no warning, causing or threatening death or serious injury

to, or rendering homeless, such numbers of persons in excess of those

which can be dealt with by the Local Authority and Public Services

operating under normal procedures and which calls for special

mobilisation and organisation of those services.     In these

circumstances, my role is to inform the Chief Executive or the Head of

Administration and Legal Department of the emergency and, under her/

his direction, to act as Liaison Officer between the departments and

services involved and produce any progress or other reports required

by her/him.   The plan identifies a number of departments and outlines

their roles and responsibilities in a major peacetime emergency

situation.    The relevant departments are required to draw up and

maintain departmental plans to meet the roles and responsibilities
OGLE                   MICHAEL   RICHARD                                   3


placed upon them.    The response of the local authority in a major

peacetime emergency situation may thus involve any or all the

departments concerned, depending upon the nature and danands of the

situation.

(5)    The version of the Plan dated December 1980 (001280) was revised

by me, on behalf of the Chief Executive, in October 1987 (001087) and

the final draft was approved by the Chief Executive, prior to its

circulation within the Authority and to the emergency services,

adjoining local authorities and various other bodies.       In revising the

Plan, full and detailed consultations were held within the Authority

and with the South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority who,

through their Emergency Planning Unit with its team of full-time

professional officers, were able to pursue contacts across the range

of amergency services and local authorities throughout South Yorkshire

and North East Derbyshire, and offer invaluable assistance and advice

in ccarpiling the revised Plan.    Although the Plan had been up-dated in

terms of personnel changes on a periodic basis, it was considered

appropriate at that time, to adopt arrangements whereby in future a

full revision of the Plan would be undertaken, at least every

alternate year.     To this end arrangements were put in hand on 18

January 1989 (180189) to undertake a further revision of the Council's

Emergency Plan, with a view to the circulation of a revised version

during the Spring of 1989 (000089).        These arrangements were overtaken

by the disaster at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989 (150489) and the

coirpletion of a revised document was set back in order to take into

account and incorporate in the Plan, issues and lessons learned from

the Hillsborough disaster.

(6)    The review has included:-

(a)    A memorandum from me to appropriate Chief Officers requesting
OGLE                  MICHAEL   RICHARD                                   4


corrments on the plan in the light of the Hillsborough disaster;

(b)    a meeting between myself and officers from the Education and

Fairily Ccmnunity Services Departments on 8 June 1989 (080689) to look

at the lessons to be learned from Hillsborough, with particular

reference to closer co-ordination between emergency rest centres and

feeding;

(c)    the initiation by the Chief Publicity Officer of corporate

discussions on the information and communications aspects of the

Council's plan with other organisations and the emergency services; and

(d)    measures to include in the draft revised Plan an officer with

expertise in emergency communications, details of contact points in

adjoining local authorities and additional points of contact in a

variety of departments within the Council.

(7)    The revised draft of the Council's Peacetime Emergency Plan was

also prepared in consultation with the South Yorkshire Fire and Civil

Defence Authority, taking into account the issues highlighted in the

abcve review and meetings with emergency services.    The revised draft

is currently awaiting the approval of the Chief Executive.    In

accordance with previous practice, the revised draft identifies an

'initial action' procedure for the Police.    The Plan does not require

a code word for implementation and the question of code words has not

been mentioned at any of my meetings with the emergency services.

(8)    I was first contacted regarding the Hillsborough disaster, by the

Director of Health and Consumer Services (Mr David PURCHON) at my

horre, shortly before 5.00 pin (1700) on 15 April 1989 (150489).    The

Director gave me an outline of the situation and his assessment of

what was needed.    I have a copy of the City Council's Scheme for Major

Peacetime Emergencies which is kept at my home and I irrmediately

contacted the (then) Chief Executive (Mr Ian PODMDRE) at his heme to
OGLE                  MICHAEL    RICHARD                                    5


appraise him of the situation.     I then contacted the Assistant

Director of Family and Comnunity Services (Mr David SNAITH) who was at

this time still at his home, and requested the implementation of his

Department's role in the Emergency Plan with particular reference to

the provision of rest centre accomodation and care of the homeless.

His Department had already taken active steps to get Social Workers to

the scene of the disaster and a temporary centre was being established

at the Hillsborough Boys' Club.    This telephone call was immediately

followed by a call from me to the (then) Acting Head of Administration

and Legal Department (Mr Mark WEBSTER). I was informed that the

Assistance Chief Personnel Officer (Safety, Health and Welfare) (Mr

Patrick O'NEILL) had already made contact with the South Yorkshire

Police HQ at Snig Hill and had offered the services of the Local

Authority.   I was not contacted by South Yorkshire Police during the

course of Saturday evening.

(9)    I then commenced arrangements for the provision, if necessary, of

meals for persons attending the rest centres.       This was done through

the Principal Administrative Assistant in the Education Department

(Mr Brian EVANS) who was requested by me to place on standby the

School Meals Service but to await further instructions before

corrmencing the preparation of food.       I then reported these

arrangements back to Mr SNAITH who was to inform me if and when they

were required.    It was not yet clear how many persons would attend the

rest centres nor for how long, but 3 centres had been opened up at

Burngreave Vestry Hall, the Kelvin Community Centre and the Sacred

Heart Church Hall.   Social Workers were attached to distressed

fairilies on a one to one basis.    I ascertained from Mr SNAITH that the

Hospitals and Police had clear instructions as to where the rest

centres were.    The Bumgreave Vestry Hall was not required and was
OGLE                    MICHAEL   RICHARD                                 6


sutsequently closed but the Kelvin and Sacred Heart Centres continued

to operate overnight.    Mr SNAITH subsequently informed me that the

Education Department's emergency feeding arrangements were not

required, food being provided by the WRVS at Kelvin and by volunteers

at the Sacred Heart Centre and I was able to 'stand-down' the School

Meals Service that evening.       During the course of the evening I

received regular up-dates from Mr PURCHON and his staff, particularly

in relation to the mortuary arrangements and the use of the Medico-

Legal Centre.   Regular contacts were maintained with Mr SNAITH who was

attending the rest centres and the Chief Executive was fully briefed.

The aforementioned actions formed a continous sequence of events which

began with the initial contact by Mr PURCHON and extended late into

the evening.    The pressure of the problem didnot allow time for a

transfer to a central base in the Town Hall. Contacts had been

established and people knew where I was.       The potential for confusion,

had a move been attempted, would have been considerable.       I did,

however, transfer operations to a central control office in the Town

Hall on the morning of Sunday 16 April (160489) and this centre

provided the focus for all information and decision making for many

days after the disaster.     The action taken by the Local Authority in

terms of care, comfort and counselling of the bereaved was the subject

of a letter dated 5 May 1989 (050589) which I sent to Lord Justice

TAYLOR'S Inquiry Team, for the attention of Inspector BURROWS, in

response to a telephone enquiry from that Team.

(10) The City Council's plan has been tested or rehearsed on a number

of occasions prior to the Hillsborough disaster, notably, the

industrial action by manual workers in the Water Industry in

January 1983 (000183), the discovery of a World War II bomb at Lancing

Road in February 1985 (000285), the discovery of levels of methane
OGLE                   MICHAEL   RICHARD                                 7


gas on a housing estate in September 1987 (000987) and the threat of a

Russian satellite "Cosmos 1900" crashing in the UK in the Autumn of

1988 (000088).

(11)     I have, through the South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence

Authority, made efforts to set up meetings with the other districts in

South Yorkshire and the emergency services, at least on an annual

basis.    Over the past two years these meetings have included

20 September 1988 (200988) - Meeting at Police HQ, Snig Hill with

representatives of South Yorkshire Police, South Yorkshire

Metropolitan Ambulance Service, the four District Councils in South

Yorkshire and the South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority to

consider the implications of the Home Office telex regarding the

possible crash of the Russian satellite "Cosmos 1900" in the UK.

30 September 1988 (300988) - Informal meeting at Radio Sheffield

between representatives of Radio Sheffield, South Yorkshire Police,

the four District Councils in South Yorkshire and the South Yorkshire

Fire and Civil Defence Authority to discuss the role of local radio in

support of District Authority major disaster responses.

20 April 1989 (200489) - Meeting at County Fire Service HQ in

Sheffield, with representatives of Fire Service, the four District

Councils and the South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority to

consider a range of issues relating to emergency planning.       (This

meeting was arranged before the Hillsborough Disaster).

15 September 1989 (150989) - Meeting at South Yorkshire Fire and Civil

Defence HQ in Barnsley with representatives of South Yorkshire Police,

the four District Councils and the South Yorkshire Fire and Civil

Defence Authority to consider a range of issues with particular

reference to call-out protocols in the light of the Hillsborough

Disaster.
        OGLE                  MICHAEL   RICHARD


         (12)   In the period after the Hillsborough disaster there were

        discussions between various parties including the Sheffield City

        Council, the South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority and

        South Yorkshire Police regarding a meeting to review the lessons of

        Hillsborough.   A general meeting was held on 15 September 1989

         (150989) as mentioned above and I took the opportunity at the meeting

        on 15 September 1989 (150989) to confirm the City Council's

        willingness to hold a more detailed meeting with full participation by

        a number of the Council's officers.   Chief Inspector EDMUNDSQN agreed

        to call a meeting to discuss the lessons of the Hillsborough disaster

#       once the full report of the Inquiry has been released.   A copy of the

        minutes of the meeting is attached, which I produce (Ref Mark MRO 1,

        Ex Mo 1).



                                                        MICHAEL R OGLE SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:



4   ICERS SIGNATURE:




#
                                                                                 3706
