NOTE FOR FILE



George Crossland from CPS York attended Discipline & Complaints,                 Heeley on

13 March 1997 and was seen by Chief Superintendent Lowe and PC Greenway.



The Dr Ed Walker file was handed to him, together with a copy of C539 (Edited version of

TB2) and copy of transcript of PS Killock WMP re its introduction into Inquest, a copy of

part of the WMP Video tape schedule for the Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry and a copy of the

video schedule TB1 and TB2, prepared by South Yorkshire Police.



On the discussions re Dr Walker evidence was produced to show that there was no new

evidence. This included the conflicting account that he had not been seen by WMP when a

statement and action produced indicated that he had.         His evidence of the condition of

those victims he treated conformed with the picture painted by Mr Wardrope, the consultant

in charge of the Accident and Emergency Dept and other medical experts such as

Professor Usher, Drs Slater and Gumpter.



He also appeared to be in error as to which order he attended to victims arriving at the

Accident and Emergency Dept.



Only a small part of the video material with the prefix TB was included in the compilation

tape, the remaining appeared to be of no evidential value.



On conclusion Mr Crossland appeared satisfied that there was in fact no new evidence to

cause the Inquest/Inquiry to be reopened.
At 10.00 am on Friday 7 March 1997, Superintendent Foster and PC Greenway of
South Yorkshire Police visited Sue McDougall and Matthew Pyne at the Home
Office.


The Doctor Ed W alker file was handed to them.


Discussion


Basically, the same as his newspaper statement, except for timings and Lee Nicol,
but they could accept with the passage of time versions alter/become distorted, due
to be asked different questions by interviewer.    Inaccurate as to not having been
seen or contacted by police.


Alive after 3.15 pm - discussed expert evidence of Professor Usher, Doctors Slater
and Gumpert.


Sue mentioned that even Doctor Popper had admitted since that 3.15 pm cut off
time wrong - explained why after calculation this time picked.


Discussed the security of the videos by Sheffield W ednesday Football Club, the
duties of PC Guest and Roger Houldsworth, what he, Houldsworth, could see - On
programme views shown were BBC material, not South Yorkshire Police


W est Midlands Police


W hy should ex head of W est Midlands Police SCS, Superintendent Beachey be put
in charge of Enquiry - Sinister overtones in view of their record.    Advised W est
Midlands Police invited and Police Complaints Authority approved appointment of IO
and they supervised the investigation so there was that independent element to the
investigation progress.    Choice of staffing would be W est Midlands Police's
responsibility.


Video material shown was of poor quality - copies of copies?      W as this done on
purpose to prevent their being used.


TB2 shown and with assistance of plan of ground advised her of views and to which
cameras they related to.
PC Bichard had lied to the Inquiry/Inquest insomuch as to what could be seen on
the videos.


W hat part, if any, of the South Yorkshire Police C C TV material was in fact
incorporated in the compilation tape.


Points


1.   Any reason why TB1 and TB2 could not be disclosed to families - Deferred as
     decision would have to come from Chief Superintendent Lowe.


2.   Have families ever had meeting with South Yorkshire Police to discuss case -
     no, except in 91 when Mr Devonside and 5 others came to South Yorkshire
     Police HQ to view photographic albums.


3.   Looked out of police room window could have seen look of anguish on fans'
     faces - CSU Duckenfield admitted his mind on other matters at time, did not
     see.


4.   Faces not picked out of the crowd, she said good view from pictures at 2.18 pm
     TB2 - response as 3 above.


5.   W hy were families trying to have the verdict overthrown and new verdict
     possibly with lack of care added - perhaps to have a second chance of having
     criminal proceedings taken against CSU Duckenfield - South Yorkshire Police
     already admitted liability, together with Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and
     engineers.


6.   Did PC Guest give evidence? - Would check.


7.   W hy did police officers on track not see distress - were subject to complaints
     procedure.


The points raised by the families, on their own, were not sufficient, but when
combined together may present persuasive element as far as families concerned to
cause enquiry to be re-opened.
Sue agreed that judicial inquiry had already denied families right to have inquests
re-opened.


Trevor Hicks, Philip Hammond, Ann Adlington had visited her on Thursday 6.3.97.
Sue stated they did not give the appearance of being vindictive, no malice and
seemed sincere. She seemed possibly swayed by their behaviour, warmed to them
- Sympathy for cause but on basis of evidence - nowhere to go.


Families believed that guilty parties had escaped by being medically retired.


Sue has been asked for update note for Michael Howard on yesterday's meeting
with families.
