DAEJ OF SII'MI : ._________________________
ADD23.j£;          Adwick Police Station,
                  :Windmill Bali: lane,..
                   Adwick Le Street, ___
                   Doncaster.      Cel.




                 1 an a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Bolice, currently
stationed at Adwick Le Street Police Station, Doncaster.
                  At 8.00 an on Saturday 15th. April 19o S I connenced duty at Adwick
Police Station in connection .with the Nottingham Forest v Liverpool FA Cup Seni
Final at Hillsborough, Sheffield. At 8.25 an. Ire ported to Inspector IIIHIPIIRUS .at
Doncaster Police Station from v;here I was conveyed to Hillsborough in company with
other officers by Police vehicles in convoy.
                  On arrival at Hillsborough I reported to Police Sergeant 2019
2H0KPS0N as directed for a briefing by the Officers in Charge of the Police Operation,
lly duties were as per the Operational Order for Serial 60 -under the command of PS
THOMPSON. Inspector BUBGESS was shovm as being in overall comend of ny serial and
serial 59 both of which.were to patrol Penistone Hoad before and after the natch.
Our instructions were to maintain order and prevent any clash of supporters, to
direct supporters to side' street parking and to maintain security of business
premises. Serial 60 were to patrol, in pairs on foot, the area of Penistone Road
from Borough Road to Burton Street. During the match ny serial were to join the
South Yorkshire Police coach in Penistone Road Iforth for standby duties until half
tine when a neal would be taken at Claywh-els Lane. After the briefing a light meal
was taken by all Officers at the football ground.
                  At 11.20 an I conmenced foot patrol in company with PC 1891
Staniforth on Penistone Road. During this tine we patrolled the area as directed
and additionally performed traffic duty at traffic ■lights on Penistone Road opposite
Owlerton Stadium. Situated on Penistone Road is a public house called theRoyal
Koto 1. These prenises v/ere open for business throughout the norning until about1.00
p a when an incident involving football fans occurred inside. These fans, believed to
be Nottingham fans, had been drinking inside and outside the pub on the pavement.
They had been noisy but not causing any particular problems. About 1.00 pn myself'and
other officers attended the pub as a result of a report of a disturbance occurring
inside. On our arrival I found that the pub was full but relatively quiet. I was
inform4 by the landlady that a small group of fans 'had-.been fighting inside but they
had left prior to our arrival. At the landlady’s request the remaining fans were
cleared fron the pub to prevent any recurrence. The prenises werethen closed. No
other incidents of note cane to my attention on Penistone Road that norning.
                  During the tine I was on duty on Penistono Road a large nunber of f s j i s
walked towards the football ground fron cars parked nearby and also fron the general
direction of the city centre. In general the fans were in high spirits but well
behaved. Sone appeared to have been drinking and a few were in possessionof cans of
beer. The fans continued to make their way to the ground at a steady .rate until jtist
after 3.00 pn when the last of then passed through. At this point we began to make
our way towards the ground.
                  As we approached the ground PS THOMPSON informed our serial that
there had been sone trouble inside the ground and that fans were injured. The cause
of the trouble was not known at this tine but I took it to mean that there had been
fighting between fans. As we walked further PS THOiiPSOK informed us that we night be
required to go inside the ground, l.’e were then picked up by a Police vehicle and taken
to the ground where we entered by the gate at the side of the North Stand at 3 .2 .0 -pc..
Me remained in the area .between-the stand      ’the kop* for about ten minutes. During
this tine I saw- several people, apparently injured, being carried fron the pitch to
                                                                 . ••••••••• continued
 ST/.TJlIiJNT 0 7 ;
   ■




■an awaiting 'anbulance inside the gate. There were a large auribcr of officers
.in this area at this time., ’  ..’hilst we were waiting PS TNOMPSOII informed our
 serial .that a large number of fans had been injure:: end sone mey be dead.I was
 still not aware what the exact cause was .at this tine except that there had been
 sone crushing up against a fence, *>fter about ten ninutec myself and other officers
 were instructed to go onto the pitch. On arrival on the pitch I .could see alarge
 number .of fans end Police .raving about around the goals at the far (LcppingsLane;'
 end of the pitch. There was also a line of police across the half way line. Aline
 of officers was also being formed             in front, of the North Strain. I woe .'
 instructed by a sergeant to join, the line and remain there to prevent fens
 coning on to the pitch.
                        Whilst I vas standing in front of the North Stand X saw
 several apparently injured fans being assisted by other fans fron the direction
 of the Leppings L-r.fi end. Some were walking and sone were being carried on
 makeshift stretchers, (made from advertising boards). As this was going on
 (Liverpool) fans in the 'North Stand were shouting abuse at nyseIf and other
 officers telling us.to go end help. Myself end the other officers remained in
 the line as instructed. More and.more fans were being assisted by police
 although, the majority were being helped by fellow' fans.
                        ..fter about ten minutes severalfans cane onto the pitch from the
 North Stand and pulled up advertising boards to use as stretchers for the injured
 fans* They then carried then over towards the Leppings Lane end. At this point
 the police line had become broken and officers had begun to drift further towards
 the centre of the pitch and turning their backs -'on the crowd. Injured fans were still
 being asssited from the Leppings Lane end and myself and other officers went
 over to that end of the ground to help.
                        On arrival at the Leppings Lane end of the ground I saw a large
 number of fans milling about in a dazed state. Some v/ere slightly injured but the
 majority appeared to be looking for friends . A few fans v/ere lying on the pitch-
 receiving first aid from ambulance , fire and police officers. Many fans were still
 carrying boards to that end of the ground but by this time they were no longer
 required but v/ere just obstructing those people attending to the injured. Many
 police officers v/ere wandering about as if not knowing what to do. 1 tried to help
 the injured and advise those looking for friends and relatives. Many fens- v/ere
 expressing their anger at the police officers at that end of the ground 'and
 blaming them for what had happenened and the lack of assistance afterwards. .
                        The Leppings lane terrace still contained several fans who
 v/ere apparently agitated by the proceedings. During this time a scuffle broke out
 between a snail number of fans on the terrace, h'ith other officers I went onto the
 terrace to calm then down. V.hilst on the teirace 1 heard fans talking amongst
 themselves about other tix v s stealing property from the terraces. I saw that there
 was a considerable quantity of property abandoned on the terracing. After things had
 calmed down'-..on the terracing I re turnedto the pitch.
                         After a short time an snrtouncersnt cane over the public
 address system that the natch would be abandoned and that fans should remain in the
 ground until asked to leave. Shortly after this a further announcement was made
 asking the fans to leave the ground. I then assisted in clearing the ground and
 the pitch, '..hen this was complete I returned to Penistone Road at            pn to join
 the remainder of my serial.
                         •.hisIt walking along Penistone Road fron the direction of the
ground I attended Hillsborough Park where a fight between fans was reportedly
taking place. I saw a large group of youths running away up the park being persuec
by mounted officers and officers on foot. The youths scattered in all directions
but some were stopped and spoken to. The youths stated that they had been attacked
by rival fans but this v/i-s unconfirmed. The youths were warned and allowed^ to
continue on their way. After this I. did not hear of °r see             further incidents.


                                                           ........ continued.
                                                           ’<-74
                               -3-                                <SjoK. f ??
          OF     Gary i)l     re 76



                  Mo other members of ny serial were present on Penistone Hoad
therefore X joined up with serial 59 until 5.10 pa when we returned to the
football ground for a'.debriefing by a senior officer. At the ground I rejoined
the .rest of ay serin. 1#
                  After the debriefing we.attended Claywh‘.el® Lane where s. hot
meal was available. \.*e remined at Claywheels Lone until transport was
available back to Doncaster. X then finished duty at Adwick Police Station at



                                               74
