                                                                                           M I R . 15




O THER DO CUM ENT FORM                          Date and tim e raise^                                   Number


Title                   j- r 0        i>/2.
(Include source and any document number i f relevantj


Receiver's instructions — urgent action —
                                                                                                                      Receiver
_______   7/f/ r/                      rr<3-n

                                                                                                                        Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                 Statement Reader
S tatem en t reader's instructions


                                                                                                                        Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                     4-Srf
                                                                                                                  O/M         SIO
Examined      further action to be taken
                                                                                                                 TfT"
                                                                                                                 r
                                                                                                                 |5 3 |
                                                                                                                        Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse o th er D ocum ent Master Number Form
                                          Westminster, London
                     Telephone:




DT/gmm



18 April   1989




LONDON




Dear

HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER

Apologies for w r i t i n g to you on this topic, but having been at the match
with my 13 ye ar old son I want ed to pass on one or two comments to someone
and I thought of you!

Fi rst of all, I confirm the press reports about the o ver cr o w d i n g and the
inadequacies of the police and emergency facilities; the police on the
pitch from 3.06 pm onwards a ppeared not to k now what they we re supposed to
be doing and the lack of stretchers, etc, and the time it took the two
ambulances (only two came onto the pitch!) to reach the injured was
unbelievable.   I also confirm the press reports about the total
inadequacies of a 'modern' sports stadium - to me the only solut ion is an
immediate total ban on stand ing in existing stadia and an urgent plan to
build a series of new 'American' style multi-sports stadia on the fringes
of towns and cities with controlled access, identity cards, ticket checks,
etc.

However, the main point that I can add rela tes to some thi ng w hic h has not
been m entioned in the press.    This is the fact that betw een 3.06 pm and
ap prox imately 4.10 pm wh en we left there was no anno unc emen t to the
spectators about what was happening.     D uring this period there was a
continual risk of major violence and c o n fr ont atio n which made me decide to
leave, not the fact that the match was abandoned, because we were not given
this information.

The majority of spectators believed, until at least the time we left (and
we were amongst the first to leave) that the problem was Liverpool
suporters trying to climb onto the pitch and disrupt the match; this caused
continual fru stration amongst the N o tti ngha m Forest suppo rte rs and a major
riot nearly broke out at app roxi mat ely 3.30 pm when the Liverpool
supporters charged across the pitch to try to fight the N ottingham Forest
supporters.  The suspicion of Liverpool hooligan problems appeared to be
confirmed to the spectators when the police brought app rox imately 10 police
dogs onto the pitch to control and contain the Nottin gha m Forest
supporters, when all that was required was a simple announcement over the
public address system about wh at was happening.      Total chaos was a v o i d e d due
the self-control of the N o ttin gha m Fore st supporters, not the actions of
the police or groun d authorities.

If the above ob ser vations are of any assistance, I would be grateful         if you
could pass this letter on to the appropriate person.

Kind regards.

Yours sincerely




cc Tony Baldry, MP
