STATEMENT OF:-   Peter Maurice Williamson v -      '   ^
                 Police Sergeant 2928
                 South Yorkshire Police
                 Police Headquarters
                 Legal Services Dept. (Prosecutions)



I am a Police Sergeant in the South Yorkshire Police, stationed in the
Prosecutions Department at Police Headquarters, Castle Green Annexe.


At 9.45 am On Saturday 15 April 1989 I commenced duty at the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Ground for the semi final football match between
Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.     After the briefing in the North Stand at
the ground I took my Serial No. 58 - which consisted of Pc 1966 Mitton,
Pc 1839 Powell, Pc 1709 Spooner, Pc 3237 Hislop, Pc 2323 Mitton,
Pc 504 Gilberthorpe, Pc 1947 Longford and Pc 1914 Royale, out of the ground
to take up duties in Herries Road.


My serial's duties were to perform in pairs on that part of Herries Road
which runs frcm the Five Arches public house to the junction with Moonshine
Lane/Shirecliffe Road.   This was to maintain order and supervise parking of
the vehicles in which Nottingham Forest fans were coning to the match in.       On
the day the area of patrol extended to take in the Devonshire Arms as this
public house was being used by the Nottingham Forest fans as well as the Five
Arches public house.


The weather on the day was fine and warm and the two public houses were being
well used by the Nottingham fans. There was still a good number of fans in
the Devonshire Arms approximately 15 to 20 minutes frcm kick off time and
they were warned that the ground was a good 15 minutes walk away and they
would be late for the kick off.


The Nottingham Forest fans were directed towards the ground and I took my
serial down Herries Road to the ground.     I was in possession of a personal
radio and I could hear that there was a lot of transmissions going on about
the Leppings Lane end of the ground.     I heard messages about a gate being
opened, but I was unable to make out who was making the requests.
I took my serial as quickly as possible to the ground and entered by Gate "0".
We then mustered at the corner of the rear of the North Stand.    There was by
this time a lot of other officers at this point.     I and my serial were then
instructed to take up positions infront of the Spion Kop along the cinder
track to watch the Nottingham supporters who were occupying this stand.


On taking up my position which was just beyond the goal mouth I became aware
that the other goal mouth at the Leppings Lane end was crowded by people and
uniformed officers.    I saw that people were being carried away to the corner
of the North Stand on make shift stretchers.   As they were being carried off
the Nottingham fans were cheering.    An official frcm the Nottingham club came
to perimeter fence and tried to stop this behaviour.    This behaviour
continued.   There was now becoming a procession of people being carried off.
People who I believe were Liverpool fans came to the Spion Kop end and began
tearing down advertising boards to take away and use as stretchers.      I
assisted in helping them to take the boards apart.


I then became aware of several Liverpool fans running across the pitch
towards the Spion Kop and they were remonstrating with the Nottingham fans.
I and the other officers present turned these fans back and escorted them
back towards the centre of the pitch.    Chief Superintendent Nesbit then
ordered that a barrier of uniformed officers should be formed across the pitch
around the half way mark to prevent any further occurence of this sort.


I remained in this position and whilst doing so saw that there were still
people laid out on the pitch and that a good number of Pc's were in a
dishevelled state and sane were quite obviously in a state of shock.


I was then instructed td perform duty along the cinder track along side the
South Stand (Nottingham fans).    However, the Nottingham fans in this stand
were well behaved.    There was an occasional outburst frcm these fans, but
this was quickly dealt with by Police Officers.


I could see by this time there were numerous people wandering around on the
pitch who were in a state of shock and were trying to find friends who they
had been with.   My main duties now were to try and console these people and
ask them to remain near to the stand allocated to the Liverpool fans.
I was still performing these duties when it was announced that the game had
been abandoned.     The fans frcm both sides were asked to remain where they
were for the time being but this announcement went unheaded and they started
leaving the ground.


I was then instructed to leave the pitch and take up duties outside the
ground.    I gathered together those memebers of my serial I could find and we
went out     onto the road outside gate "0".   However, shortly after we were then
directed     back into the ground to clear the area around thegymnasium.    I saw
that there were only three civilians in this area. They were all male
teenagers.     Enquiries revealed these to be the son of a doctor and his two
friends.     The doctor was in the gymnasium and I left them where they were so
they would not lose contact with him.


Chief Inspector Beale then asked me to take 10 men and a driver and go out
onto mobile outside in     the vicinity of the ground.    I then went out with
PC's 931(driver), 504, 3237, 2323,       1966, 1539, 2554, 414, 1741, 1947 and 2969.
We then went on mobile patrol as far as we could.        The roads were absolutely
congested.     We did locate a man who was trying to find Hammerton Road Police
Station who had not been able to locate his son since the match had been
abandoned.     He was escorted to Hammerton Road Police Station and handed over
to officers there.


At approximately 6 pm we returned to the ground andwere        then directed to
Clay Wheels Lane.     At approximately   7 pm we retired frcmduty.



                                     ,




PETER MAURICE WILLIAMSON
