                                                  M         HF$£
                                                      6~' fO
                                                        -f& *


OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date andtim e raised                   C—^ L liS   Number



Title
        X   jlM c   X'                                                                           K 5L o ^
(Include source and any^dqgjment number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions - urgent action    s/No
                                                                     O S )
                                                                                                              Receiver




                                                                                                              Indexer
Document regiVfered/indexed as indicated              ^ 3

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                          Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions                                         G L^M O -


                                                                                                              Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                          K3
                                                                                                           ^0c%
Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
I Patnick Esq OBE MP                                 GJD/AMS
House of Coasons
London
SW1A OAA                                             2k April 1989




Bear Sir


RE* HXULSBOilOIX» - 15 APittL 1989


I on grateful to you for writing and the inforoation that you included
in your letter will be of great interest to ray investigative tea®.

It may be that we shall be to touch with you again to take up the points
that you have made.

Thank you very much for writing*


Yours faithfully




Chief Constable
                                   Irvine Patnick, OBE, MP
                                                                                    A

                                  HOUSE OF COMMONS
                                     L O N D O N SW1A0AA




G. J, Dear Q. P. M. ,
The C h 1ef Constable
West Midlands Police.
Count y Headquarters
13‘i r 'i T i . i . h i sun B4-                    2 0 1li   A p r\i..1 1 9 3 9 .




15th April       1989 Hills b o rough Stadiu m Disaster

F rom media reports I understand Peter Wright G.B.E, The Chief
Constable South Yorkshire Police has invited you to conduct an
inquiry into the policing on the above.

This being confirmed I enclose herewith a copy of my rough
notes together referred to in the copy letter to the St. Hon
Lord Justice? Taylor which I think are self explanatory.

I will of course be pleased equally to attend before you or
answer any requests from you for further information.
                               H O U SE OF C O M M O N S
                                     L O N D O N SW1A0AA


                                                                      20 April 1989
Dear Sir Peter,
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 15th AprilJ-989




considered by you.
I have resisted the temptation to e di t and redraft my notes as I
hone vou will agree that they may be more valuable as an almost
i d e n t i f i e d C a n d e w i l i n g i v e ^ t h e i r ^ o w n b e vide nee*" t o ^ o u r ' e n g u i r y which


f S i? ^
s ens a ti on a li s at io nSofW thehm a t te ra c a m e ^ tas Tith s o " L n y other bad
things,       from the media.
I will of course be pleased to attend before you or answer any
requests from you for further information.


Yours sincerely,




 The Rt. Hon Lord Justice Taylor,
 Hillsborough Public Enquiry,
 c/o Home Office,
 50 Queen Anne's Gate,
 LONDON SWlH 9AT.
                                           m m . i'&wiiciL, u iif c , M r




                                          HOUSE OF COMMONS
                                              L O N D O N SW1A0AA



Typed by Irvine Patnick 13th April 1989

m h . . A p r i L im    .

The following are my recollections of the above date
" I was in the room I use as an office at home when my wife came to inform
me of 'trouble' shown on television at the foot-ball match being played at
Sheffield Wednesdays' Football ground and switched on and moved a
television set to enable me to watch the scenes.

It became compulsive viewing and I virtually stopped work.on my word
processor .   .                                '

It became obvious after several telephone interruptions by reporters to me
I should leave home and find out what was happening. My wife informed me
that, stciff were being called into Hospitals.

I left home I am not aware at what time and went to the Royal Hallamshire
Hospital parked in Olossop Road and went into the hospital spoke with a
                       and inquired if they were OK she implied they were it was
very busy and I left just as a physician some one that I did not know
offered to help and was instructed to see if any patients could be sent
home.

From there I decided to visit Hammerton Road Police Station which I
considered would be used by the Police. When I arrived near Hammerton Road
the police were assisting traffic , 3 double deck coach from Liverpool was
parked outside Hillsborough Barracks opposite Hillsborough Boys Club on
Langsett,Road .

I went in to- the Boys Club which was crowded with people including police
officers who were speaking to people present whom I deduced were from
Liverpool . I inquired of a police who was in charge ,and he pointed to a
clergy man I said Hello to a police officer who recognised me and left and
went to Hammerton Road police station which was very busy and after
introducing myself to a police constable decided to move off.

The next place to visit was the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground , I
parked in Leppings Lane and went toward the main entrance produced my House
of Commons pass and requested to see the Chairman of Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club. After a while the person on the door informed me that he had
gone home and that admission to the club was not possible.

Leaving the ground I saw a Radio Sheffield mobile transmitter and was
invited by David Holmes a political reporter if I would care to do an
interview which   I did-. Robert Jackson Radio Sheffields sports  reporter then
spoke with me .   They informed me that The Hon. Colin Moynihan   MPThe
Minister for Sport was flying to Sheffield but did not know how or where he
would land.

Having a mobile telephone I tried to obtain the ministers mobile telephone
number whilst still at the ground the mobile telephone number     ofthe
Minister from a colleague David Evans MP but he did not have it.
                               HOUSE OF C O M M O N S
                                    L O N D O N SW1A0AA




Sheet 2 Irvine Patnick QBE MP.

I spoke with my Private Secretary Miss                         at her home in London
by mobile telephone .1 informed of a p a p e r I h a d i e t t in a file on her desk
with the ministers mobile phone number and inquired how I could obtain this
information from the file .She stated that no staff would be on duty to do
that but offered to go to her office and then telephone me back with the
phone number. She did just that and informed she had spoken to the duty
officer at the D. of E. The minister was leaving Biggin Hill at 9.00 pm was
in his car and I may just catch him. The time was then about 8. 30pm. I went
on to the S.Y Police H. Q.left my car on a double yellow line whilst I went
in to ask if I may see the Chief Constable I had to show my identity to the
officer on duty whom I later discovered had answered a public call for off
duty police officers to report for duty he gave me a visitors pass. I
inquired where to park and was informed the Police car park was full and so
went to park my car elsewhere. I tried to telephone the Minister but was
uri-iiucceost ul. I then walked back to HQ. and was informed that the Chief
Constable was tied up giving TV interviews one crew was with him arid
another waiting.

I again telephoned the minister who answered I explained the situation
looked grim offered him and his press officer accommodation if they were
staying and inquired of the place the helicopter they were to travel to
Sheffield by would be landing .He did not know but requested I should meet
him and the police would know his place of landing .

Radio Hallam rang me for an interview I took a note of the number and
stated I would call up afterwards.

The PC on duty rang the Chief Constables staff officer and then informed me
that the Deputy Chief Constable would be coming to see me in reception .The
Deputy Chief Constable Peter Hayes came to see me and I inquired where the
minister was to land .he was unaware of the visit but thought other
Ministers were probably visiting tomorrow (Sunday morning). He checked out
if the Minister of Sport was visiting Saturday confirmed this and would be
landing at the Niagara Ground. I inquired how long the flying time was- we
discussed this -and I concluded an hour and a quarter plus.

I thanked him handed back my visitors pass and left the building I
telephoned Radio Hallam agreed to be interviewed and then walked up to the
station and gave the interview .Jim Greensmith the head of news at the
station then inquired if the minister was visiting which I confirmed he
asked where he would be landing which I declined to give but after further
inquiry indicated it could be on the football ground side of the city. He
informed me the Prime Minister and the Home Secretary were to visit the
next day.

I left Radio Hallam and went to Niagara Ground and arrived at the SY Police
Transport dept, and wearing casual clothes was challenged by a police
officer I my produced my identity and requested information on the
helicopters landing site he directions which were the sports ground just at
the rear of the building. I then went by car to the ground and parked.
   *                      ».J»    i..      V   *   -«■•«'» -f   ■■■->•■   J   fc.'A'.A




                                 HOUSE OF COMMONS
                                        LONDON SW1AQAA




Sheet 3 Irvine Patnick 08E MP.

It must have been then around 9.30 pm. . some while later police cars
arrived and moved on to the sports field and manoeuvred into position made
a cross with on the ground with headlights and set the blue lights going .

I locked my car and moved towards the senior police officers who were
gathering. A Chief Superintendent David Duckworth whom I knew from my years
as a senior member of South Yorkshire County Council when he had a lower
rank asked if I would go and speak with some of the officers that had been
on duty at the stadium ,he stated they were down in the dumps .This I
readily agreed to .Someone who I think was a senior officer came toward the
Chief Superintendent and attempted to console! each other.

I moved into the building there were many officers I noted a sergeant and a
superintendents'crown on jackets amongst those present they were sitting
around in groups they were wearing police sweaters it was very quiet and my
reception I would describe as 'frosty*.
I moved away from them and was greeted by a Sergeant not on duty in mufti
who was on sick leave I had met during my South Yorkshire Council days, We
spoke I inquired’ if he was better when an officer detached himself from a
sitting arounda nearby table and said words to the effect I quote 'Did I
 want to know the truth' I indicated that I did and the following is my
recollection .1 was. taken back to his table and from police officers around
 this table I heard the following which I will try to convey just as I heard
it : -'Some of the supporters were pissed out of their minds . They were
pissing on us while we were pulling the dead and Injured out they were
swearing at us kicking and punching us and hampering our work'. One seated
showed me the marks of the kicks on his left trouser leg and the marks on
his skin. Another one Informed how the crowd had lifted up a Police horse
how the fans had been crawling beneath the horses and inqlutred if I was
like him and gave them a wide berth I affirmed this
One said ' I picked up a girl she was dead she was in my arms her blouse
was torn she had no bra' on her breasts were exposed when someone shouted
at me throw over here we'll fuck her. It was booze that did it-you speak up
for us tell them in Parliament wfrat happened. ’

I was advised by senior officers to take what had been said 'with a pinch
of salt '.The lights of the helicopter indicated its arrival and I left to
greet the minister and introduce him to the Senior police officers present.
I informed the minister of what I had heard.
On Monday the press were telephoning me with 'stories' they had heard and
on Tuesday     18th April the media were on to the story of looting, violence
and drink and could I confirm this. Some calls were taken by my secretary
and not returned by me .Despite the fact on those two days I did not speak
to some newspapers and yet some took and printed a garbled tale. On the 19th
of April a Graham Boon of Whites News Agency asked if I could confirm the
police had found dead bodies outsided the ground I could not and asked why
after a telephone conversation yesterday with a colleague Peter Moxon some
comments had beeen attributed to me the day before which I had not made. He
apologised and informed me it had been garbled by others that had used it.
   k ~     'j.'sv ■s reporter from 'the Sheffield Star 3 Jane? .Gott asked if I
                            H O U SE O F C O II M O N S
                                 L O N D O N &W140AA




Sheet 4 Irvine Patnick OBE MP

Eventually after being sickened by the 'myths ’ that had sprung up about
the disaster I repeated ths story in part to the media in order to correct
the rumours circulating the police officers had related to me .
I am not aware of names ranks or numbers of the officers but do believe
they were telling me the truth.

    What a reporter says I said, is always open to misrepresentation.
    For a true record of what i said, the television video recording
    will no dcwd?t be available.
