    "                          ^hc24~V
^   CHRISTOPHER DAVID BELL    Police Constable 126   Main Street Police Station. C Group.

                                                                   o          <5^9- '4^v\
    Beport regarding the Hillsborough Incident on 15th, Aprilt 1989_______________ ^


    On Saturday, 15th, April, 1989 I was detailed to work 8*30 a#m. to 7*30 p.m.
    working the FA OTP semi final duty at Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield •
    I was a member of serial number 39 and my serial    Sergeant was PS DOYLE and
    my serial Inspector was H R. MEEK#


    I commenced duty at Main Street Police Station at 8.3oa.m    from there I was
    conveyed to the Hillsborough Football Ground by coach • We were there directed
    to the aw-in north stand and seated in serials, we were subsequently briefed    by
    senior Officers . After the main briefing we were again     seen as a serial by
    our serial Inspector and Sergeants regarding our individual duties •


    At 10*50 p.m. the serial was deployed into the Halifax     Road area   to supervise
    the Liverpool fans coaches which were to park along Halifax Road    and to direct
    the supporters to the Leppings Lane end of the ground# I took up a position in
    Halifax Road in company with Police Constable 1^ Qaiyam near to the Wadsley
    Bridge Working Mens Club entrance « Whilst at this location we saw the Liverpool
    coaches start to arrive and park at the top of Halifax Road near to the junction
    with Deerlands Avenne, some distance from where we were positioned . In a very
    short time a number of coaches had arrived and the fans were passing our location*
    It became apparant at this stage that a great number of the Liverpool supporters
           been drinking, although not drunk they had obviously consumed intoxicants .
    The fans were in good humour . As the afternoon progressed and more and more
    coaches arrived it became clear that a large proportion of the coaches had been
    carrying alcohol, fans were getting off the coaches with cans of beer or lager
    sometimes more than the one can • I asked what we were expected to do in relation
    to this problem     and was told that we were to do nothing as long as they drank up
    before getting to the match . This information was received from another Constable
    who stated that those were the instructions being given     by supervisory Officers
    in view of the extent of the problem . Indeed, if we had enforced the law in
    relation to alcohol on coaches, then manpower would have been quickly drained f
    such was the extent of the problem •


    Whilst standing at the entrance to the Working Mens Clue we were approached by
    countless Liverpool fans asking where to buy tickets for the game and where was
    nearest pub that was open • Indeed, fans were climbing over walls of the working
    mens Club in an effort to gain entry after they had been refused by stewards of
    the Club* As the coaches passed our position we joined other Officers in walking
    towards the ground     in time with the arriving coaches . I saw a large group of
        fans standing outside the White Horse Public House drinking alcohol . It became
        obvious that a large proportion of the fans arriving late were intoxicated .
It was also clear that a large quantity of alcohol bad been consumed by fans as they
walked from the coaches to the ground, I saw empty cane       littering the footpaths and
verges all the way to the ground# Quite a number of the Liverpool coaches arrived
late, at 2#^5P*m* to 3 p.m. and these coaches were parking in a position near to the
junction with Claywheels lane • As my serial was now gathered at the junction of
Claywheels Lane awaiting further instructions, a message *e.s received       on PS DOYLE'S
radio requesting     assistance at the Leppings Lane end . At the time we thought it
was reported fighting# In any event we made       our way quickly to the Leppings Lane
end • Hy impression en route was that nothing serious was happening as Officers
were passing us going the opposite way , away from the ground*


As we approached the Leppings I&ne entrance to the ground       I saw a cordon of
Officers preventing entry to the Leppings Icme turnstiles • At this stage I was
still under the impression that it was a problem with fighting inside the ground#
There were very few fans outside the ground at this time . We arrived at the Leppings
Lane end at about 3*10 p.m.       and we were instructed to join the cordon and prevent
fans entering the turnstiles area • At this time       this was pointless as there were
only a few fans and numerous Police Officers • Whilst standing in the cordon
it became clear that no—one really knew what was happening inside the ground# We
stood in the cordon for two or three minutes then we were instructed to enter the
Leppings lane   *>tv3 ,   I ran into the Leppings Lane end and was immediately contrented
with hysterical fans shouting, 11 GET DOWN THEBE, DO SOMETHIN!!, IT'S ALL YOOR
FAULT.11 At this time I was entering        the tunnel leading underneath the stand to
the Leppings lane terraces* I saw PC TAYLOR coming through the tunnel, having to
fight his way past fans who were just standing there seemingly in a daze . The tunnel
area was full of spectators and a large crowd were at the rear of the stand area .
I saw that PC TAYLOR was carrying a young boy who was apparently dead . I then made
my way through the crowd towards the terraces, having to push and shove my way through .
The vast majority of fans were just standing there        watching or shouting abuse at
Police Officers « As I entered        the number 3 section of the   terracing it became
clear that a major incident had occurred • Policemen and women were carrying
apparently dead bodies past me through the crowd* I saw that there was literally
a pile of bodies towards the front of the terraces and in the main near to an exit
gate in the perimeter fencing. There were numerous Policemen and emergency services
on the pitch itself • The pitch was a sea of people . I enlisted the help of some
Liverpool fans who helped me to carry a youth from the terraces through the tunnel
and out into the area at the back of the stand where emergency services were
beginning to arrive. I attempted mouth to mouth resuscitation o:: the youth and kept
this tip for some minntes but the youth was obviously dead and had been so for some
minutes . The Liverpool fans were continually shouting abuse at the Police Officers
kicking out , I was narrowly missed by a youth throwing a bottle from the seating
area above the terraces towards me, the bottle shattered on the concrete beside me.
The majority of the fans were heavily intoxicated and were doing nothing but shout
abuse and get in the way . There was a section of the fans that got stuck in and
helped , but these were in thelnlnorit^ • 1 then helped “to for* a lined lifting the
bodies from the terraces along the line and through the gate in the perimeter fence
and onto the pitch where the majority of the medical help seemed to be .


After this I went to the end of the tunnel to stop fans returning onto the terraces .
Whilst there we were repeatedly   abused with bad language, we were urinated upon
by fans from the seated area • The fans,perhaps understandably in some cases, would
not listen to reason and barged through at the first oppertunity • I was pushed amd
jostled by drunken fans trying to get back onto the terraces • Unbelievably a large
number wanted to get back because they didn't   want   to miss the restart of the
match • The fans that were behaving badly were the ones that were heavily in drink •
After a while all of the bodies were removed and the situation calmed down and the
fans dispersed • I then attended at the North Stand for stand down • We were later
transported back to Main Street   Police Station   where we were sttod down at 7 .30pn.


I was not injured in the incident, and connot assist further.




P C M 26 BELL
