                                                             li.   U■                      </

                       Northern Regional Health Authority                                       gifa

                             N O R T H U M B R IA A M B U L A N C E SERVICE



Tel: (091) 273 1212                                                               Ambulance Headquarters,
Fax: (091) 273 7070                                                               Interlink House,
                                                                                  Scotswood Road,
                                                                                  Newcastle upon Tyne.
                                          Our Ref:       LMC/DB                   NE4 7BJ
                 Mr. L. M. Caple
Please ask for                            Your Ref:

                 22nd May, 1989


                 The Honourable Mr. Justice Taylor,
                 The Hillsborough Inquiry,
                 Sheffield Town Hall,
                 Sheffield,
                 South Yorkshire.


                 Dear Sir,

                 I write on behalf of the Regional Ambulance Officers' Group who represent
                 the professional advisory group on Ambulance issues for the National
                 Health Service with membership drawn from all the English Health Regions,
                 Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.

                 At our meeting last week, we considered the evidence submitted by the
                 Association of Chief Ambulance Officers (copy enclosed) to your Inquiry
                 and resolved that we should write and endorse the recommendations made by
                 the Association.

                 It is our hope that your recommendations will include a strengthening of
                 Ambulance Service Involvement within the terms of the Safety at Sports
                 Ground Act.

                 Yours faithfully,




                 L. M. Caple
                 SECRETARY
                 REGIONAL AMBULANCE OFFICERS' GROUP




                        REGIONAL AMBULANCE OFFICER: L M. CAPLE,    f a s i l h s m m bim
     Inquiry into the Hillsborough
           Stadium Disaster


               Subm ission by
The A ssociation of Chief A m bulance Officers
                                          1



                                   S u b m ission


1.        The Association of Chief A m bulance Officers ("the Associa­
tion") wishes to subm it the follow ing views concerning the needs
of safety at sports events in the light of the H illsborough Stadium
disaster.

2.           The Association w^as fo unded in 1949 to, inter alia, prom ote
and m aintain efficient and economical am bulance services w ithin
the N ational H ealth Service. The sixty or so m em bers of the
 Association com prise all of the Chief A m bulance Officers in post in
 the U nited K ingdom , the Republic of Ireland and the Channel
 Islands.         The view s expressed here are, how ever, directed at
 m atters w ithin the U nited Kingdom .

 3.          The Association understands that ambulance service resources
 at H illsborough on the 15th A pril 1989 com prised thirty St. John's
 A m bulance Brigade personnel w ith tw o am bulances, an d two
     officers from the South Yorkshire M etropolitan A m bulance Serv­
     ice ("SYMAS") w ith a similar num ber of am bulances and their
     crews.

     4.       N o direct inform ation is available to the Association concern­
     ing contingency planning, first aid and casualty evacuation equip­
     m ent, or life su p p o rt training of stadium staff at H illsborough.


     5.       In term s of am bulance sendee resources, if perh ap s not other
     m atters of m edical provision, those at H illsborough w ere greater,
     in the Association's experience, than are to b e found at m an y sports
     events which attract large crow ds. W hether they w ere adequate,
     indeed w hether m edical resources as a w hole w^ere adequate, are,
     how ever, different questions.


      6. ■     That said, the adequacy of m edical resources at H illsborough
      is a question for the Inquiry to consider on the basis of evidence
      from those directly involved. The points w hich the Association
      w ishes to raise are rather that:

                 (a) if the resources w ere adequate, then that w as essentially
                 fortuitous;
            (b) if the resources were inadequate, the extent to w hich
            that situation m ight have been prevented w ould also have
            d ep en d ed largely on chance.


7.         The reason w hy the Association takes this view lies in the
absence of statu to ry sup po rt for the provision of m edical resources
com parable to th at available to the police and fire services.


8.         The s u p p o rt referred to is that given by the Safety of Sports
G rounds Act 1975, as am ended by the Local G overnm ent Act 1985
and the Fire Safety an d Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987, ("the
Act").

9.         The Inquiry will know that safety certificates issued under
section 2 of the Act are required generally to "contain such terms and
conditions as the local authority consider necessary or expedient to secure
reasonable safety". The section goes on to specify certain particular
 requirem ents, including term s and conditions as to "the number,
 size and situation of entrances to and exits from the stadium [or regulated
 stand] or any part of it (including means of escape in case of fire or other
 emergency) and the means of access to any such entrances or exits".


 10.        O n th e face of it, section 2 of the Act w ould appear to embrace
 the possibility of a safety certificate including term s and conditions
 as to the provision of m edical resources. In practice, however, the
 operation of section 2 is limited by the consultation provisions of
 section 3, and now sub-section (2A) of section 2 introduced by
 am endm ent. The requirem ent as to consultation extends only to
 "the chief officer of police and where the local authority is in Greater
 London or a metropolitan county the fire authority or, in any other case,
 the building authority". W here a certificate contains a condition as
 to the provision of police services, the sub-section referred to
 reserves the extent of such provision "for the determination of the chief
 officer of police".


     11.    A n incidental effect of these provisions is that they address
     the pocket of a "person concerned with the organisation or management
     of a sports stadium". Such a person can be compelled to lay out
     m oney on fire precautions and p ay for the attendance of police
     officers. M oney is not necessarily the answ er to everything—-but
                                    3



questions of funding police resources and fire precautions are in
this w ay answ ered to some degree.


12.    T he principal effect, how ever, is that the police and fire
services are given substantial "clout" in dealing w ith organisers or
m anagers. In term s of advance planning and equipm ent, as well
as levels of m anning and organisation on the day, police and fire
officers are in positions of authority from w hich to im pose their
professional judgm ents in m atters of public safety.


13.    N o tw ithstand in g that public safety is in the Association's
experience receiving more attention today than ever before, the
position is wholly otherwise w ith regard to am bulance services.
The chief am bulance officer has no part in the issue or refusal of a
safety certificate. H e has no authority, and no m eans of compelling
an organiser or m anager to co-operate in the provision of medical
cover, let alone pay for it.


 14.     This is not to say that the provision of am bulances and crews
 on the day, or the general advice of am bulance officers, is entirely
 neglected.


 15.     The St. John's Am bulance Brigade or the Red Cross are a
 custom ary and welcome presence at alm ost every sporting and
 sim ilar event. Likewise, NHS am bulance services will often make
 volun tary provision at larger events.


 16.     A gain, there is som e voluntary co-operation at local level.
 A m bulance services are able to advise m anagers and organisers in
 such m atters as first aid equipm ent, basic life su p po rt training for
 stad iu m staff, and the setting aside of facilities to receive casual­
 ties— and there are instances of such advice being taken and acted
 upon.


 17.     N evertheless, the operative w o rd is "voluntary". Thus the
 Association understand s that SYMAS placed officers and am bu­
 lances at H illsborough on its ow n initiative, w hile the St. John's
 A m bulance Brigade is of course an entirely voluntary organisa­
 tion.
18.    The fortuitous nature of things is in fact well illustrated by
w h at h ap p en ed at Hillsborough. There are practical limits to the
n u m b er of am bulances and crews th at can attend throughout an
event. A major incident will inevitably involve mobilising ad d i­
tional resources, and doing so quickly. It is the universal experi­
ence of the Association's m em bers that the first problem faced by
the am bulance service in a major incident is the communication of
reliable inform ation on w hich to base its response.


19.    The Association understan ds th at it w as the two officers from
SYMAS w7ho initiated m obilisation at H illsborough. It was fortu­
nate indeed that they w ere present and in a position to do so. It
m igh t be asked w hether m obilisation wras in any way handicapped
by the fact that the SYMAS officers w^ere present voluntarily and
th u s n o t at the centre of operations, for exam ple in the police
com m and post. But b e that as it m ay, the m aterial point is that,
w hatev er role the SYMAS officers w ere able to play, no m eans
currently exists of ensuring that professional officers will be in a
position to act similarily at future sports events.


20.     As for the funding of am bulance resources, the Association
u n d erstan d s that SYMAS acted w ith ou t paym ent, w’hile the St
John's A m bulance Brigade w ould have received no more than a
 contribution to its expenses at the rate of £5 per 5,000 spectators,
 th u s aro u n d £35 in all. That is not a criticism of Sheffield W ednes­
 d a y Football Club— at some events the brigade receives nothing at
 all. But it can hardly be described as funding in any real sense.



 21.    H aving regard to the foregoing, the Association respectfully
 invites the Inquiry to find:


         (a) that on-site medical resources, provided on the basis of
         professional advice and judgem ent, are an essential elem ent
         in m eeting the needs of safety at sports events; and


         (b) that the provision of such resources can only be secured
         b y statutory m eans.
                                   5



22.   The Association futher respectfully invites the Inquiry to
recom m end am endm ent of the Act to provide:


       (a) in section 2 sub-section (2)(c) that a safety certificate
       shall include term s and conditions as to the provision of first
       aid facilities and training in use of the same;


       (b) in section 2 subsection (2A) that no condition of a safety
       certificate shall require the provision of the attendance at
       the gro un d of any m em bers of an ambulance service unless
       the extent of the provision of their attendance is reserved for
       the determ ination of the chief am bulance officer of the
       service;


        (c) in section 3 subsection (3) that the local authority shall
        send a copy of an application for a safety certificate to the
        chief am bulance officer for the area in question (and that
        accordingly the d uty of the local authority to consult shall
        extend to such officer); and


        (d) for such further and consequential am endem ents as are
        appropriate.




                           V N Jolliffe
                           N ational Secretary
                           Association of Chief A m bulance Officers
                           Dorset A m bulance Service H eadq uarters
                           R ingw ood Road
                           St Leonards
                           Ringw ood, BH24 2SP


                           5th M ay 1989
