       ,
Peter Sykes
                                                                            ©oKSL -sii
Police Constable 179
Main Street Police Station
Rotherham.




At 8.30am on Saturday 15th April 1989, I paraded for duty at Main Street Police Station,
P.o’
   c^crhoTi.   Tr! co?npany with Police Sargent 2171 Keenan and other officers we then made are
way to Hillsboro Football Ground, Sheffield by transit van.      At y.^Oam that day I attended
i/ue brieliuK witiiin the ground and formed part of Serial k2 supervised by Sergent Keenan.
At 11.15am I took up a patrol position on Halifax Road, nearest junction Southey Green Road,
just up from Wadsley Bridge Railway Station,      My duties were to patrol the road supervising
visiting Liverpool football supporters, who were arriving by coach and private vehicles.
On my arrival the road was quite busy with supporters and traffic and by about 12.30pm that
•day the road was nearly full on one side with football coaches.      Most supporters visited
a nearby public house which eventually had to close its doors and only admit persons on
a one in one out basis.     Other supported visited local shops and a 'Thresher off licence was
very busy with supporters, I remained at that location untill about 2.50pm v/hen the vast
majority of supporters left the public house and our serial escorted them down Halifax Road
to the junction of Claywheels Lane.     On instructions from Sergeant Keenan we made are way to
the Lepping Lane entrance to the Hillsboro football ground.      On arrival at this location at
around 3.10pm a large number of supporters began to leave the ground as well as supporters
still tryng to gain entrance to the ground.      Some supporters v/ho were leaving the ground
were obviously distressed and many shouted abuse towards the Police in that area and also
commented to what had happened inside the ground.      I became aware from these comments that
a scrieuc; incident bad taken place in the ground.     I remained o v tn iJ e the ground assisting
•in traffic control of arriving emergency vehicles v/ho were needed in the ground.      At 6.30pm
I left that area and in company with serial h2 officers we entered the ground and attended
a further briefing     on completion of the briefing I returned to Main Street Police station
and ended my tour of duty at 8pm.




P.Sykes P.O.179.
