                                                                                         M IR .15


. OTHER DOCUMENT
          ------------- FORM
                         «• w i i m                  |Date   and time raised
                                                                                                      Number

 Title           jKj      UJbkt jft*'
 (Include source and any document number if relevant)


 Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Y f t r f C            0 t>    ^




 Document registered/indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                    Indexer



                                                                                                               Statement Reader



                                                                                                                   Indexer
No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken
                                                                                                                         SIO
                                                                                         1      | |   I™


                                                                                         1      ^ IL& ^^9
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
          Esq


                                                          ' Blackpool
                                                            Lancashire



The Rt. Hon Douglas Hurd Esq, MP                          18 April 1989
Home Secretary
House of Commons
Westminster
LONDON




 Dear Mr Hurd

 Unlike many of those who died at Hillsborough, I have been fortunate to watch football

 for the past- 45 years or so, and feel it my duty, to write this letter giving you my

views of what happened at the Semi-Final.




I had been to last year's Match, and having then witnessed the crushing outside the

Ground at Leppings Lane, arrived earlier this year at 2.15p.m.    We had no problem in

getting in, but I was surprised to find the Police presence in the immediate vicinity

of the Turnstiles sparse in relation to 1988.




We took our seats at 2.30p.m. directly above the Leppings Lane Goal, and therefore,

had an uninterrupted view of the unfortunate events which followed.      My immediate

reaction half-an-hour before the kick-off was of the grossly over-packed centre section

Of the Leppings Lane terracing.    In complete contrast, the wing sections had huge

unpopulated gaps which over the next twenty minutes or so, slowly began to fill up.

The situation in the centre section however, got steadily worse, and fifteen minutes

before kick-off time, waves of supporters were being pushed down the terracing.     Not

once during the half-hour before the kick-off was there an announcement over the

loudspeaker to ask spectators not to push or-to keep away from the centre section.      No

attempt appeared to have been made by Police or Stewards in front of this section to

get people out and transfer them to the sparsely populated wing sections.     I contrasted

this to the situation at Anfield just over a fortnight ago when at the Evening Match




                                            4i
  against Derby County, late arrivals caused a crush in the lower section of the 'Kop'.

.Immediately this happened, the Police and Stewards were'on hand to shepherd people away

 and announcements were regularly made over the Public Address System for spectators

 to move away from the section under pressure.




 In the period leading up to the kick-off, more and     more people appeared to he coming

 into the centre section which, as mentioned before, was grossly over-populated half an

 hour before the Match was due to begin.




 I understand that a Gate at the Leppings Lane End. was opened to let spectators in

 following the dreadful crush outside.     This therefore, had the effect of compounding

 what was already an appalling situation.




 I have seen the Sheffield Wednesday Secretary on television referring to his computer

 telling him that the Leppings Lane End was under capacity.    How can anyone, possibly

rely on a computer print-out in such circumstances?     The only way to marshal the crowds

was to get outside and observe, and it was obvious to anyone with even the slightest

wit, that marshalling of the spectators was sadly lacking.




If, as reported, the Police allowed the Gate to be opened, why weren’t the spectators

directed to the wing sections?   Some of the Police appeared to have walkie-talkies.

Did they not co-ordinate their actions with their colleagues inside the ground who were

observing the mayhem in the half-hour leading up to kick-off time?     Surely, Fans should

have been prevented from entering the central section by a line of Policemen,     or Stewards

being deployed across the tunnel entrance.




I would now like to comment on the Leppings Lane End of the ground.    Whilst, this is

normally adequate for League games, when Home Supporters can gain access to the North

Stand from the Pennistone Road end also, I would suggest that for a Semi-Final where one

  the Team's Supporters takes the North Stand, and the Leppings Lane    accommodation, the
arrangement is totally unsatisfactory.   The approach leading to this section of the ground




                                              ♦i
is on^the bend of a road, extremely narrow, and     it is like asking all the Main Stand

Imd^'Kop' Supporters at Anfield to make their way through the Shankley Gates and then

to be faced by a brick wall across the main Car Park.




I would now like to turn to another section of the ground, which on normal.match days,

because of access from both ends of the ground, is perfectly acceptable, but which on

Semi-Final days gives many Spectators extreme cause for concern.     This is the landing

behind the North Stand.     Last year, I was at the 'Kop' end of this Stand, and after the

match, made my way with my son and nephew out of the ground using this landing.      It

was one of the most frightening experiences of my life, and there were times when I felt

that I was being carried by the crowd without my feet touching the ground.     There were

many Spectators who showed how terrified they were.     This year, I had decided that I

would make my way out of the Stand at ground level, come what may, but after watching

the dreadful scenes for thirty minutes, and knowing full well that I was unable to

help, we left the ground in complete safety, but in utter dismay and quickly reunited

with my son who, in that dreadful central section, had been one of the lucky ones.



In addition to following Liverpool Football Club for the past 16 years, I lived in

Sheffield for 3% years, during which time, I regularly visited both the Brammall Lane

and Hillsborough Grounds.    I feel therefore, that I am able to contribute with a

knowledge of both Anfield and Hillsborough, and conclude by expressing my utter

amazement at the apparent lack of satisfactory marshalling in the Leppings Lane area

inside and outside the ground.

Yours sincerely
