CHRISTOPHER DALRYMPLE                                                           QOR 483




Police Constable 2923

Doncaster Police Station

ju.o.o9

On April 15th 1989 I was deputed to duties relating to the FA Cup Semi Final

between Liverpool FC and Notts Forest FC to be played at Hillsborough Football

Ground, Sheffield that day.

I paraded at Doncaster Police Station at 8.30 a.m. and was transported to

Hillsborough Football Ground.     I attended a full briefing held in the North Stand

of the ground with the rest of my Serial (S 61) at about 10 a.m.      Following this

briefing my serial commenced mobile patrol, as a Tango unit under the supeT’-1 sion

of Sgt Stuart Chapman in the Southey Green and Firvale districts of Sheffield.

This was the Notts Forest fans side of the city.

We made general early patrols out as far as the Ml motorway paying particular

attention to the influx of fans coaches and cars and monitored public houses.

After midday we paid particular attention to public houses closer to the ground

on and around rierries   Road.   The pubs were becoming   very bus^ with euacucu

parking up nearby and    also dropping fans off to use the pub and make their own

way to the ground.

At approximately 1.30    p.m. we parked up in a street close to a pub called the

Devonshire Arms which    was becoming very busy with Notts Forest fans, a lot    of

whom were stood in the car park drinking. There was a constant stream of coaches

pulling up outside and dropping fans off and numerous cars were pulling into the

pub car park.

There was also a constant flow of fans on foot walking towards the ground, we

were about i-J mile from the ground.
                                                                                PAGE 2
CHRISTOPHER DALRYMPLE                                                           Q0R

A large proportion of the younger portion of these fans were stopping off at the

Devonshire Arms, most were chanting and singing but did not appear violent or

abusive.     However at one point a group of about 15 male youths came to my

attention.     They were walking towards the pub and all of them were shouting and

chanting very loudly.    A couple at the front were    shouting abuse so myself and PC

Serhatlic (PC 2497) went to them.    We led them back to our van where we cautioned

them re their conduct    and then allowed them to go on their way. They had been

drinking but were not drunk.     This group all went   into the pub.

During our time out in the Firvale/Southey Green area our radio

reception/transmission were broken.     I do not know the area well but apparently

it is a notorious radio 'dead area.'

At about 2.50 p.m. we began to make our way towards the football ground.         There

were still coaches dropping people off at the pub.      However, there was no

indication of any trouble but it was obvious these fans would not be at the

ground in time for the kickoff or the early part of the game.

At this point we were oblivious to any problems in Leppings Lane or any build up

of fans. To the best of my knowledge we were by now receiving virtually nothing

via the radio which Sgt Chapman had.

We approached the ground and drove onto Penistone Road from Herries Road. We were

still unaware of any problem at this point but I noticed a lot of police vehicle

activity around the ground, some with blue lights on.

I have no idea what the time was but I recall us suddenly picking up radio

messages again.     I heard "everybody onto the perimeter track."      We then made

towards the front of the ground after crossing over onto the groundward side of

the road.     I saw more police vehicles travelling towards the ground.      I then

heard on a radio a female voice calling "operation support Hillsborough Football

Ground" although I am not sure if this was on personal radio or VHF Channel 1.           I
                                                                             PAGE 3
CHRISTOPHER DALRYMPLE                                                        Q0R 483
presume it was Channel 1 VHF.

At this we went straight to the ground,     parked up outside andwent inside where

we gathered outside the gym awaiting further directions. There were about 30-40

PC's gathered there. Although nobody specifically told us what was happening it

was generally presumed that there was trouble within the ground, i e , a pitch

invasion or large scale fighting.

After a couple of minutes waiting around I went up into the N Stand to see what

was happening.    I saw a large number of   officers gathered in the centre of the

Leppings Lane, end terracing and people were climbing over    the fencing. The match

had been stopped and it looked like a pitch invasion. This was obviously the

early stages of the incident.

After a few more minutes we were ordered to go into the ground. We were still

unaware of what was happening so my serial formed into pairs and we made our way

onto the pitch via the walkway between the North Stand and Spion K o p , obviously I

was expecting fighting to be taking place or a large pitch invasion.      I saw a

huge crowd of police and fans at the Leppings Lane end which still looked like a

pitch invasion.

As we walked onto the perimeter track we were greeted with jeering and shouting

from the Notts Forest fans to our left, some missiles were thrown.     The 1st half

of the group of officers I was with were directed by a Ch In&pector- z o tac

Leppings Lane end.    Myself and the rest of the group were directed lo form a

broken cordon along the front of the Spion Kop, presumably to stop any attempts

to get onto the pitch as by this time there were numerous Liverpool fans all over

the pitch.

From this point my memory is not clear as to any timescale of the numerous

occurrences on the pitch or the relative times between them.

After about 10 minutes.stood towards gate 3 of the Spion Kop it was obvious to us
                                                                              PAGE 4
CHRISTOPHER DALRYMPLE                                                         Q°R 483

that the incident was not a pitch invasion.     I began to see people being

stretchered away and carried away on hoardings. Rumours began to spread amongst

police officers that one person had been killed.     My attention was then drawn to

a small disturbance in the Kop, at the front close to gate 2, I saw an officer

enter via Gate 2 and I went to back him up. We entered the kop, the scuffle had

broken up but the other officer, not known to me, went to a youth and warned him

re his conduct.

There were no complaints of any nature made to us and we again left the stand.

It was not clear if those who had been fighting were opposing fans.     I returned

to the area of gate 3-

About 5 minutes later fans began to run down to the kop and started to break up

the advertisement boards. There was a constant stream of injured being carried

from the ground on these and it was obvious they were needed so I assisted in the

dismantling of them and fans took them away.

After approx another 5 minutes stood facing the kop, during which time there was

constant jeering and abuse at Liverpool from some sections of the Notts Forest

fans who obviously didn't realise what had happened I suddenly turned around and

saw about 30-40 Liverpool charging down the pitch towards us in a line strung out

across the centre third of the ground.     My initial reaction was that they were

going for the Notts Forest fans.

I turned (calling PC Serhatlic as I did so) and ran towards them. I got to the

centre of the pitch in front of and about 30 yards out from the goal.     There were

6 youths running directly at me.     My impression was that they were after me, not

the opposing fans.     In the centre of the group was a male youth aged about 19

yrs, heavily built and about 6' 0" tall, he ran at me and just before he got to

me I struck him with my right forearm across his neck, this knocked him clean

over, backwards.     The other youths stopped and picked him up, pushing him back
                                                                              PAGE 5
CHRISTOPHER DALRYMPLE                                                         Q°R ^

towards me, they were all screaming abuse at me and I formed the impression they

were drunk.

I felt in real physical danger and drew my staff, I then became aware of PC

Serhatlic to my left who also had his staff drawn.     I shouted at the group to get

back, one tried to run past me to my right but I caught him around the waist and

pushed him back.    By this time more officers were all around stopping any further

progress by the fans.     A Ch Insp whose full identity is not known to me

approached me from behind and instructed me to put my staff away.

After this were organised by several Sgts and Inspectors to form a cordon across

the pitch at the centre line to keep a sterile area between the two lots of fans.

People were still being carried away on hoardings through the police line.

I was stood roughly in line with Gate 2 of the West Stand.     I stood there for

about 20 minutes during which time numerous Liverpool fans tried to get through

the line, they were all distressed and angry. Some blaming the police, some the

opposing fans and some the football club and the FA.     I then saw 2 fans stood

shouting at a TV cameraman on a static camera at the front of the South Stand

close to the players tunnel.     I went over and got between the fans and the

camerman.     I told them they were not achieving   anything by having a     go at him,so

they started on at me.     They showed me tickets   with the stubs still     attached,

obviously unchecked by any official. They were      shouting at me "this     is your

fuckin' fault, put that in your report you bastard" and     "you should      have givenus

the kop end."    Both these youths smelt strongly of intoxicants, they were both

drunk.

At this point,Brian Clough and Kenny Dalglish emerged          lue pitch with a

senior police officer. There was a surge of fans towards them and they had to be

led back off the pitch.     The players tunnel area was cleared of fans and I was

stood again in front of the South Stand in front of the police cordon.       There
                                                                                        PAGE 6
CHRISTOPHER DALRYMPLE                                                                   Q°R ^83

were a couple of PC's with a bucket of water giving drinks to fans, a lot of whom

were obviously going into shock or at least very distressed.

Suddenly somebody threw a mug down onto the pitch from up in the South Stand.

This caused a number of Liverpool fans to surge towards the stand, obviously

intent on finding who'd thrown it. With other officers I joined a cordon across

this section of the S Stand and the matter diffused itself. We were stood in this

cordon for some 20        minutes again when I saw, by chance, 2 people on the far side

of the pitch   below the North Stand run together and hug one another, obviously

they had been separated in the incident and were emotional at re-locating one

another.   Howevers this caused people in their immediate vicinity to look at

them, out of interest, people near to those onlookers walked towards them to see

what was happening and so on until I heard 3 youths close to me me say "there's a

fight over there," and they ran off in that direction.        This is clear evidence of

the state of mind of some of the fans, intent on finding a fight or an excuse for

one.

Over the next i ■hour or so people were just milling around, all the injured were

off the pitch and there was no real direction as to what we should be doing or

what was going to happen.

At one point   there was a minor scuffle on the pitch close to Gate 2 of the W

Stand when a   press photographer was attacked by several fans. This again caused 2

youths near me to call out 'fight' and they started, to run towards the scene. 1

chased and caught one, another officer caught the other and they were both sent

away.
                  t   ‘


After about 20 minutes more an announcement was made that the game was being

abandoned and the Liverpool fans should begin to leave. I located my serial

sergeant (Chapman) again and we located the rest of our serial and        * s n i,    oul.   of

the ground to resume mobile patrol re any disorder around the ground.                However
                                                                          PAGE 7
CHRISTOPHER DALRYMPLE                                                    Q0R 483
our van was gone, being used as an ambulance.

Eventually we were, along with numerous other officers without specific tasks,

directed to sit in the N Stand where we were given a short de-brief and informed

we would be held pending any requirements for further officers to be deployed

anywhere.

We were not required in the end and were later sent to Claywheels Lane from where

we were eventually transported back to Doncaster DHQ where I went off duty at

7.45 p.m.
