                       /./               t
Stuart Andrew CHAPMAN
     years
Police Sergeant 870




I am a Police Sergeant in the South Yorkshire Police presently stationed
at     the     Force    Training     Centre,    Green   Lane,   The    Common,     Ecclesfield,
Sheffield.


At     9,,45am    on     Saturday,    15 April     1989,   I reported        for   duty    at the
Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield, in connection with the F.A. Cup
Semi-Final Football Match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forrest. I was
placed in charge of Serial 61, a van patrol, with the call sign Tango
Seven.       The Serial had the following responsibilities:-


PHASE ONE (BEFORE MATCH)
Patrol Fir Vale area, paying special attention to Licensed premises.


PHASE TWO (DURING MATCH)
At 3.15pm take meal at Claywheels Lane and at 3.45pm resume patrol - Fir
Vale/Southey Green areas.


PHASE THREE (AFTER MATCH)
Patrol Fir Vale area.


The other officers in the Serial were
PC's     904     Garner      (van    driver),    3262   Hallett,      2923    Dalrymple,     2497
Serhatlic, PC 2942 Williamson.
Together with other officers involved in policing the match I was briefed
on how the event should be policed.         Following refreshments taken in the
ground we went on patrol in the Fir Vale area.         The Serial patrolled that
area throughout phase one without responding to any incidents.


About 3.00pm that day we were on Herries Road, Sheffield, about one mile
from the Hillsborough Football Ground, almost all Nottingham supporters
appeared, to have made their way into the ground from our area.                     I
therefore directed PC Garner to move nearer the ground with a view to
making our way to Claywheels Lane for meal at 3.15pm.           We travelled down
Herries Road and turned left into Penistone Road, to travel towards the
City away from the ground.        (A right turn is prohibited at this junction).
I then heard Operation Support called on my personal radio, with a request
for officers to go to the ground.            On finding a gap in the central
reservation   we   turned   the   vehicle   around   and went   back   towards    the
Football Ground, stopping only to pick up other officers on foot.


About 3.10pm we arrived at the ground and went in via the gates on
Penistone Road, that lead under .the North Stand.          The Serial and myself
together with numerous other officers were directed to stand on the pitch
infront of the Spion Kop, facing the Nottingham Forrest supporters.              Once
on the pitch I could see other officers and supporters at the Leppings
Lane end trying to pull people from the terraces.          Other supporters were
pulling down advertising boards to make into stretchers.          I was not aware
at this time as to the exact nature of the incident at the Leppings Lane
end, other than there had been a crush.         I could see people on the ground
who appeared to be unconscious but I did not know that some people had
been fatally injured.
A Doctor came to the gate in the fence behind the goal at the Spion Kop
and asked if he could be of assistance.     I caused the gate to be opened
and directed the Doctor towards the First Aid room.


A few minutes later I was aware of large numbers of supporters moving
along the playing area of the pitch towards the Spion Kop.   Some were very
distressed and others were shouting obscenities which were directed either
at the Police or the Nottingham supporters in the Spion Kop, I am not sure
which.    Together with other officers I approached these supporters and
talked to them and by either verbal       persuasion or by placing my arm
around them in comfort, was able to move them back towards the Leppings
Lane end.      It was one of the supporters that told me some people had
died.     Some of the people I spoke to smelled of intoxicants but I am
unable to say whether those acting aggressively were in fact drunk or
extremely distressed or both.


An instruction was shouted to form a cordon across the width of the ground
to move the supporters back from the Spion Kop end towards the centre
circle.     At this point I seriously thought that crowd violence was about
to break out.     Many of the supporters in front of me were acting in an
aggressive manner, shouting and gesticulating towards the Spion Kop.    They
did, however, start to move back towards the centre of the ground.         A
fixed cordon was established and only broken to allow through injured
persons and the helpers.     I remained on the cordon with other officers.
During the time on the cordon I heard a radio broadcast on my personal
radio that referred to 10 or 12 bodies being behind Leppings Lane.      This
was the first official confirmation I had that there were fatalities.
When the ground started to empty of supporters, the instruction was given
for all Tango mobile officers to return to their vehicles and resume
patrol.   When the Serial and I returned to Penistone Road, PC Garner and
the transit van were missing.    We were then directed back into the ground
and on to the North Stand.   It was only then, talking to officers who had
been involved in the rescues at the Leppings Lane end that I became fully
aware of the vast number of fatalities involved.    After supplying a short
written resume to Chief Inspector Beal of the Serial's involvement I was
stood down to Claywheels Lane.



I took no further part in the incident.




Signed /? .
