P.C.2800 Brian Simms, 38 years of age (15it years Police service) stationed at
Doncaster Folice Station in the capacity of a Community Constable forthe Balby
area.
At 8.30am on Saturday 15 April 1989 I paraded on duty at Doncaster and was then
transported to Sheffield, by double-decker bus, for duty at the Liverpool v Notts.
Forest football match.

I was part of Serial No.25 supervised by P.3.26^0 Perry and after being briefed
inside the ground, and a short r.eal break, I left with other Officers to take up
a point in Middlefield Road near to the Hillsborough Shopping Precinct.


Throughout this time I was in company with P.C.2225 Purvis and other Officers
were working in pairs at regular intervals along i-iiddlefield Poad. This 'point'
commenced about 11.15am that day and the other Officers referred to were P.C.s
Enwright, Smith, Wild, Weeks, Foster and Gibson although there were others
positioned further towards the football ground.


From taking up the 'point' there were many small groups of both sets of
supporters walking towards the ground from the general direction of the City
centre, although most of them seemed to be Liverpool fans (the common red/white
colours made identification, at times, difficult).
In the early stages there was little rowdiness, chanting, etc, but from, about
1.00pm, the numbers of supporters increased and the Threashers off-licence, which
was situated only a few yards from my position, was becoming swamped v/ith fans
purchasing intoxicants of all descriptions and in large quantities. Individual
people were buying up to six cans of beer/lager and large bottles of wine were also
being consumed. Owing to the large..r.umbers of people entering the premises the
manager closed the shop at 2.C0pm. I believe it v/as P.C. Gibson who spoke to the
manager but that the .closing of the premises was a voluntary act.

It was also apparent that by this time many supporters were worse for drink and
it was necessary to advise some of them about their conduct.


I wis not in possession of a Police radio but P.C. Purvis was, and I caught only
brief, and sometimes garbled, transmissions from other Officers who I took to be
on duty at the ground itself.
Shortly after 3*00pm I recall an Officer, over the radio, requesting for the gates
to be opened otherwise there would be serious injuries outside the ground.
I assumed it was that same Officer who repeatedly asked for the gates to be opened
but, again, owing to the garbled state of the transmission/ reception I v/as unable
to understand exactly what was happening.
Shortly after this I did hear a transmission requesting all Officers to return to

the ground. A Folice Transit van came into Middlefield Hoad from Bradfield Hoad
but because it was already full of Officers did not stop. I walked, back to the
Leppings Lane end of the ground with P.C. Purvis. Other Officers, including
F.S. Ferry and Insp. Humpheries, also returned.

On arrival I saw a Large number of Liverpool fans already leaving the ground
ircm the Leppings Lane end. Most of them were in a distressed state and some
bore minor injuries and were being helped away by friends.
i v/as not instructed to enter the ground and by this time emergency vehicles
were arriving.
I would estimate that 50 Police Officers were on the road/footpaths and that
they, like myself, v/as unaware of what had happened inside the ground,
although some fans did say that deaths had occurred.
Host of those leaving were extremely hostile towards the Folice.


I assisted in keeping clear the road so that the emergency services could
gain access to the ground.

About 5.20pm I v/as instructed by F.S. Ferry to return into Kiddlefield Road,
with other Officers, and about 6.05pm I returned to the ground where we v/ere
eventually stood down.
