                                               LTD         3465

                   OtUGlWAV    TEMTJfcfc   .




            SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED


                      INVITATION TO TENDER,


              SPECIFICATION AND DAYWORK SCHEDULE


                    FOR THE STRENGTHENING OF


                    SPION KOP PERIMETER FENCE


                       AND CRUSH BARRIERS




                                                     EASTWOOD & PARTNERS
                                                     CONSULTING ENGINEERS
                                                     BOWMAKER HOUSE
                                                     23 Kl NG F I E L D   ROAD
July 1981                                            SHEFFIELD       S1 1 9 A S
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                             BOWMAKER HOUSE
              C o n s u lt in g     E n g in e e r s                                                            23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                                SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W. Eastwood                   B .E n g., P h.D ., F.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                             Tel.: (0742) 583871
                              F .l.S tru ct.E „ F.G .S., M .C ons.E .

A. A. Wood                    B .E n g., P h .D ., C .Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                              F .I.Struct.E ., M .I.W .E.S., M .C ons.E

A. G. Burdett                 G .M ., B .S c .(E n g ), C .E ng., M .I.C.E.

R. C. A. Eastwood            B .S c., C .Eng., M .I.C.E., M .I.S tru c tE .

Associates;
G eoffrey Spir                C .E n * ., M .I.C .E ., M J.M e c h .E .

C. S. Greaves                 B .E n * .. C .E n * ., M .I.C .E ., M .I.S tru c t.E .

A . J . Clough               B .A ., C .E n g ., M .C .I.B .S ., M .I.M ech.E .                  Our Ref:    WE/JAS/ACM/PB/3465
J . A . Strange              C .E n g ., M .I.S trucc.E .
                                                                                                 Your Ref:
Consultant:
A. L. Percy                   M .T « c h .(H o n .), B .Sc.. C .E n * ., F.I.C .E.,
                              F .I.S tru c t.E ., F .I.M u n .E ., M .R .T .P .I.                            20 July, 1981




   Hallamshire Builders Ltd. ,
   30, Chester Street,
   SHEFFIELD SI 4GS.




    Dear Sirs,

                                  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                        Strengthening of Spion Kop Perimeter Fence
                                                                     and Crush Barriers

               On behalf of our clients, Sheffield Wednesday Football
    Club Lt d . , we have pleasure in inviting you to tender for
     the supply, fabrication and installation of new supports to
     the perimeter fence on Spion Kop, the repair of two crush
     barriers and casting a new step at the rear of the terracing.

               Drawings and Specification

               Enclosed are single copies of our A4 size drawings
    3465/1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 showing details of the work.                                                              A
     copy of the Specification is also bound with this document.

               The Site

               The site of the Works is at Sheffield Wednesday Football
    Ground, Hillsborough, Sheffield.

               Conditions of Contract

               The Conditions of Contract will be the Fifth Edition
     (1973) issued by the Institution of Civil Engineers and

                                                                Registered in England - No. 1134531
                                                                  SHEET   2


EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS




    Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors, with amendments
    but the variation of price (Labour and Materials) clause is
    NOT included.

         Programme

         The whole of the Works is to be substantially complete
    by 28 August, 1981.     The commencement date shall be no later
    than 10 August, 1981.

         Clearing away before home games

         The Contractor is to allow for taking down and clearing
    away all plant, equipment, tools and temporary works before
    each home game.    The dates on which the first two home games
    are to be played   are given below

         Nigeria          - 15 August at   3.00 p.m.
         Middlesbrough - 22 August at      3.00 p.m.

         Overtime

         Working overtime as necessary in order to complete the
    Contract by the date agreed must be allowed for in the Tender.

         Care of the Works

         The Contractor is to keep all persons (including those
    employed by sub-contractors) under his control and within
    the boundaries of the site, and he will be held responsible
    for the care of the Works generally until their completion,
    including all work executed and materials deposited on the
    site by himself or his sub-contractors and suppliers,
    together with all risks arising from weather, carelessness
    of operatives, damage or loss by theft or any other cause.

         Insurance

         The Contractor must provide evidence that he holds a
    current third party insurance policy, as required by the
    Conditions of Contract to the sum of at least £500,000 for
                                                                     SHEET   3


EASTWOOD £r PARTNERS




    any one accident, the number of accidents is to be unlimited.

         Electric Current

         The Employer will provide electrical power at 240 V,
    single phase, but the Contractor must allow for all temporary
    wiring, cables, control gear, transformers and adapt and
    maintain as necessary and pay all charges in connection with
    the same, remove on completion and leave everything to a
    standard not less than that existing originally.

         Attendance and sub-contractors

         The Contractor must allow in his price for the general
    attendance of one trade upon another, including all sub­
    contractors and for the provision of all transport, plant
    and equipment.     All sub-contractors are   to be   approvedby
    the Engineer before placing any orders.

         Contingency Item

         Please include in your tender a contingency item of
    £7 5 which may or may not be expended in part or full at the
    direction of the Engineer.

         Completion of Tender

         Please complete and return one bound copy of this
    document.   Your tender is to be on a fixed    price basis and
    remain open for acceptance for a period      of 28   days from the
    date of return.    The inviters of this render do not under­
    take to accept the lowest tender, or any, received.

         Return of Tender

         All tenders must be returned in the envelope provided
    no later than noon on Monday 3 August, 1981.

         Would you please contact Mr. J. Strange to arrange an
    appointment to visit the site on Friday 24 July.
                                                                 SHEET   4


EASTWOOD £r PARTNERS




         We would be pleased if you would acknowledge receipt
    of this document and confirm whether you intend submitting
    a tender.

         If you are unable to submit a tender, kindly return
    the documents immediately.




                                    Yours faithfully,
                                             LI




                         «sac,




                                                                                           \
                                                            r

                                                                                    Dr».      Chd      O au.
    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                 Consulting Engineers
                                                                                                    V ,/
    Bowmaker House.   2 3 Kingfield   Road. Sheffield. S11 9 AS.   t« i.   «3«7i
                                                                                    S u its

■   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LID
    HILLSBOROUGH                                                                   I 3 1 6 5 7 .1
                                                                            J^> Wlp-w p0 ^ -
                                                                 >   f Z E A /N O W ?   ® K t^ * v * = *        T - <S6 c J \ o t l              p o S ^ S

                                                               dj ^ coviotSe-pE 2MovJ»J M^CWS 'D
                                                                  o b \U- «&U»e> <fc tvAS-X^U- p-osj-s..
                                                                  Vn(b A.C> “|*=» C-x-'SrpMCj K m \-
                                                               4     CUSk'S'J eeafcJCJZe-liB*                  A P ooM D                     IS**!*1-
                                                            £,               aa£^h' es>c'e»Yi*jc.                        p&op.L*?.

                                                                         E T c isJik JC .        n o      kxt ^ o »j | a    L             f z ^ t L nft=,
                                                                         fcc-      v ^ b 4 -c » t>           “p=* f j e - w                p^^-y .




                                                          £>a ■*■Ic^TUve.

       ,         ^    KoL|',
                           E> .
                                   TYPICAL SECTION X — X.
                                                     T H IS      p ta s r   T *»
                                                      e e M A iu     .
                                                                                                                                      '
                                                      /
                                                                                                                                             5"
      T                                             jy                                                                                T>


                  —   .—   .—




                                                                            MtW        OoMCE&|E Y«o H6.VE
                 EXISTING                  PLAN.                                             P\kj\s>VA.
     X .f*
    Y2A               "..         “
                                                   T                                                      .T ^ Z
                                                                                                             /                    v/
            ri
    -----




                                                                                                                  \//
     X




             f Aks                                                                 —         ■—

                                                                                            Add
                 PROPOSED PLAN
                                                                                                               f e o x C : ,* , x fe T W C            L. G .V J S S E .'^
                                                                                                                                  FW All.
                  v-»e.w p«=»cr^ ovJ
                 «c=>mui\.'|Uk . 6c>^>fe
                 •pU-|E-
                                           PLAN ON NEW BASEPLATE
                                                                                                                  Drn.                Ch i                Dale
      EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                          Consulting        Engineers
                                                                                            Tel. 583871          ■V                                       y^v&i
                                                                                                                  Scales.     v

1     SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD.                                                                             \- - \ o .          v ' 2 c^ .

1     HILLSBOROUGH.                                                                                                 3^65/                            ,2.
                                                         KK*W                        K6f''6




                                                                              Wtlr> ovi
                                                                              .p»E-CJE-              NSAXf-
                                                                              io o        oe^E^V’     VJ'*^vA ^ 2 o ^
                                                                              HoLf- poK              1Cs»>AM. X
                                                                              too         Lo*a«c« OoVM&X.




                                                                                ic?o
                                              /»MOE4ZC£^r                     £>VJO«e£Oj

                                                       SECTION
                                                                              1 No REQD.




T   EASTWOOD & PARTNERS
    Bowmaker House.   2 3 Kingfield
                                        Consulting Engineers
                                      Road. Sheffield. S11 9AS. t«i. 583871
                                                                                Drn.          Chd.       Date
                                                                                                      'fye.,.
                                                                                Scales.
1
■
  SHEFFIELD WEONESOAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD
    HILLSBOROUGH.                                                              | 3^65/                    .3.
     V-UsVi      Grno kC>o *      CoL     f e . .                                     g.*xs^vie*            wifrt
     l ^ o   o     L o t4 C « .
                                                                                      VAoUr1 >wi f o e ©oVT|[ .
    CXZ.iU.E-D f=«SZ.             J4»a^    ^ B>oLja                                  -I^^^tg^gjejg f-o psBoviCsE-
                                                                                      Jew             *Y«=»
     E=x'S^»W4C-i          CJ V2-Cj_i\-AEL Se-e^vorJ
     -|fc> fee*- tAV-ieboVq«=o <£
     e^ANJOv^-c*,




                                                             ^300 < *«■O P * ^ O O
                                                             w \ c ^ &t-<=>oc




                                                              4 REQUIRED THUS.

                                                                                                                              Ora.     Cftd.   .   Dale

EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                 SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD. HILLSBOROUGH
Consulting Engineers                                                                                                          Scales

Bowmaker House
23 Kingfield Road
Sheffield S11 9AS to ss3>7i                                                                                                     3465 /             k.
                                                                                                                    COS.Ltd
                 0=»3 » l'^Xx'2e=»                                                         E « A /« 5 « e -   e=-x 'S ^ w J O   c o vjc jsej &   ^c     p a ’^ T
                                                        aou‘[lcAc£|‘oe Jo D & U -                 \2e-pL^C&- vai^vA view
                                                         H o \JE ^
                                                        S»leEV€ .                          ? o 3 x '3>"5? *                              p a & J.
                                                                                                         '?/2 ^ H.o\_H>- po*2. V<ofAN\^$.
                                                                                           H.V.       126-tvJfoeoiUO                E»A8L. 3ooo Lc,.



                                                                                                                                      Kiew ooi-KoeEjc
                                                                                                                                      T« W.VE- fc»^e>*
                                                                                                                                       ^\>a\£»vt<

                                                                                                                                         e*~is.J,Jcu -peeac£
                                                                                                                                         Li*je=- .




                                         aMDSFeCoJ
                                           \Nt\-C rJ’eVJ S\-E=-E-Ye-
                                            ijo naN-S IM
                                           H » W poSj.                                                                                      if=o istJcatsfBeuS^.
                                               HBW   JCrn-»/*   * a- 77 * 3 •
                                               Ho\lo>N ^yacTfvo*-! •*
                        NEW SLEEVE.            3oo    L o -{<=> zsOOcvsrvoCass^e.
                                               B*kiS"[«jG C o o ^ ^
          NKS.U? HX\S^\V4C, F*=»V.e^
                M B W sLetve-.                 KaiIs .


                                                                                                                                   Dm.            CM.              Dite
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                    SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD        HILLSBOROUGH                                      u
                                                                                                                                      ^PJP                                J&L
Consulting Engineers                                                                                                               Scales

Bowmaker House                                                                                                                           \:'Z*
23 Kingfield Road
Sheffield S11 9AS t«t. 593*7’                                                                                                       3 4 6 5 /.5 .
\4feW        v4<"^vA-
        Jo         V




                 SECTION A - A .




                   PLAN                      ON NEW CONCRETE INFILL.
                                                                                                                    Of n.      Chd.     Date
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                               SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD , HILLSBOROUOH                                VrA
                                                                                                                                       'i/si f— i
Consulting Engineers                                                                                                S c sltt

Bowmaker House
23 Kingfield Road
Sheffield S11 9AS       T e l . 5 8 3 8 71                                                                            3 4 6 5 /6 .
                                                                                                         COS lt d
                                                  J m \ cvC        • so m m .           y s / 'O E ^ -




                       NEW CLIP DETAIL
                       Remove old rivets and clip,
                       replace with new




 1   EASTWOOD & PARTNERS
     Bowmaker House,   2 3 Kingfield
                                         Consulting Engineers
                                       Road, Sheffield- S11 9AS.   t « i.   si3 J 7 i
                                                                                                Orn.         Chd.    Date.


                                                                                                                    'S/Va. .
                                                                                                 Scales.

1■   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD.                                                            1 -^0 .
     HILLSBOROUGH.                                                                            13 ^ 6 5 / 7 .
        Specification of Works for use in Connection

      with the Strengthening of the Spion Kop Perimeter

                 Fence and Crush Barriers and

      Casting a new step at the rear of the terracing




1.0    Steelwork General

       1.1   The Contractor is the person with overall
              responsibility for the fabrication and erection
              of the structural steelwork.

       1.2   British Standard Specifications are defined by
              their catalogue number.  In all cases the B.S.
              Specification must be the latest edition
              issued, including any addenda and amendments.

       1.3    The work shall be executed by labour competent
              for the class of work on which it is employed
              and is to be under the direction of an
              experience and competent supervisor.
              All work shall be done to the satisfaction of
              Eastwood & Partners, hereinafter called the
              Engineer. B.S.449 together with other relevant
              British Standards and the clauses specified in
              this document shall apply as the minimum,
              standard of acceptance.

       1.4    The principle dimensions for setting out the
              work shall be those shown on the Drawings,
              which are to be read in conjunction with all
              further drawings issued by the Engineer.

              The Contractor shall allow in his tender for
              obtaining all dimensions from site necessary
              to ensure that the steelwork he is supplying
              matches to the existing.


2.0    Steelwork and Welding

       2.1     All materials shall be of British manufacture
              throughout.   All steel shall comply with BS.
              4360 grade 43A.

       2.2     All plates shall be flattened and all members
              straightened and free from twist so that when
              assembled the adjacent surfaces shall be in
              close contact throughout.

       2.3     All cut edges must be left straight and true
              and any burring or fash shall be removed.
              Hand flame cutting shall not be employed.



                               5
      2.4   Boltsand nuts shall be galvanised grade 4.6 to BS.
             4190 16mm diameter.  The nuts shall fit spanner
             tight. Washers shall be to BS.4320 and
             fitted under the nut of every bolt. No threaded
             portion of any bolt shall be within the thick­
            ness of the parts bolted together.

      2.5   Over the areas of welding, the steel is to be *
            cleaned down to bright metal by grinding, to
            remove all paint, rust and any other deleterious
            matter.  No welding shall be carried out when
            rain is falling or in conditions of high wind.
            No welding shall be done if the surfaces of the
            work are wet.

             Electrodes compatible with the grade of material
             being welded shall be used throughout and shall
             be stored and used in accordance with the
             manufacturer's recommendations.  Damp or damaged
             electrodes shall not be used.

             All slag and spatter shall be cleaned off every
             run of weld metal.

             In addition to full supervision by the Contractor
             and inspection in accordance with BS.5289, if in
             the opinion of the Engineer, the quality or
             strength of any weld is in question this weld is
             to be completely removed and the piece re-welded.
             No payment will be made in respect of time lost
             for carrying out any remedial work.

      2.6    All surfaces of the steelwork shall be
             thoroughly scraped and wire brushed until all
             dirt, rust mill scale and grease and oil are
             removed.


3.0   Concrete Work

      3.1   Unless otherwise stated, all workmanship and
            materials shall conform with BS Codes of
            Practice CP.114 and CP.110. Where these conflict
            CP.110 shall take precendence.

      3.2   All cement shall be Ordinary Portland Cement and
             is to be manufactured at one works approved by
             the Engineer and shall comply in all respects
            with the requirements of BS.12.

             The acceptance of cement shall be subject to the
             compressive tests on cubes hereinafter specified
             being satisfactory.

             The Engineer may, from time to time, direct that
             a consignment of cement be tested in accordance
             with the British Standard Specification either



                           6
      before the consignment leaves the works or after
      it has been delivered to either the site or a
      ready mixed plant.  The cement on the site is to
      be stored so that any one consignment may be
      identified, and in the event of failure under
      test of the samples of a consignment, then that
      consignment shall not be used, and, on notification
      from the Engineer to the Contractor, shall be
      removed from the site within three days of such
      notification.

      Cement shall be transported to site and handled
      with full protection from the weather and shall
      be stored in a dry watertight shed or in an
      approved bulk storage site.  Storage is to be
      arranged so that the cement consignments are used
      in the order of delivery to the site.  If, in the
      opinion of the Engineer, cement has been damaged
      in transit or during storage, then it shall be
      removed from the site within three days of
      notification.

      'Rapid Hardening' or types of cement other than
      Ordinary Portland Cement shall not be employed in
      the Works without the express sanction of the
      Engineer.

      Admixtures for accelerating, or retarding the
      initial setting of the cement or for increasing
      the impermeability or workability of the concrete
      or for any other purpose shall not be used without
      the express written sanction of the Engineer.

3.3   Materials used as aggregates for concrete shall be
      derived from a source which is approved by the
      Engineer.

      Aggregate shall be chemically inert, strong, hard,
      durable, of limited porosity and free from
      deleterious matter.  Aggregates shall be stored in
      a bin or on a clean hard surface and maintained
      free from contamination.  Aggregate of different
      types or sizes shall be kept separate.

      If the Engineer so directs, tests of the
      aggregates shall be made. The samples selected
      by the Engineer shall be tested in compliance with
      the respective procedures specified in British
      Standard No. 882.

      Descriptions of aggregates to be used are as
      follows

             a)   Coarse aggregate 20mm down
             b)   Coarse aggregate 12mm down
             c)   Fine aggregate, and




                     7
      'Coarse aggregate 20mm down' and 'Coarse aggregate
      12mm down' shall consist of Derbyshire limestone
      and shall be washed unless otherwise allowed by
      the Engineer. The grading of coarse aggregate,
      when analysed by the method given for sieve
      analysis in BS.812 shall be within the limits given
      in Table 1 of BS.882.  The 'ten percent fines'
      value for coarse aggregate, determined in
      accordance with BS.882, shall not be less than 10
      tonnes.

      Fine aggregate shall consist of clean hard coarse
      naturally occurring sand approved by the Engineer,
      completely free from deleterious matter and shall
      be washed, unless otherwise allowed by the Engineer.

      The grading of fine aggregate when analysed by the
      method of sieve analysis described in BS.812, shall
      be within the limits of grading zone 2 or 3 given
      in Table 2 of BS.882.

3.4   The water used for making concrete or mortar or
      grout, cleaning out shuttering, curing concrete or
      similar purposes shall be taken from the mains
      supply wherever possible and shall comply with the
      requirements of BS.3148. Where water is not
      available from the mains the Engineer's approval
      shall be obtained before it is used.

3.5   The proportions of cement, fine aggregate and
      coarse aggregate shall be determined by weight.

      All structural concrete shall consist of four
      parts of coarse aggregate 20mm graded, two parts
      of fine aggregate and one part of cement all
      measured by weight, except as otherwise indicated
      by the Engineer.

      The quantity of water added to the concrete shall
      be such as to ensure compliance with the
      requirements of clause 3.6 (slump).

3.6   The slump of the concrete shall be 50mm + or -
      25mm except that where the Contractor wishes to
      pump the concrete the Engineer may be prepared to
      consider proposals for a greater slump allied to
      measures which will ensure the attainment of the
      required strength.  The slump shall be measured
      as the pouring of the batch commences and at a
      time not more than 20 minutes after the commence­
      ment of mixing.

      The Contractor shall have on site a B.S. slump
      cone and associated equipment and shall carry out
      slump tests as requested without additional
      reimbursement.
3.7   When Ready-mixed concrete is used, the water shall
      be added to the mix not more than twenty minutes
      before placing the concrete commences.  Certificates
      stating the mix proportions, the actual weights of
      materials, type of aggregate, water cement ratio
      and quantities shall be submitted to the Engineer
      relating to each batch. Test cubes shall be taken
      from each if required by the Engineer.

      Each delivery of Ready-mixed concrete must be
      accompanied by a delivery note stating the exact
      weights of materials and water content, and the
      time at which water was added to the mix.

      The concrete shall be carried in purpose made
      agitators, operating continuously or truck mixers.
      The concrete shall be compacted and in its final
      position within 30 minutes of the introduction of
      cement to the aggregates, unless a longer time is
      agreed by the Engineer. The time of such
      introductions shall be recorded on the delivery
      note together with the weight of the constituents
      of each mix.

      When truck mixed concrete is used, water shall be
      added under supervision either at the site or at
      the central batching plant as agreed by the
      Engineer but in no circumstances shall water be
      added in transit.  When concrete is mixed and water
      added at a batching plant no further water may be
      added in the truck mixer.

      Unless otherwise agreed by the Engineer, truck
      mixer units and their mixing and discharge
      performance shall comply with the requirements of
      BS.4251.  Mixing shall continue for the number and
      rate of revolutions recommended in accordance with
      Item 9 in Appendix B of BS.4251 or, in the absence
      of the manufacturer's instructions, mixing shall
      continue for not less than 100 revolutions at a
      rate of not less than 7 revolutions per minute.

      Where the Engineer   or Contractor has cause to
      refuse to accept a   batch of concrete then no
      further deliveries   carried in the truck containing
      that concrete will   be allowed until a period of 4
      hours has elapsed.

3.8   The concrete shall be transported from the mixer to
      its final position in liquid-tight conveyors or
      barrows, and with the least possible delay.
      Concrete which has not been deposited in its final
      position within 30 minutes after mixing commenced
      will be rejected by the Engineer.

      All concrete conveyors, barrows and chutes shall be
      thoroughly washed out immediate mixing ceases and



                     9
       before re-use shall be primed with rich cement
       grout.

3.9    Before placing concrete, all reinforcement moulds,
       shuttering and centering and all items to be cast
       in, are to be cleaned of all dirt, sawdust, loose
       wire and wood.   Access holes shall be provided in
        formwork to facilitate cleaning at all inaccessible
        pockets and angles.

       Unless otherwise approved or instructed, concrete
       shall be placed in a single operation to the full
       depths of slabs, beams and similar members.
       Concrete shall be placed continuously until com­
       pletion of the part of the work between specified
       or approved construction joints. At the completion
       of a specified or approved part a construction
       joint in the form and in the position hereinafter
       specified shall be made.

3.10   All concrete surfaces, except those covered by
       formwork, shall be cured by being kept wet at all
       times during a period of seven days after the
       final set has taken place. The concrete shall be
       kept wet by flooding and covering with polyethylene
       sheeting.  As an alternative to this procedure the
       Engineer may allow the use of an approved
       proprietary curing agent applied in accordance with
       the manufacturer's instructions.

       Curing shall commence at the earliest possible time
       following placing of the concrete.

       Should the Contractor fail to adequately   comply
       with the requirements of this clause the   Engineer
       may require the Contractor to remove all   concrete
       inadequately cured and replace it at his   own
       expense.

3.11   All concrete shall be protected to the satisfaction
       of the Engineer against sun and wind by suitable
       covering or other approved means.

       If, in the opinion of the Engineer, despite any
       precautions taken by the Contractor, concrete has
       been damaged by climatic or other conditions, the
       Engineer may direct the Contractor to remove and
       replace such concrete at the Contractor's expense,
       to limits defined by the Engineer.

       The Contractor shall keep systematic records of
       concreting progress, materials and climatic
       conditions in a form to be approved by the Engineer.

       The Contractor's rates will be deemed to include
       for all necessary precautions called for in this
       clause.


                       10
3.12   Shuttering and centering shall be removed gently
       without jarring and only in the presence of a
       competent supervisor.  The Engineer shall be
       informed in advance when the Contractor will be
       removing shuttering.

3.13   After removal of the shuttering, no touching up
       of any kind shall be attempted until thework has
       been inspected by the Engineer.  It is of vital
       importance that the external and exposed finish
       of visible concrete be completely free from
       defects.

       Any concrete which, on being stripped of the
       formwork, is in the opinion of the Engineer,
       insufficiently dense, out of line, of unsightly
       finish or having blemishes of any kind, shall be
       cut out and made good at the Contractor's sole
       expense to the limits defined by the Engineer.

       Rendering over any surface shall not be permitted,
       except that small aneas of honeycombing on
       visible exposed surfaces and isolated superficial
       air and water holes may be made good immediately
       on removal of the shuttering, but only on the
       written approval of the Engineer.

       Where no particular finish is specified for the
       horizontal surfaces of concrete (including
       surfaces making less than an angle of
       approximately 15° with the horizontal) these
       surfaces shall be accurately screeded to a smooth
       finish and to give the correct thickness and
       falls.  The price of the concrete shall be deemed
       to include the cost of screeding.

       The permissible tolerances in shuttered surfaces
       are as specified below.

       Mass Concrete Terracing

       (a)   Variations in consecutive steps between:
             (i)   Rise ± 1mm
             (ii) Tread ± 2mm

       (b)   Surface deviations from a straight template,
             3m long, - 2mm.

3.14   Before completion, all exposed faces shall be
       cleaned of all stains and rubbed down as
       necessary to give a perfect surface to the com­
       plete satisfaction of the Engineer.

3.15   When each section of the structural steelwork has
       been erected, plumbed, lined and levelled, the
       Contractor shall puddle or ram a 2:1 sand and
       cement grout or semi-dry mortar under the steel­
       work as directed by the Engineer.



                     11
             Where necessary a frame shall be provided around
             the work to prevent losses whilst the grout is
             being poured and the frame shall not be removed
             until the grout has set. The consistency of the
             mix shall be such as to ensure that the space
             under the steelwork is completely filled.


4.0   Painting

      4.1   All painting materials described in this section
             are to be products of a recognised paint
            manufacturer to the approval of the Engineer.
            One coat of Alkyd gloss is to be applied over
            one coat of undercoat over a prepared priming
            coat.

      4.2   All paints shall be thoroughly mixed before use
            unless there is a specific instruction to the
            contrary on the container.  They shall be stored
            so as to minimise exposure to extremes of
             temperature.

      4.3   All surfaces of the steelwork shall be thoroughly
            scraped and wire brushed or grade 2 blast cleaned
            until all dirt, rust, mill scale and grease or
            oil are removed.

      4.4   After cleaning all surfaces of the steelwork shall
            receive one coat of Zinc Phosphate metal primer
             applied no later than two hours after being
            cleaned.   All painting is to be carriqd out
            strictly in accordance with the manufacturer's
             instructions.

      4.5   Primed or undercoated metalwork shall not be
             left in an exposed or unsuitable situation for an
            undue period before completing the painting
             process.

      4.6   The steelwork is not to be delivered to site until
             the priming paint has hardened.  After erection,
             lining and levelling all blemishes erection damage
             and welds are to be wire brushed and cleaned to
             remove all rust, dirt and contaminations.  The
             surfaces are then to be primed as described in
             4.4.

      4.7   No exterior or exposed painting shall be carried
             out under adverse weather conditions such as
             extremes of temperature or during rain, fog, etc.

      4.8   No priming coats shall be applied until the
             surfaces have been inspected and the preporatory
             work has been approved by the Engineer. No
             undercoat or finishing coats shall be applied
             until the previous coat has been similarly
             inspected and approved.


                            12
4.9   No consecutive coats of paint are to be   of the
      same shade except in the case of white.    All
      colours and finishes are to be selected   by the
      Engineer and provision must be made for   the
      execution of trial areas on the site if   required.




                 13
                               SUMMARY




Work described on drawings                     Cost
                                                £


3465/2   Remove existing T-section posts
         and upstand, replace with new
         angle section post return up­
         stand.


3465/3   Break out area of terracing
         extend rear leg - cast concrete
         base.


3465/4   Remove existing raker, replace
         with angle and cast block.


3465/5   Remove existing concrete post
         and terrace.  Cast in new steel
         post and make good terrace.


3465/6   Cast new concrete infill step.


3465/7   Remove existing clip, fix new
         clip.


         Contingency

         TOTAL TENDER FIGURE
                                           L




                                 14
             SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD.
          CONTRACT FOR THE ALTERATIONS TO SPION KOP
      OF NEW PERIMETER FENCE, THE REPAIR OF TWO CRUSH
     BARRIERS AND ALTERATIONS TO A SMALL AREA OF TERRACE




To: Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
    Hillsborough,
    Sheffield S6 1SW.



GENTLEMEN:

    Having examined the Drawings, Conditions of Contract and
Specification for the construction of the above named Works,
we off to construct, complete and maintain the whole of the
said Works in conformity with the said Drawings, Conditions
of Contract and Specification for the sum of


or such other sum as may be ascertained in accordance with
the said conditions.

    We undertake to complete and deliver the whole of the
Works comprised in the Contract within the time stated in the
Appendix hereto.

    Unless and until a formal Agreement is prepared and
executed, this Tender, together with your written acceptance
thereof, shall constitute a binding Contract between us.

    We understand that you are not bound to accept the
lowest or any Tender you may receive.
                             APPENDIX


Amount of Bond        (10)                                Not required

Minimum amount of third party
insurance            (23(2))                              £500,000

Time for completion   (43)

The whole of the Works to be                              Liquidated damages
substantially complete by 28                              for delay.
August, 1981.                                             £100/week.

Period of Maintenance (49(1))                             12 months

Vesting of Materials not on
Site                 (54(1))(60(11))                      Not applicable

No form of measurement adopted,
lump sum, fixed price (57)

Percentage of adjustment of P.C.
Sums                 (59A(2)(b))(5(c))                    No P.C. Sums

Percentage of the Value of Goods                          Single payment on
and materials to be included in                           completion of work
Interim Certificate  (60(2)(b))                           with a 5% retention
Minimum amount of Interim                                 held for a period
Certificate          (60(1))                              of 12 months




                               We are, Gentlemen,

                               Yours faithfully,

                                     Signature
                                     Address .               .6.u.tucefs .Lt>,

                                             .                          ... .

                                                 .'pHefliejjD. /Si _4.^?. . .

                                     Witness ..




                               16
1.    Labour

      The rates quoted are to include for wages,
      bonus or other incentive payments, travelling,
      allowances, payments in respect of time lost
      due to inclement weather, overtime, other than
      overtime authorised by the Engineer, all
      payments allowances and expenses due in accordance
      with the rules and decisions of appropriate wage
      fixing authorities, all statutory charges,
      National Insurance and Graduated Pensions, Normal
      Contract Works, Third Party and Employers’
      Liability Insurances, Annual and Public Holidays
      with Pay, Non-contibutory Sick Pay Scheme,
      Industrial Training Levy, Redundancy Payments
      Contribution, Contracts of Employment Act, Site
       Supervision and Staff, Small Tools, Protective
      Clothing, Head Office charges and Profit,
       Subsistence or Lodging Allowances and periodic
       travel allowances.

2.    Materials

      Percentage addition required on the cost of
      materials delivered to Site.  (The cost of
      materials means the invoiced price of materials
      delivered to site without the deduction of any
      cash discount, not exceeding 2\%) .

 3.   Plant

      Percentage addition (if required) on Plant as
      scheduled in Section 3 of the Schedules of
      Daywork carried out incidental to Contract Work
      referred to in Clause 52(3) of the I.C.E.
      Conditions of Contract.




                  18
Provisions and Conditions attached to the foregoing Daywork
                          Schedule


    (i)     That the time of Gangers or chargehands working
            with their gangs is to be paid for under
            appropriate items, but the time of foremen and
            walking gangers is not to be included but is to
            be covered by Site Supervision arid Staff.


   (ii)      That overtime when chargeable under the Contract
             and previously authorised in writing by the
             Engineer is to be paid to the workmen - thus,
             if a man works one hour overtime for which he
             is paid for l£ hours the Contractor is to be
             paid l£ hours for such a man.


  (iii)      That the rates for plant are only to apply to
             plant which the Contractor has available upon
             the site.


   (iv)      That the rates for materials are to cover delivery
             at the usual points at which materials are
             received on the site and not distribution to the
             individual sites where daywork is in progress,
             the cost of such distribution being chargeable
             in addition.


    (v)      That the daywork rates are to cover the use of
             such Contractor’s wagons and temporary tracks
             as are already in position on the site of the
             work to be done by daywork, unless such wagons
             and tracks are used exclusively for daywork,
             then they are to be paid for.


   (vi)      That the cost of watching and lighting specially
             necessitated by daywork is to be paid for
             separately.


  (vii)      That daywork charges will only be accepted for
             work previously authorised in writing by the
             Engineer to be carried out as daywork.


 (viii)      That craftsmen’s rate will only be paid for
             skilled work.


   (ix)      The labour rates will apply to all the General
             Contractor’s sub-contract labour.




                     19
