     Incident   *105    110S89 0P5005         TYPING SERVICE DOCUMENT

                                                          OFFICERS REPORT NUMBER   |R396

                                                                                   Station

     Surname            KThin

     Forenames          STEVEN

     Age                                           Date of birt          b

     Address


     Occupation         POL Cl

     Telephone

     Number of Pages

      Dated              110589                                                      Signed


                I am a Chief Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police presently

                stationed at West Bar Police Station, Sheffield.        Since Saturday,

                8 April 1989,     I have performed the duty of Acting Superintendent.       It

                is a duty I have performed on numerous previous occasions.

                I have served at West Bar Police Station in my present rank since

                4 March 1985 and was involved in the policing at the FA cup semi­

                final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest in 1988.

                Immediately I became aware that the fixture was to be repeated in

                1989.   I liaised with Police Sergeant 1004 Jones who has

                responsibility for the planning of all major events in *D1* Sub

                Division.   I informed Sergeant Jones that the police operation *D1*
?•              Sub Division would be based upon the successful operation of the

                previous year and I instructed him to attend the preliminary planning

                meeting at Hammerton Road Police Station and report to me thereafter.

                In due course Sergeant Jones reported that the police operation in

                *F * division would be a repeat of that of the previous year.       There

                were no significant changes proposed to the police operation in 'D*

                division other than a transfer of the responsibility for all traffic

                matters from divisions to Headquarters Operations and Traffic
                                                                     PAGE     2
                                                                     R 3 96

Division.     I then instructed_3erqearVL Jones to jprej^are an operation

order based upon that of the                   .

His terms of reference were to provide sufficient police officers to

enBure public order in the city centre between 7.00 pm Friday,

14 April 1989, until 3.00 am Sunday,     16 April 1989 and to ensure that

rival supporters arriving by train at the Sheffield Midland Station

were conveyed to and from the football ground by South Yorkshire

Transport buses under police supervision.

Numerous consultations took place between Sergeant Jones and myself

as he gained information from South Yorkshire Transport, British Rail,

British Transport Police,     *F* Division and Operations and Traffic

Division.     In due course Sergeant Jones delivered to me a draft

operational order, which I examined and returned to him for

amendments.     The completed order was subsequently delivered to

Superintendent Bates, Deputy Divisional Commander for his examination         „

and signature prior to distribution.

Those officers who were engaged on public order patrols during the

evening of Friday,    14 April 1986, were briefed at 7.00 pm that day by

Inspector Beeden.     I prepared a briefing of all other officers which

took place at 9.00 am on Saturday,     15 April 1989,   in the gymnasium at

West Bar Police Station.      I began my briefing by referring to the

operation of the previous year and explained to the officers present

that the single major difference was that supervision of traffic was

not to be our responsibility.      I then referred to the public order

patrols which had been in operation since 7.00 pm the previous

evening and I reported that no football related public disorder had

occurred.     The officers who had been engaged on the Friday evening

public order patrols were not present at my briefing and I referred

to theif returning to duty at mid-day to continue their public order

responsibilities until the early hours of the following morning.
                                                                  PAGE    3
                                                                  R39&

I referred then to the police operation at the Midland Station.       I

explained that a single special train was travelling from Liverpool

and that that would arrive at Wadsley Bridge Railway Station.     I

referred to service train® from Liverpool and other parts of the

country tarrying Liverpool supporters which would undoubtedly arrive

■at Midland Station as would all special trains carrying supporters

from Nottingham.

I explained that our intention was that rival football supporters

would be segregated on the platforms by British Transport Police

Officers, that Liverpool supporters would be directed towards the

South luggage exit and Nottingham supporters towards the North end

gate in Sheaf Street.   Liverpool supporters would be encouraged to

board South Yorkshire Transport buses parked in Cross Turner Street

and Nottingham supporters would be similarly encouraged to board

buses parked in Sheaf Street.   It was hoped that they would return to

the Railway Station by bus and consequently they would required to

pay a return fare of £1.00 when boarding at the Midland Station.

South Yorkshire Transport had provided 35 buses each of which would

convey 80 passengers.   It was our intention that as supporters

emerged from the platform and made their way to the buses selective

searches would be carried out by officers.   I instructed officers that

they should look for offensive weapons, drink and any person who was

the worse for drink and I suggested that if it became obvious that

searches were taking place any supporter carrying a weapon or

intoxicating liquor would discard it prior to his being searched.

As each bus was occupied 2 constable* were to board the bus and

accompany the driver to the football stadium.   It was hoped that the

bus would be able to return to the Railway Station and I instructed

officers to return on the empty buses so that they might make further

journeys.   Once it became impossible for the buses to return to the
                                                                . PAGE     '4
                                                                  R 3 96

Railway Station due to traffic congestion which we had hoped would

not be before 2.43 pm officers would remain at the football ground,

report to their serial sergeants and would remain at the ground as a

reserve of manpower for 'F* division.

Inspector Harper was to have responsibility for the Nottingham

supporters,   Inspector Dews responsibility for the Liverpool

supporters ajfd both Inspectors were to make their way to the football

stad-ilim once the operation at the Railway Station had come to an end

so that they could take Command of 'D* division serials at the ground

so that they might deploy them during the match should it be necessary

and ensure that the boarding of buses after the match and the

escorting of them to the Railway Station would take place as had been

planned.

Officers were to be deployed throughout in serials the majority of

which were comprised of 10 constables and 1 sergeant,    but certain

serials contained less than 10 constables and some had 2 sergeants.

Mounted officers and dog handlers were also available.

2 serials numbers 17 and 18 were to be deployed in Pond Street Bus

Station with a view of identifying football supporters who had

travelled by coach.    Those supporters were to be encouraged to make

their way to the Railway Station and board South Yorkshire Transport

Buses along with the train passengers.     Those 2 serials together with

serial 19 which was engaged on public order patrol were to take their

meal at West Bar Police Station during the match.     All other serials

would take their meal at the football ground.

Communications were to be by no means of personal radio operating on

a dedicated radio channel and radios would be allocated 1 to each

pair of officers.     I outlined the command structure - Superintendent

Bates was in overall command, I was responsible for policing at the

Midland Station and Chief Inspector Donnelly was to be responsible for
                                                                   PAGE   S
                                                                   R396

the policing of the city centre.

I instructed all officers to be in position by 10.00 am and that they

must not retire from duty without reporting to their serial

sergeants.    Serial Sergeants were to report the whole of their serial

off duty; to *D1*?control and I reminded m l 1 officers that the

majority of people attending the football match that day were decent,

law-abiding individuals.    I expected officers to treat them with

courtesy and good humour but equally 1 expected them to deal swiftly

and effectively with anyone who was intent on engaging in crime,

violence and public disorder.

All prisoners were to be taken to the Charge Office at Bridge Street

and additional CID officers were on duty at West Bar Police Station

with a view to their being directed to Charge Office to assume

responsibility for the prisoners at an early stage so that the

uniformed officers could return to their public order duties.

I invited Superintendent Bates to address the briefing and he

referred to South Yorkshire Police being in the public eye and the

importance of every officer performing his duty to the very highest

standard.    The briefing was then concluded and officers began to

leave the gymnasium in order to take up their positions.

I arrived at the Midland Station shortly after 10.00 am.     Inspectors

Harper and Dews were already in position, together with the serials           j
of officers under their command.    I spent time at both exits from the       !

Railway Station and at the main public exit where some football             |

supporters were emerging amidst ordinary rail passengers.     Where       j
those supporters could be identified they were directed     towards the   j


buses carrying the other supporters.   34 buses were used to convey       j

Nottingham Forest supporters to the football ground,   18 to convey       [

Liverpool supporters.   They were comprised of both sexes and all ages, J

the majority were orderly and those who were over boisterous were
                                                                                   PAGE
                                                                                   R396

             controlled by the police officers present.     I was aware from

             monitoring communications by personal radio, that other officers were

             deployed to a number of incidents of public disorder involving

             football supporters of both clubs, at various locations throughout

             the city centre.

             Upon receipt of information from the British Transport Police that no

             more football supporters were on route to the Midland Station I

             returned to West Bar Police Station at approximately 3.00 pm in order

             to take refreshments.     A short time later I was sitting in the sfenior

             officers dining room together with Chief Inspector Donnelly and

v^T   £ {0   Inspector Beeden when I received a telephone call from the control

             room sergeant.     He informed me that the police at the Hillsborough

             Football Ground were requesting additional police manpower.       I

             informed him that the majority of ’D* Division officers were already

             at the ground and that only 3 serials remained in the city centre.             I

             could see some of those officers taking their meal in the restaurant

             at West Bar Police Station and I informed the sergeant that I would

             address those officers as to the request for further manpower.         I

             .nstructed the sergeant to ascertain the severity of the incident at

             the football ground and that should it be necessary all available

             *D1* officers should be directed to attend.

             I then spoke to the officers in the restaurant and advised them of

             the contents of the telephone call.     They had all completed their

             meal and immediately departed.     Almost immediately I received another

             telephone call from the control room sergeant in which he informed me

             that the police at Hammerton Road had called "Operation Support".          I

             advised him that the officers had left the restaurant and that all

             available *D1* officers should be directed to attend at the football

             ground.

             Chief Inspector Donnelly,   Inspector Beeden and I made our way to the
                                                                   PAGE
                                                                   R396

control room where details of the incident at the football ground

were beginning to emerge.     I was informed that 1 serial had attended

from *D1* but that 2 other serials,    1 in a transit van,   1 on foot had

remained in the Sub Division, together with the officers from the

duty group which was on duty at that time.

It then became apparent that a serious incident had occurred at the

Hillsborough Football Ground which could have had serious

consequences for the city centre later in the day, and Chief

Inspector Donnelly,   Inspector Beeden and I retired to my office to

discuss and decide upon policing arrangements for the city centre in

the knowledge that those officers whom we had expected to be

available to us were likely to be detained at the football ground.

We decided to make use of the Pub Watch early warning system to

request all licensees' in the city centre to close their premises

until further notice.     A further duty group was scheduled to report

for duty at 6.00 pm and we decided to contact those officers

individually at home and require them to report for duty immediately

and all officers on duty in *D1' Sub Division were summoned to the

gymnasium for briefing.

I subsequently addressed that briefing.     I informed the officers of

what had taken place at Hillsborough and the possible consequences

should large numbers of irate football supporters return to the city

centre.   I informed the officers that I would take command of the

policing in fD 1 f Sub Division and remain in the control room.     Chief

Inspector Donnelly would take command of the policing at the Midland

Station and Inspector Beeden would be responsible for the remainder

of the city centre.     The sub divisional response vehicle and 3 area

cars were to be deployed with 2 officers in each to be responsible

for the routine policing of the sub division.

All other officers were to be deployed in relation to the football
                                                                           PAGE     8
                                                                           R 3 96

        supporters returning to the Midland Station.     3 sergeants and

        approximately 20 constables were available to me at that time.       I

        divided them into 3 serials each under the command of a sergeant, 2

        to be deployed on foot and 1 to remain mobile.     1 foot serial was to

        be deployed in Snig Hill and another was to be deployed in Fitsalan

        Square.   The 3rd serial was to remain mobile to be available to

         respond to any part of the city centre including the Midland Station.

        As those officers left the police station to take up their positions

        members of the 6.00 pm duty &roup began to arrive.     I formed them

         into serials of 1 sergeant and 6 or 7 constables and deployed them to

         other vulnerable parts of the city centre.    Other officers then

         became available from Hillsborough and I deployed them at various

         locations throughout the city centre and at the Midland Station.

         I remained i n the control room at West Bar Police Station in command

         of the operation in the city centre until 8.00 pm by which time the

         majority of football supporters had dispersed without serious incident

         and the majority of police officers had retired from duty.    I retired

         from duty at 9.00 pm that day.



END OF REPORT
     REPORT ON FA CUP SEVII-FINAL, HILLSBOROUGH - SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989



                                                       STEVEN KING

                                                       39 Years

                                                       Chief Inspector

                                                       South Yorkshire Police



I am a Chief Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police presently stationed

at West Bar Police Station, Sheffield.     Since Saturday 8 April 1989 I have

performed the duty of Acting Superintendent.     It is a duty I have performed

on numerous previous occasions.



I have served at West Bar Police Station in my present rank since 4 March

1985 and was involved in the policing at the FA cup semi-final between

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest in 1988.

Immediately I became aware that the fixture was to be repeated in 1989,

I liaised with Police Sergeant 1004 Jones who has responsibility for the

planning of all major events in 'Dl' Sub-Division.     I informed Sergeant

Jones that the police operation in 'Dl' Sub-Division would be based upon

the successful operation of the previous year and I instructed him to attend

the preliminary planning meeting at Hammerton Road Police Station and report

to me thereafter.



In due course Sergeant Jones reported that the police operation in 'F'

division would be a repeat of that of the previous year.    There were no

significant changes proposed to the police operation in 'D' division other

than a transfer of the responsibility for all traffic matters from divisions

to Headquarters Operations and Traffic Division.     I then instructed Sergeant

Jones to prepare an operation order based upon that of the previous year.
2

His terms of reference were to provide sufficient police officers to ensure

public order in the city centre between 7.00 pm Friday 14 April 1989 until

3.00 am Sunday 16 April 1989 and to ensure that rival supporters arriving

by train at the Sheffield Midland Station were conveyed to and from the

football ground by South Yorkshire Transport buses under police supervision.



Numerous consultations took place between Sergeant Jones and myself as he

gained information from South Yorkshire Transport, British Rail, British

Transport Police, 'F' Division and Operations and Traffic Division.     In

due course Sergeant Jones delivered to me a draft operational order, which

I examined and returned to him for amendments.    The completed order was

subsequently delivered to Superintendent Bates, Deputy Divisional Commander

for his examination and signature prior to distribution.



Those officers who were engaged on public order patrols during the evening

of Friday 14 April 1989 were briefed at 7.00 pm that day by Inspector Beeden.

I prepared a briefing of all other officers which took place at 9.00 am

on Saturday 15 April 1989 in the gymnasium at West Bar Police Station.

I began my briefing by referring to the operation of the previous year and

explained to the officers present that the single major difference was that

supervision of traffic was not to be our responsibility.    I then referred

to the public order patrols which had been in operation since 7.00 pm the

previous evening and I reported that no football related public disorder

had occurred.   The officers who had been engaged on the Friday evening public

order patrols were not present at my briefing and I referred to their

returning to duty at mid-day to continue their public order responsibilities

until the early hours of the following morning.
3

I referred then to the police operation at the Midland Station.     I explained

that a single special train was travelling from Liverpool and that that

would arrive at Wadsley Bridge Railway Station.     I referred to service trains

from Liverpool and other parts of the country carrying Liverpool supporters

which would undoubtedly arrive at Midland Station as would all special trains

carrying supporters from Nottingham.



I explained that our intention was that rival football supporters would

be segregated on the platforms by British Transport Police officers, that

Liverpool supporters would be directed towards the South luggage exit and

Nottingham supporters towards the North end gate in Sheaf Street.     Liverpool

supporters would be encouraged to board South Yorkshire Transport buses

parked in Cross Turner Street and Nottingham supporters would be similarly

encouraged to board buses parked in Sheaf Street.     It was hoped that they

would return to the Railway Station    by bus and consequently they would be

required to pay a return fare of £1.00 when boarding at the Midland Station.



South Yorkshire Transport had provided 35 buses each of which would convey

80 passengers.     It was our intention that as supporters emerged from the

platform and made their way to the buses selective searches would be carried

out by officers.    I instructed officers that they should look for offensive

weapons, drink and any person who was the worse for drink and I suggested

that if it became obvious that searches were taking place any supporter

carrying a weapon or intoxicating liquor would discard it prior to his being

searched.



As each bus was occupied 2 constables were to board the bus and accompany

the driver to the football stadium.    It was hoped that the bus would be
4

able to return to the Railway Station and I instructed officers to return

on the empty buses so that they might make further journeys.     Once it became

impossible for the buses to return to the Railway Station due to traffic

congestion which we had hoped would not be before 2.45 pm officers would

remain at the football ground, report to their serial sergeants and would

remain at the ground as a reserve of man power for 'F' division.



Inspector Harper was to have responsibility for the Nottingham supporters,

Inspector Dews responsibility for the Liverpool supporters and both

Inspectors were to make their way to the football stadium once the operation

at the Railway Station had come to an end so that they could take conmand

of 'D' division serials at the ground so that they might deploy than during

the match should it be necessary and ensure that the boarding of buses after

the match and the escorting of them to the Railway Station would take place

as had been planned.



Officers were to be deployed throughout in serials the majority of which

were comprised of 10 constables and 1 sergeant, but certain serials contained

less than 10 constables and some had 2 sergeants.    Mounted officers and

dog handlers were also available.



2 serials numbers 17 and 18 were to be deployed in Pond Street Bus Station

with a view to identifying football supporters who had travelled by coach.

Those supporters were to be encouraged to make their way to the Railway

Station and board South Yorkshire Transport Buses along with the train

passengers.    Those 2 serials together with serial 19 which was engaged on

public order patrol were to take their meal at West Bar Police Station during

the match.    All other serials would take their meal at the football ground.
                                                                                c

5

Conmunications were to be by means of personal radio operating on a dedicated

radio channel and radios would be allocated 1 to each pair of officers.

I outlined the command structure - Superintendent Bates was in overall

conmand, I was responsible for policing at the Midland Station and Chief

Inspector Donnelly was to be responsible for the policing of the city centre.



I instructed all officers to be in position by 10.00 am and that they must

not retire from duty without reporting to their serial sergeants.   Serial

sergeants were to report the whole of their serial off duty to 'Dl' control

and I reminded all officers that the majority of people attending the

football match that day were decent, law-biding individuals. I expected

officers to treat than with courtesy and good humour but equally I expected

than to deal swiftly and effectively with anyone who was intent on engaging

in crime, violence and public disorder.



All prisoners were to be taken to the Charge Office at Bridge Street and

additional CID officers were on duty at West Bar Police Station with a view

to their being directed to Charge Office to assume responsibility for the

prisoners at an early stage so that the uniformed officers could return

to their public order duties.



I invited Superintendent Bates to address the briefing and he referred to

South Yorkshire Police being in the public eye and the importance of every

officer performing his duty to the very highest standard.   The briefing

was then concluded and officers began to leave the gymnasium in order to

take up their positions.
                                                                                 (U'H
6

I arrived at the Midland Station shortly after 10.00 am.     Inspectors Harper

and Dews were already in position, together with the serials of officers

under their command.   I spent time at both exits from the Railway Station

and at the main public exit where some football supporters were emerging

amidst ordinary rail passengers.    Where those supporters could be identified

they were directed towards the buses carrying the other supporters.     34

buses were used to convey Nottingham Forest supporters to the football

ground, 18 to convey Liverpool supporters.   They were comprised of both

sexes and all ages, the majority were orderly and those who were over

boisterous were controlled by the police officers present.     I was aware

from monitoring conmunications by personal radio, that other officers were

deployed to a number of incidents of public disorder involving football

supporters of both clubs, at various locations throughout the city centre.



Upon receipt of information from the British Transport Police that no more

football supporters were on route to the Midland Station I returned to West

Bar Police Station at approximately 3.00 pm in order to take refreshments.

A short time later I was sitting in the senior officers dining room together

with Chief Inspector Donnelly and Inspector Beeden when I received a

telephone call from the control room sergeant.   He informed me that the

police at the Hillsborough Football Ground were requesting additional police

manpower.   I informed him that the majority of 'D ' division officers were

already at the ground and that only 3 serials remained in the city centre.

I could see some of those officers taking their meal in the restaurant at

West Bar Police Station and I informed the sergeant that I would address

those officers as to the request for further manpower.   I instructed the

sergeant to ascertain the severity of the incident at the football ground
7

and that should it be necessary all available 'Dl1 officers should be

directed to attend.



1 then spoke to the officers in the restaurant and advised them of the

contents of the telephone call.     They had all completed their meal and

immediately departed.     Almost immediately I received another telephone call

from the control room sergeant in which he informed me that the police at

Hammerton Road had called     "Operation Support".   I advised him that the

officers had left the restaurant and that all available 'Dl1 officers should

be directed to attend at the football ground.



Chief Inspector Donnelly, Inspector Beeden and I made our way to the control

room where details of the incident at the football ground were beginning

to emerge.   I was informed that 1 serial had attended from 'Dl1 but that

2 other serials, 1 in a transit van, 1 on foot had remained in the

Sub-Division, together with the officers from the duty group which was on

duty at that time.



It then became apparent that a serious incident had occurred at the

Hillsborough Football Ground which could have had serious consequences for

the city centre later in the day, and Chief Inspector Donnelly, Inspector

Beeden and I retired to my office to discuss and decide upon policing

arrangements for the city centre in the knowledge that those officers whom

we had expected to be available to us were likely to be detained at the

football ground.     We decided to make use of the Pub Watch early warning

system to request all licensees in the city centre to close their premises

until further notice.    A further duty group was scheduled to report for

duty at 6.00 pm and we decided to contact those officers individually at
k




8

home and require than to report for duty imnediately and all officers on

duty in 'Dl' Sub-Division were summoned to the gymnasium for briefing.



I subsequently addressed that briefing.     I informed the officers of what

had taken place at Hillsborough and the possible consequences should large

numbers of irate football supporters return to the city centre.     I informed

the officers that I would take command of the policing in 'Dl' Sub-Division

and remain in the control room.     Chief Inspector Donnelly would take command

of the policing at the Midland Station and Inspector Beeden would be

responsible for the remainder of the city centre.     The Sub-divisional

response vehicle and 3 area cars were to be deployed with 2 officers in

each to be responsible for the routine policing of the sub-division.



All other officers were to be deployed in relation to the football supporters

returning to the Midland Station.     3 sergeants and approximtely 20 constables

were available to me at that time.     I divided them into 3 serials each under

the conmand of a sergeant, 2 to be deployed on foot and 1 to ranain mobile.

1 foot serial was to be deployed in Snig Hill and another was to be deployed

in Fitzalan Square.   The 3rd serial was to ranain mobile to be available

to respond to any part of the city centre including the Midland Station.

As those officers left the police station to take up their positions members

of the 6.00 pm duty group began to arrive.     I formed them into serials of

1 sergeant and 6 or 7 constables and deployed than to other vulnerable parts

of the city centre.   Other officers then became available from Hillsborough

and I deployed them at various locations throughout the city centre and

at the Midland Station.
I remained in the control roan at West Bar Police Station in command of

the operation in the city centre until 8.00 pm by which time the majority

of football supporters had dispersed without serious incident and the

majority of police officers had retired from duty.   I retired from duty

at 9.00 pm that day.




Acting Superintendent
