               %




   Surname                   JOHNSTONE

   Forenames                 GEOFFREY EDWARD

   Age                       OVER 21                     DOB

   Occupation                POLICE CONSTABLE kOJ

   Address                   S. YORKS. POLICE, F/ARMS TRAINING,
                             OPERATIONS DIVISION, HEADQUARTERS.

   DATED                      11/06/89



   I am an Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, at present in the
% Firearms Training department at Headquarters.     On Saturday 15 April 1989 I

   performed duty at the Football Association Cup Semi-Final match at the

   Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield, between Liverpool Football Club and

   the Notts. Forest Football Club.

   I paraded for duty at 0900 at Headquarters, arriving at the ground at 09^5

   hours.    I then attended the briefing at 1000 that day in the North Stand,

   given by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and other officers.

   I was engaged on duty in serial ^9 and was to patrol in a Police unit, Tango k.

   We were to patrol the Foxhill area, this.^area being set aside for the visiting

   Liverpool supporters, and included the localities where Liverpool supporters

   were to park their coaches, mini buses, and private vehicles.

   The sergeant in charge of the serial was PS 2207 Shaw, my Inspector was Insp

   Robinson.

   We commenced patrol at 1050 that day, in company with Inspector Robinson.

   At 1058 we drove passed the Fox public house, and I noticed that there were six

   or seven youths already waiting outside the premises, and that there were two

   or three vehicles in the car park.




     G JOHNSTONE   PC k07
                                                                          Page 2         ^   I


   Geoffrey Edward Johnstone




   At 1125 we returned to the Fox public house, and with Inspector Robinson

   I went inside and spoke to the landlord.   He had apparently made

   arrangements for Liverpool supporters to use a large separate room, putting

   his regular customers into a side room, There were already approximately

   twenty customers in the Liverpool supporters room, and the front car park was

   beginning to full up.

   A check was made of the other licensed premises in the area.    Most of the public

   houses were either closed, or open only at the rear for local customers only.

   We paid passing attention to the main roads in the Foxhill area including public

   houses, and a small chip shop in Trafalgar road.    I noticed that the Fox public

   house had become full with a large crowd spilling out onto a patio area and the

   front car park.   Supporters were sitting on the perimeter walls and drinking.

   The car park was completely full.

   At 1315 we received a radio message of youths shop lifting in the GT News shop in

   Foxhill road, which is situated immediately opposite the Fox public house.      We

   attended, and the Manageress complained of a group of youths who had been in the

   shop, the youths had snatched sweets and other items on open display and when the

   Managress had spoken to them, she had been subjected to obscene verbal abuse.        As

^ | t h e youths ran from the shop she had been assaulted, although I saw no apparent

   injuries, she appeared very' distressed and frightened.   The youths had left the

   area in a vehicle and the Managress had noted the number.    We commenced a search

   of the immediate area.

   At 1330 we saw the vehicle, registered number             being driven along

   Halifax road towards the city centre.   We followed the vehicle into the car park

   of the White Horse public house on Halifax road and the occupants were detained.




     U
    G JOHNSTONE   PC *f07
Geoffrey Edward Johnstone




The vehicle was a white Renault van, containing six Liverpool supporters, all

of whom had been drinking.

The occupants were


1   .

2   .




k.



5.



6.




At IjhO we arrived at Ecclesfield Police-Station.    The six people were then

documented, this taking until approximately 1^50.    A serial member PC 333

Ogilvie was left at Ecclesfield and we resumed patrol.

Due to heavy radio traffic we moved to the Leppings Lane end of the ground

arriving at approximately 1515*     We left our vehicle and moved through a crowd

and joined other officers immediately in front of the turnstiles giving access

to the West Stand.     Whilst moving through the crowd of supporters I noticed some

people appeared very upset and some were openly crying.     Some supporters were

obviously very angry I was kicked and spat on by supporters as 1 passed by a group

of approximately fifteen.     I saw several officers having similar types of

aggresiV'j behaviour shown towards them.



        JOHNSTONE PC *f07
                                                                      Page 4




    Geoffrey Edward Johnstone




    The supporters were generally moving along Leppings Lane away from the ground

    hut were shouting abuse at passing Police vehicles, Police officers and some

    other emergency services.     A common term of abuse I heard from several

    supporters was "MURDERING BASTARDS".

    It was not clear to me at this time what had actually occurred inside the

    stadium until the radio referred to "Bodies" situated inside the ground.

    At approximately 1550 I was instructed by Inspector Robinson to accompany him

    into the ground.   This I did accompanied by most of my serial.    We moved to the

    entrance to the gymnasium where we took up a position in a cordon, keeping the

    immediate area from the crowd.     I assisted other officers to carry injured

    supporters to ambulances and returned to my serial.

    There were a large number of people in the area of the gymnasium attempting to

    find relatives or friends amongst the injured and deceased.

    At approximately 1615 I assisted Inspector Robinson to set up and man an enquiry

    desk near to the gymnasium.     I obtained datails of persons missing or lost, and

    of the persons reporting.     At 1730 I passed all my lists to Inspector Robinson

^   for forwarding to Hammerton Road Police Station.

    At approximately 1800 having collected our vehicle we resumed mobile patrol in

    the immediate area.

    At 1820 as a result of a message received I attended the Northern General Hospital

    re a report of fighting in the Accident end Emergency Department.    The disturbance

    was over on arrival but together with my serial we remained in the vicinity of the

    hospital until approximately 1920, when we returned to the ground.




      G JOHNSTONE   PC ^07
                                                             p    .
                                                             Page 5
                                                                         QvOlt 41 :0 *|*



Geoffrey Edward Johnston-3




We were stood down at 1930 having returned to Claywheels Lane garage and I went

off duty at 2000 that day.

I did not see any of the incident inside the ground, I was at no time on the

perimeter track, or playing area, and I did not have any contact with any of the

casualities other than as mentioned previously.

 I found the supporters generally good humoured, and in a festive spirit, most    ■

of them having been drinking.




G JOHNSTONE   PC k07
