 OTtfER DOCUMENT FORM                                   Date and tim e raised                IkJM         Number


 T itle                     (If

 (Include source and any document number if relevant)
                                                                                                                             /
 Receiver's instructions - urgent action                                        b*   4   ^    /g J fstX            c)
                                                                                                                            Receiver



           Bisty^/ir
Document registe^S/indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                M.
                                                                                                                             Indexer

No(s) o f actions raised

Statement reader's instructions   f\       5 ~ O cl<^                                                                   Statement Reader



Indexed as indicated                                                                                                        Indexer

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No(s)                                                                                                        Indexer

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
Report of the Events of Saturday    15th April   1989,   as experienced by:

                KOP SEASON TICKET HOLDER.

WORK ADDRESS:




      Liverpool                 Telephone Number

HOME ADDRESS:



      Wallasey
      Merseyside                Telephone   Number:



At about 9-15 a.m. we left Wallasey in a Mini-bus, collected the rest of the party
in Liverpool and departed for Sheffield at about 10.00 a.m.

The reason we left so early was that, last year we had been held up in road works
and stopped to have the Mini-bus searched before arriving in Sheffield and therefore
arrived with very little time to spare.

We travelled to Sheffield by the same route as last year, via Stockport and the
Snake Pass, stopping at the Lady Bower Reservoir at about 11.30 a.m.

We stayed there for approxim ately 35 minutes and arrived in Sheffield just before
1.00 p.m.  At no time did we see any police, any signs for the ground, or were we
stopped and searched as the previous year.

The Mini-bus was parked as soon as possible on a bridge, and we established we were
only 1-1 2 miles ^ from the ground, so we decided to walk. No pubs had been open on
the way, particularly on the Snake Pass where they were closed for "structural
repairs" but the first pub in Sheffield, after turning right from the bridge, was
open and all 11 of us stopped here for a drink.

There was no trouble in the pub, there were also some Nottingham Forest fans present,
and the landlord said he would also open up after the match.

We left at about 2.00 p.m. for the ground   and were directed through a large park.
There were some car parking at the end   of the park and we asked a Steward the way to
the "LIVERPOOL END".

Right out of the park and left at the lights unfort u n a t e l y led us to the Nottingham
Forest end of the ground so we therefore had to walk back against the crowd to the
Leppings Lane end, arriving at 2.30 p.m.

At this point only 4 of us were actually in the terracing so we arranged to meet
in the park after the match and turned to join the queue for the turnstiles.

A gate allowed us into the area presumably reserved for queuing!, but it was
immediately noticeable that a lack of police p resence or o r ganizat ion made this
impossible.

We moved to the right of the crush and   as we approached the turnstiles realised
there was a barrier to the left of us.    A policeman told us to go to the back of the
barrier and join the crowd again, which we did.

At this point, I caught my foot on one of the barrier stanchions and actually fell
over, I do not know w ho pulled me up, or how, but when I did get to my feet I was in
a solid crush and unable to move in any direc tion other than with the crowd.




                                                                        continued/
-H



                                         -   2   -




 At this point I lost one    of my friends but managed to keep the other two more or                    less
 in my sight, but more by    luck than design.

 I tried to move my arms to protect m yself but was unable to do so and at this point
 we saw people being hauled up over the walls and jumping over the turnstiles simply
 to get out of the crush.

 We were eventually carried right over to the left hand side and I managed to force
 my way through the first turnstile, my ticket was not requested, although I did
 throw it at the gateman.

 Once inside the ground I caught my breath and began to look for my friends.         I could
 not believe the total d i s o r g a nization I had just experienced, I had thought last
 year had been bad enough.

 There had been various announcements requesting fans not to push, and at this point
 the teams were on the pitch, but the match did not appear to have started.

 From this point on time became unimportant,            I do not have a watch,     but would not
 have had time to look at it anyway.

 Two of my friends came through the turnstiles, both with tickets intact and at this
 point I heard someone saying "The bastards opening the gate".  My first instinct was
 to get out of the way and the only way into the ground appeared to be through the
 tunnel straight ahead.

 There were no stewards, no police, no direction w h a t s o e v e r at this point so we ran
 to the tunnel and up the steps, up to a solid wall of legs.

 I pushed my way through, as this is not abnormal for terracing at away matches, or
 even at Wembley, but once inside I saw the match had started but you could alread y
 see there was something terribly wrong.

 People were already climbing    over the fence and the police          on the pitch     were obvio u s l y
 trying at this point to stop    a riot?!

 I saw three fans caught, the gate, through which some people were lucky enough to
 escape, opened and they were pushed back into the crowd.   Police were s t a nd ing on
 the wall pushing people back off the railin g and into the crowd, shouting to move
 back and stop pushing.

 My body felt as though     it were in a tumble dryer and I found myself pushing and using
 my feet frantically to     move to the side  where I could see space.

 Suddenly there was a roar, afterwards established as Beardsley hitting the bar,                    a
 sudden surge from behind, and luck took over.

 What I saw was indescribable, but my gut reaction was still to look after myself. I
 realised people behind me were being hauled to safety and that police had finally
 realized what was happening and some lay across the top of the fence and pulled
 people to safety, the gate was opened and people fought with one another to get out.

 It was easy to see that there were a l ready fatalities, people           were franti c a l l y   working
 on bodies, ajready lifeless, and many seemingly small.

 Wire cutters ripped the fence in front of us open and people were pulled through
 there too.  I hadn't really noticed the players had left the pitch.

 Eventually, as more people got   onto the pitch we were able to search and find friends,
 and only then begin to   take in the full horror of what had happened. I have never
 seen so many single shoes in my life, there was money, season tickets, jackets, pairs
 of glasses, scarves, even watches littering the floor, there was no need to loot.

 Fans above, in the stand, started to rip advert i s i n g boards down, initially again the
 police assumed vandalism, until they realized they were improvised stretchers.       A line
 of police had appeared across the pitch,            presuma bly to stop a riot,    WHAT RIOT,     their
 help was needed elsewhere.




                                                                               continued/
Two ambulances arrived on the pitch and a Liverpool supporter began to rip the goal
net down, only to be stopped by a policeman.  A fireman took over where he had left
off.

Emergency services appeared few and far between initially,         but the fire brigade
cannot be praised enough for their efforts.

There were some moments of lunacy, e.g. a press photographer removing a coat from a
dead body and trying to take a photograph, he did not manage to do so as he was
qui ckly spotted, and a policeman trying to arrest a man who was obvious ly looking
for people he had been with beneath the various jackets and blankets.

Our next task was to make         sure other friends, in the stands, knew we were O.K.
This meant w a l k i n g to the   front and searching frantically, whilst standing amongst
the debris.    As the final       announcement was made that the match had been abandoned
I found them.      Only then,     when I realized that som ebody knew I was O.K. did we stop
to think what we had been         through.

I realized I had done nothing to help, I had simply taken care of numb er one and
then my friends, I don't know what I could have done, but the fact is I did nothing.
I didn't even try to comfort anyone, I just felt numb.

It was about threequarters of an hour after we left the ground that we finally found
the 11th member, just as we were reporting him m i ss ing he ran up to us, he had been
helping outside, he is a trainee doctor.

I know he has completed his own account, and that he will have detailed his horror
at   the lack of equipment and medical expertise present.

In the cold light of day it is much easier to see what went         wrong,   but why did nobody
listen to the fans earlier.

Liverpool supporters regularly take large support away with them,            they knew that
things were not right last year.

I also went to a semi-final against Arsenal in the early 80's and things were no better
then.  Just because nothing has happened before is no reason for complacency.

Liverpool Football Club appealed that if the match were to remain at Hillsborough,
we MUST have the larger end.  There were Nottingham Forrest fans trying to sell
tickets as we arrived.

There have been many accusations made since last Saturday, I have suggested some
possible reasons for the disaster in the form of questions I would like answered.

 1.   The F.A. once again failed to a c knowled ge the appeal by Liverpool        for a change
      of venue, OUT OF FAIRNESS TO BOTH CLUBS?

2.      They also failed to listen to Liverpools request for       a larger a l location of
      tickets, based on previous experience. UJwy?

 3.   There were a ppa rently more police than there are at Wembley.      W H E R E WERE THEY!?

 4.   Why did security appear less tight than on previous years when ap proa c h i n g the
       ground and how many other people were mis-dir ected?

 5.   Why will no-one admit that the only differen ce between this year and last year
      was the opening of a gate?

 6.   Why were there not more escape routes from the cage?

7-    Why were the sides almost empty and nobody there to close the middle section
      or direct people away?

8.    Why was the kick off not held back,        it was at Tranmere the previous week with
      a crowd of only 10,000?

 9.   Why was ever ybody so slow to react both inside and outside the ground:          are we
      really such animals?

10.   Do Sheffield Wednesday have to provide stewards and if so where were they?
