ts \ cr?Pi
             HniSBORCXKa INQUIRY.

             David McDonnell, PC 8
             Adwick Police Station, Doncaster.




             At 8.00 am on Saturday 15th April 1989, I started my duty at Adwick
             Police Station with regard to the football semi-final event at
             Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield.

             At 10.00 am that morning, I was part of the large parade in the
             North Stand at Hillsborough Football Ground, having been deputed a
             serial led by PS Venables.

             On conclusion of this parade, we vere deputed as a serial to work cm
             Penistone Road cm the approach road to the ground, seme 800 yards
             away.

             During my duty there, the Nottingham Forest fans were making their
             way to the ground in a mainly orderly fashion.

             Approximately 3.10 pm as a result of a radio instruction, we all, as
             a serial attended at the ground and we were stood by in an area
             between the North Stand and the Kop end.

             A short time later we were requested to walk onto the pitch andface
             the Nottingham Forest supporters who were in the Kop end.
             Clearly, after a short while it became apparent that the main
             problem within the ground was at the Leppings Lane stand but it was
             quite a while before I was aware that there were serious injuries
             resulting from an incident that had taken place there.

             After several minutes in front of the Nottingham Forest supporters
             we were directed to stand along the centre line of the pitch in
             order to keep the Liverpool supporters who were on the pitch away
             fran the Nottingham Forest end.

             Approximately 4.00 pm after an announcement on the public address
             system, the football fans slowly left the ground at all the
             available exits and our serial was deputed to assist and escort the
             fans leaving the ground. Our serial remained on Penistone Road, a
             couple of hundred yards away from the ground.

             Approximately 5.45 pm that afternoon, we all returned to the North
             Stand for a de-brief. My duty was concluded at 8.00 pm that
             evening, having booked off at Adwick Police Station.
