                    Sheffield Archives Ref. % u ) ®| | ! | b io iS                      M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and time raised                            Number


Title      KslJ ^ q^ -jvDwA                                                             Kb&lS      •

(Include source and any document number i f relevam r
                                                                7
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y t^ /N c T )
                                                                                                                  Receiver




                                                                                                                  Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                             1044       -

                                                                                                            Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions         ^    p o



                                                                                                                  Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken            L en&e. ^                                                  O/M         SIO


                                                                          XL   ly-f \ t ^
                                                                                      ........
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                                               i
                                                               Merseyside.

                                                           25th.Apri1,1989.
Dear
              I can see no lasting changes in football until the most important people
are consulted in what they want,the paying supporters.I want to see supporters elected
onto the boards of every League club.Done in the following manner,
           team advertises in local press saying all season ticket holders are to be
           involved.A sponsorship form to be included on the advertisement requiring,
           name,date of birth,address and 10 sponsors all with season ticket numbers for
           verification.
week 2     team advertises in local press showing all names and addresses of caditdates
           who can then be contacted by the voters to seek views etc.Maybe local media
           would be interested.
week 3     team advertises in local press listing any withdrawals,and including a voting
           form.
week 4     team playing at home,season ticket holders hand in forms on entry to match,
week 5     result anounced and the two winning canditdates take up position on board.

             The whole operation is quick,cheap and easy.Supporters, 184 of them from
all sizes of club would have a say in how our national sport is run and aimed for the
future.Such a scheme would have to be instigated from outside football because the men
in charge do not give a damn about ordinary supporters.


                                 Yours faithfuly,
