 AL/yi FIRTH POLICE COil^TAAL^ igO.'.lOODUi.ATb 1OLIC.J bl'AllOI!.
                                                                                         c \SJ
 Sir,
        On Saturday 15 th April 1939.1 commenced duty at G.^arn at UooUseats   olice Station,

Tor deployment to Hilloboroutfi for the /.A.Cup semi rinal.Je arrive.I at the ground

 at 9 .50 am for a briefing in the iior-h otand at lO.OOam.FoIlowing the briexing we

 were deployed to the Penistone koad enclosure where vie were given a furtaer briefing

  by iiupt.Greenwood and Inspector Booth regarding potential problems on botn the

  turnstiles ®id o n t h e Kop.l was then deployed us part of aerial 9 with responsibilities

 for turnstiles number ^3 and h k ,\le remained at those turnstiles searching ^ottinghais

 Forest s n i f t e r * entering the ground,and preventing dangerous article* beiu^ Uuten xn.

 At that time we were constantly supervised by the serial Sgt,who remained at the

0irnstiles throughout,and periodically "by both the Inspector and Superintendent.

  Vie remained at the Penistone iload end of the ground until around 3 .10pm.shortly prior

 to leaving that location I heard a message passed via the tannoy system,asking spectators

 to leave the pitch,we were then told by 5gt Jessop to leave the turnstiles,anu as we

 did so several supporters jumped over the turnstiles,and the groundstaff were instructed

 to close the gates to prevent further problems.Ue then followed the Sgt around the bade

  of the kop,through the crowd to the perimeter fence and we were allowed through a gate

  directly behind the goals.The crowd was not densly packed at this end of the ground

  and we were able to walk easily to that fencingCi’he queueing at the      turnstiles had been

  light throughout the morning with numbers building only to around a maximum of twenty,

^ t h o u g h there was -a constant flow of Nottingham supporters from early morning.}

 on entering the playing area I could see there were a number of supporters uu tue pitch

  and that others were climbing over the fencing and others were being pulled into

   the seats behind the terracing.At first I thought we had been taken from the turnstiles

 because of fighting - problems had been anticipated at that end of the ground with

 Liverpool fans being amongst the Forest supporters,-but on entering the ground I

   formed the opinion that it was merely a pitch invasion.The Nottingham Forest supporters

  must have thought the same as there were chants of abuse directed at the Liverpool fans

  and also chants of "off the pitch".In view of the numbers* on the pitch I thought it would

  take some time to clear the playing area and the start of the game had obviously been

  delayed .There seemed less urgency to get to that end of the g rcmd in view of the rdtuati
 anti most of the serial slower to a normal walking P *ce across the pitch.At that stage
        *


I .was .unaware of the nature of i.he incident or that the Game hud actualy started,and

 then been stopped.lle crossed the pitch and on Getting towards the Leppings Lane end

 I could see a number of officers stood on the perimeter fence shouting and waving at the

 crowd trying to Get then to move back,but they seemed to be taking no notice.As X

got to the fencing I could then see that those supporters nearest to the fencing were

being crushed against the mesh.I realised immediately that quite a large number were

 already apparently dead.! immediately cliinbe* on the fencing and began shouting for

 people to move backwards,but they were just shouting back,obviously unaware of the

seriousness of the situation.* gate directly behind the goal was opened and a crowd of

 police officers were around that gate pulling people througlul realined .because of the

 density of both the crowd and police around that gate that I would be unable to get onto

► tne terracing to assist.I went to the next gate along towards the South stand,which

 was opened,and there was a steady stream of supporters emerging from that gate which

  opens into the southern section of the Leppings Lane terrace.After the pressure of fans

  had been reduced a number of officers .      were able to get onto the terracing and mahe

  there way to the centre section.Tiiere was a problem around the gate with m l in juried pear

 trying to get out,thus impeding the removal of dead and incurred persons from the centre

 section.1 remained close to that gate along with a number of other officers leaving

 a corridor along the front of the     terracing to allow the removal of injurred

 persons over the fencing and out onto the pitch.'ihe crowd in this section was

• v e r y agitated, some bordering on hysterical.aa apparently dead   .ersons were removed

 from the centre section.As toe movement of bodies stopped I left the terracing and

  went back onto the pitch.By this time most of the dead and incurred had been removed

  from the terracing,and there were a large number of persons lying out on the pitch.

 Some were obviously dead and had their heads covered with coats e t c A o s e that were

  incurred were being seen to;each person seemed to have several around them assisting.

  Many of the incurred were recieving mouth to mouth and heart massage .There was one .

  ambulance on the pitch,and I expected others to follow,thouCh they didnt.-'he removal

   of the dead and incurred was underway though there were no stretchers in evidence and

   people were breakinjup the hoarding to use.I assisted in the removal of one young

   man who was atill alive who wa., taken to      back of the Korta Ktand where he was

  left with nn ambulance crew.I then returned to the pitch and as I a. o-oached the halfway
line si,group of Liverpool supporters numbering around a hundred set off running towards

the kop end shouting and screaming abuse, they seemed intent on attacking the Forest

supporters.    There was a real danger of a serious public order problem which I honestly

found inconceivable on top of the day's events.    There were a number of officers on the

pitch trying to calm this situation, pulling people back and trying to get them to

return to the other end of the pitch.    I recall a banner being unfurled on the kop

referring to Bill Shankley which seemed to further infuriate this section of the crowd.

The group were Moved back to the other end of the pitch and instructions were given to

fora a cordon along the halfway line to prevent any further problems.    There were,

however, sporadic bursts of fighting between small numbers all around the ground.

After a short period the dead and injured had all been removed, and the ground was

becoming very quiet as people began to realise just what had happened.     We remained in

the cordon until a message was passed via the tannoy that the game was off and the

ground emptied.    At this time we were unaware of the numbers involved though opinion

gave the number of dead at around fifteen.    We were also totally unaware of how or why

it had happened.

The serial had regrouped on the halfway line and as the ground became empty we were

directed to resume the duties we had been given, which was supervision of bus queues.

This was unnecessary as most of the crowds had left and those that remained were quiet

and stunned.

We were then directed back to the ground for a debriefing.    The numbers dead were now

rumoured to be around thirty.    By the time we left the ground that number had become

seventy.   There was still no explanation of what had caused it.

We returned to Woodseats and went off duty at 7.15 pm.

The mood of the Liverpool supporters ranged from anger to a stunnedsilence,there       was    a

number on the pitch whose actions were bordering on hysterical.

There was a problem with radio communications in that only Sergeants and above had

radios so there was an obvious difficulty in directing officers to specific points.

When confronted with that situation remaining in a serial is difficult, if not

impossible, as all ones attention is directed to assisting as best as    you can, there was

no time to be spent on looking around for the rest of your serial.
In'.faction the day I did not see any other member of my serial between reaching the

Leppings Lane end of the ground and being formed into a cordon on the halfway line.       It

was only then that serials began to regroup.

The public address system was either under utilised or ineffective as it was impossible

to hear it, when it would seem to have been a suitable method of communications, for

both Police Officers and for directing the public.     The only times I recall it being

used was prior to the incident and to inform supporters that the game was abandoned.

I cannot recall seeing a steward at any time during the incident.

Some supporter© were extremely helpful and doing all they could to assist the injured

and remove bodies.    Others however were a hinderence wanting to voice their opinions on

ticket allocation and the uselessness of the Police, and in the extreme wanting to fight

With the Forest supporters*

     was not involved in the removal of any dead persons, only one injured youth and I can

recall little regarding his description, other than being a white male, early twenties

with dark hair.

I can only describe my feelings on the day as deep shock, in fact the scale of the

disaster really didn't start to sink in until the following day.     I don't think anyone

on the serial was prepared for what we were faced with on our arrival at that end of the

ground, and the shock at seeing such deaths when we thought we were dealing with a pitch

invasion cannot be described.     However, no amount of preparation or training could




•
prepare you for what we were confronted with on that day.

    _________
