         S I h ]P                    0£v»-u5 PtL&J                          \%\Cl^i
                                                                              / j r ^<
At S.^5an Staurday 15 April 1989* I reported in full Police uniform at Woodseats
Police Station. I had been told that my duties that day were in connection with
the FA Cup Semi Final between the teams of Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.                                    ,

We were V trtp r conveyed to the ground in policetransport and <£n arrival at the
ground were formed into serials and went to the North Stand of the ground for
the general briefing. I was assigned to serial 7 under the command of Police
Bergeant 752 ^atty. Our duties that day were to be at the gpion Kop end of the
ground to deal with matters of public order and safety of persons attending the
ground.
M::zKBX0xtaiMz±hstfcxaxmDakBzzH£xfei±mEBpa6Etx8ar$Kp5DrtaEBXx
Following the jp a sx general bridfing we took up are duties in the centre of the jessbstx
 Sion Kop. In the corner of the Kop nearest to tjje North Stand was to be an area
 set asisde for Liverpool supporters who came acfcc into this part of theground.
 One serial was assisgned to cordon of this area and are duties were to reinforce the
 cordon should the need arise.
 At around 12noon the first groups of supporters began to enter the ground. Innitally
 they were godd humoured but at more and more fans entered the ground the
 atmosphere changed. As pushing M ats’          n’
                                                 fPTiVt^rr at the cordon near the North
 Stand we as a serial went to reinforce that cordon. At that time in this area
 were approximately 200 Liverpool supporters and more were Endosrixg entering all the
 time. 3gkjKJtOM±^hflr«tgx^ityx«kskfexaxtaaigzkekm tss.zfcjaer.gzgg|gg>:gfzsai^gEkBEsxaacs
 There was no hostility between the groups of iJEEx nqspetax supporters that I witnessed
 at this time, other than Forest supporters pushing at the cordon of which I was a
member in an effort to get into the comparitive spaceof the Liverpool supporters
 end of the kop.
 I was aware however that many of the supporters had been drining heavily and were
 the worse for drink. This was true of both sets of supporters..
 Although I did look over to the Leppins Lane ehd of the ground from time to time I
 waS not aware of any serious overcrowding or pushing. I was not in direct radio
 contact.
As kick off time approached the pressure on the cordon increased but Kop as a whole
was not ftnnrjMitckiwhr overcrowded, but it was full.                                                   y
At 3pm the teams kicked off.At approximately J.O kpm as the Nottingham team* wer e
attacking the teppins Lane end of the ground. I saw a surge of supporters from the
Leppins Lane Terrace come onto the pitch. I was iot aware of the cause, but more and
more support^came onto the pitch. The tifcRRiKnmi Police Officers on duty at that end of
ground rushed tov.ards them and the perimeter fencig but I was unable to see what was
happening clearly.The teams than ran off the patch and large number of police
rushed towards that end of the ground.
£)araaEx±BadbcKE±KBbc The pushing then on the cordon increased as the Nottingham Forest
supporters began to oqps push towards the Liverpool fans, Due to this I was not in
a position to clearly see what was happeningat the Leppins lane side of the ground,
but I was aware that people were being carried on stretchers and advertising hoardings
qnd were being treated by St Johns Ambulance men Police and supporters. I was
aware that a serious incident had happened, but I was tinaware what had took place
not was I aware of the gravity of the situation.
I saw i s two supporters j h c k x b d c rim onto the pitch $ x f e E j p b c x ± H and begin to gesticulate
to the Forest supt>orters in an aggressive manner. This only aggraveted the sitHfttion
and the pressure on the cordon {increased as Forest supporters pushed harder on the
cordon in an effort to feet to the Liverpool supporters. A cordon of Folice Officers
was then placed accross the middle of the pitch which calmed the situation.
As it became odd obvious that a serious incident had happened the Kop became ^pdaoritKtit
■pod: calmed. I then turned my attention to what was happening on the pitch and
at the Leppins lane end. I saw ambulances taking people away and more people being
treated and carried off on stretchers.
I remained on the Spion Kop untill we were ordered to usher people from the ground
I had no personal contact or further information which I can give, regarding the
events which happened on tje ^eppins Lane side of the ground.
At 7po that day following the debrief in the North Standof theground I ended my tour of
duty.
