V-r r-trt   C & lO l           j

                l^\IL&v^           U-   c(


                  .    pj
                       i


                           CLWos - p. i^.


ovc.
                           JACK CLOKE PS 965 -   SERIAL 40


                        fC f DIVISION PROSECUTIONS DEPARTMENT



At 8.30 am, Saturday 15th April 1989, I paraded for duty at Main Street Police

Station, Rotherham.    I there met up with other members of my serial and together

we set off for the Hillsborough Stadium at about 9-00 am arriving at about

9-25 am.   I then liaised with Inspector Meek and at 9.55 am the serial paraded

in the North Stand for briefing.     After briefing at about 10.30 am we took meal

and then left the stadium and made our way on foot to Halifax Road to commence

phase one which was reception     of Liverpool coaches.


On arrival at Halifax Road I deployed officers in pairs spread out along Halifax

Road on the Barnsley bound carriageway from the junction with Cowper Road to the

junction with Wilcox Road.     Two Policewomenin the serial were deployed in listing

all coaches arriving by obtaining the proprietors name and the registration mark

of each vehicle.     Two coaches were already parked at the location.   All passengers

had left the vehicles prior to our arrival and these vehicles contained drivers

only.   Traffic using Halifax Road was fairly light until about 12 noon when I

noticed a steady build up, particularly of private vehicles.      Many fans were

arriving in private cars, mini buses and Transit type vehicles.      These were being

parked up on the sevice roads adjacent to Halifax Road and in side streets in

the vicinity.


Another two or three coaches arrived between approximately 12 noon and 12.45 pm.

All passengers were good humoured and did not present us with any problems.        I

made a point of boarding each coach and speaking to all passengers via the coach

microphone system.     My intention was to 'set the m ood 1 and in doing so explain

in a friendly way what was required of them and to inform everyone present that

bottles, cans, banners etc. would not be allowed.      Any such items they may have

had in their possession therefore would be best kept well away from the ground.

This they accepted well and left quite good humoured and in what I would describe

as good spirits.
                                -   2   -                                     Q p ^ ICj-
Coaches came in steadily until about 1.45 pm after which time they began to arrive

in considerable numbers.   I continued to board as many coaches as possible working

this duty in conjuction with Inspector Meek and Sergeant Doyle but on occasions

we had difficulty in keeping up with the numbers that were arriving.            Out of a

total of 53 or 54 coaches that arrived, we managed to board something like 40

or 45 and get the message across to fans.


The vast majority were good humoured and accepted what was said to them without

question.   I noticed that not all fans were leaving coaches and heading in the

general direction of the ground.            A good number of them were visiting public houses,

clubs and off licensed premises and a considerable number were in possession of

cans or bottles of alcohol.


We continued coach reception until about 2.40 pm when the last vehicle in the column

was at a point opposite Southey Green Road.            One vehicle was leaking diesel oil

badly and I contacted ground control via the radio and requested the attendance

of the fire brigade to swill away diesel and also            to standby due to the fire risk.

The fire brigade arrived a short time later and I left the scene.            With other

members of the serial we commenced to slowly walk along Halifax Road towards the

ground.


At this time I saw two or three large groups of fans making their way slowly from

the White Horse Public House.       By this time many of them were under the influence

of drink although I do not recollect seeing anyone who I would describe as being

drunk.    Many were quite merry and boistrous.          I saw a large number of cans and

bottles had been deposited on the footpath and grass verges and garden walls.

At 2.45 pm I was at the junction with Kilner Way and it occurred to me that a

good number of the fans would not reach the ground in time for the start at 3-00 pm.


We made our way to the junction of Claywheels Lane when at about 3.02 pm a message

was passed over the radio that all officers were to attend the ground immediately.

Together with a group of officers consisting of several of my own serial and several

of another, boarded a police van and attended immediately at the ground, arriving
                             -   3   -




at about 3.04 pm.


I entered the Leppings Lane entrance and went into the enclosure at the rear of

the West Stand.     The scene was one of utter chaos.        Many hundreds of people were

milling around aimlessly and I could see that there were a considerable number

of injured persons lying on the gound in the vicinity of the tunnel entrance

leading to the terrace of the West Stand.


Many people appeared to be in shock and a good number had consumed alcohol.            The

smell of alcohol was quite strong even in the open air.


Although there was no message over the radio at this time I sensed that something

was very wrong inside the gound.           I would describe the atmosphere as being 'uneasy

calm'.   It was my opinion that a nasty situation could have developed had large

numbers of people emerged from the ground via the tunnel as many of these casualties

and people attending to them would have been trampled on.          I then spoke to several

constables from another serial as by now I had become detached from my own, to

start lifting casualties and placing them outside the ground perimeter wall near

to the River Don.     I personally assisted in lifting some 12-15 injured persons

to the relative safety of this area.


Ambulances began to arrive and had difficulty in reaching us due to sheer numbers

of people milling around at the Leppings Lane area.           I then assisted in clearing

a passage for the ambulances.            I liaised with ambulance personnel   and directed

them to where they were needed.


I then returned to the enclosure and assisted in carrying out more injured and

this time taking them direct to waiting ambulances.            It was here that I took hold

of one casualty and realised that he was dead.            He was a youth of 18-20 years

dressed in blue jeans and I believe a blue coloured shirt.            This body was placed

adjacent to the River Don near to the fencing at the top of the river bank.               Other

bodies were lying nearby and in total I counted some eleven bodies which had been

placed in this location.
The forecourt area was gradually being cleared of casualties but many people

were still milling around looking for friends or relatives.     Many were in deep

shock and several in an almost hysterical condition.


At a   time which I would guess would have been 3-20 to 3-25 pm I was approached

by a   fire brigade officer wearing a white helmet.    I believe his rank was       thatof

Station Officer and he asked me where he and his men were needed.     Although I had

not entered the area into the tunnel due to the fact that I had not had time and

indeed had more than enough to cope with on the outside, it was now obvious to me

that   there were many more casualties inside the ground and I suggested to him     that

they   would best be employed inside the ground itself.   The two fire crews with    him

entered the ground via the tunnel to which I had directed them.


Ambulances began arriving quite frequently and the next period was occupied with

loading them with casualties and getting them away to hospital.


It was at this stage that I became aware of a different mood of a considerable

number of fans.   A group of some four or five youths all of which appeared to be

under the influence of drink, were standing in the enclosure and screaming

obscenities at police officers.   Comments such as 'People are dying in there and

you lot are doing nothing about it' were being made by several people and their

mood had become very angry and abusive.



The chaos began to unfold and a degree of order was emerging in that all the dead

were placed in one area which was now screened off by barriers and tarpaulin sheets

many of the injured had been removed to hospital and many of the friends and

relatives had also left the scene to go to hospital with them.     A line of police

officers extended infront of the barriers to give additional privacy from the

fans that were now leaving the West Stand and filing past into Leppings Lane thus

preventing them from viewing these bodies and obviously the possibility of a

public order situation.



Fans were now slowly leaving the West Stand and here many of them were still being

quite hostile towards police officers.    The bulk of supporters from this end of
                                    -   5   -




    the ground slowly cleared and the ground emptied.        I assisted in then loading

    the eleven bodies into ambulances which then tookthem to the temporary mortuary

    in the gymnasium.   All were male in the      18-35 age group.   I could not describe

    in detail how they were dressed.        Radio reception had been quite good throughout

    the day even when I was   some 1$ miles from the ground at Halifax Road.       I did

    not however receive any   transmissions from just after 3-00 pm onwards until

    a message was received at about 4.45 pm.       This was for all officers to re-form

    in the West Stand for a de-briefing.


    After de-briefing I then re-formed my serial and at about 5.45 pm we walked to

    Claywheels Lane Garage to await transport for Rotherham.


    The remainder of serial 40 were stood down from duty at 7-00 pm except PC 1961

    Lawrence who had stayed on at Hillsborough in connection with mortuary duties.




f   IPS 965 CL0KE
