Incident re Hillsborough.
Martyn Andrew Suter P.C 1925*
Rotherham. 'B* group.

    At 8.30am on Saturday, 15th April 1989 I paraded on duty at Main Street Police
Station Botherham in full uniform for duties at Hillsborough Football Ground. I
was assigned to serial k2 under the supervision of Sgt. 2171 Keenan and partnered
for the day by P.C 10^ Bovill.
    The serial attended a briefing at Hillsborough at 9a® before taking a packed meal
and moving out to a point on Halifax Road outside the petrol service station in company
with P.C Bovill. She basis of this duty being to supervise the arrival of Liverpool
fans arriving in that area.
    Throughout the day the quantity of fans arriving at this location steadily grew.
There general demeanour was good being in festive mood many were singing and shouting
and the majority, certainly of the younger fans, were carrying several cans of beer
each. In fact the major question asked on the day was where the nearest public house
was that was open. As the day progressed to beyond 2pm the area was extremely busy
and some problems arose with fans going to urinate behind and adjacent to the shops
which are overlooked by private houses. These people were moved along and the general
state of the people passing at this time was dnsiderably more drunken though the persons
spoken to for any reason all had tickets to the ground.
    At 2*^5pm we made our way further down the road approximately 100 yards to outside
the public house junction Halifax Road and Southey Green Lane. This area was littered
with beer cans and glasses from the pub were spread around the area. It was apparent that
    pub had been extremely busy. Shortly before 3pn the serial as a whole moved off
towards Claywheel Lane to take a meal break.
    At the junction of Claywheels Lane I saw several other serials making their way towardd
the ground in a hurridd fashion. It was from these units that we were informed to attend
at the ground as there was a major public order problem at that location. A passing
Police transit vehicle conveyed the serial to the Leppings Lane end of the ground where
other officers were already in attendance. The mood of the crowd at this location was
extremely hostile becoming increasingly so as even the fans with tickets were told they
were not to be allowed access to the ground at this time due to the problems within. Other
emrgency services arrived at the scene and some considerable difficulty was met in
attempting to clear the fans away f om the gates to allow access. Officers were geneaally
met with abuse. The serial was instructed to remain outside the ground and supervise
the public order situation at this location.
    As the extent of the incident within the ground was filtered to the putside and fans
were emerging from the ground screaming and shouting abuse at the officers outside. I
felt that at this time any wrong move by any officer would have resulted in major
repurcussions and injuries to the Police at this location such was the degree of hostility.
It was necessary to stand and take a bombardment of abuse and threats.
 _ On the ground being emptied we made our way back towards Claywheels Lane encountering
^^iolent confrontation a short distance along the road between a local man, who had takeh
several young fans into his home and arranged for their parents to come from Liverpool to
collect them as they were extremely distressed and a drunken Liverpool fan who had abused
his assistance. Other fans removed the Liverpool supporter and I walked and calmed the
local man back to his home. He was extremely upset and angry at the abuse he had received.
We continued to traffic control duties before mealing and returning to Rotherham to go
off duty.
    At no point did I enter the main stadium or handle any of the deceased.




                                                                       Police Constable 1925
