                                                                                            M IR .15


 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                 Date and time raised
                                                                                                       Number

 Title _                            •     /^.qQ jSU       f /oc^ stoh S _
 I Include source and any document number if relevant)


 Receiver's instructions - urgent action - ^ f s /N o     ib-Pf h     y t^ ju C   J.   /J
                                                                                                                        Receiver



 Document registered/indexgd-er-indicated                                                                               Indexer
 No(s) of actions raised

Statement reader's instructions             1 U(_,
                                                                                                                Statement Reader



Indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                        Indexer
No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken
                                                                                                                ,0 /M         SIO




Further action No(s)
                                                                                                                    Indexer

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                    South Yorkshire

 Probation                                          Probation Service
                                                    Chief Probation Officer
                                                    John Hicks

 in South Yorkshire                                 11a Arundel Gate
                                                    Sheffield S1 2PQ
                                                    Telephone: (0742) 726477


        JDH/KAH                    cf          19th April 1989


        Mr W. Whalley
        Head of S6 Department
        Home Office
        Queen Anne's Gate
        London
        SW1H 9AT


        Dear Mr Whalley

        On behalf of Mr Roger Hewstfene who is a Probation
        Officer in Merseyside, I enclose his eye witness account
        of some events leading up to the tragedy at Hillsborough
        football ground on Saturday 15th April 1989.   Your
        name and designation was obtained from Police H ead­
        quarters in Sheffield.

        I hope this report will assist you in your enquiry.

        Yours sincerely




        John Hicks
        Chief Probation Officer.



R1442
                                                                               J
                       MEMORANDUM

                                         18th April, 1989
                                   Date........           .....
        Enquiry Chairman - Hillsborough Disaster
To:   ...... ... .......................
       Mr. Roger Hewstone - C/0             Probation Office
From: .....................,.J

Subject:... ............... ............


        Please find enclosed a copy of my observation
        of events at Hillsborough on 15th April.
        These were compiled from rough notes completed
        the same evening and a more careful draft
        drawn up on 16th April.

       Having now seen certain film of events outside
       and talked to others who were present at the
       ground, I think it likely that I may be able
       to amplify some parts of my evidence, especially
       if I were to speak to someone from the Enquiry
       team who had intimate knowledge of the sequence
       of events that day.  Sight of any additional
       film from such as the BBC might also jog my
       memory.  I am concerned that any evidence I
       might hold is not lost too quickly in the passage
       of time.

        I have already given my particulars to the
        press office at the main Sheffield Police
        Station, clearly indicating the nature of
        my evidence though not in any detailed terms.
        This telephone call was made on 17th April,
        though as yet I have heard nothing further.
        I was told that Officers would be getting back in
        touch with me on the same day that I rang.
     My son (15) and I boarded a full Eavesway coach at Ashton-in-Makerfield,

Greater Manchester, which left at 11.45am.            I was told by the company that they

had 3 other coaches going to Sheffield for the match.            At first we assumed

our route would be the usual M62 - Ml, which for last year’s semi-final

had brought us to the ground well before 2pm.            The driver, acting on company

orders to avoid anticipated delays on the M62 due to lane restrictions, took

us instead via Sheffield and the Woodhead Pass and the mood on our coach

became angry and frustrated when we were held up in heavy traffic in

Stockport and on the road to Glossop for over 1$ hours.           Most were resigned

at this stage to missing the start of the match.            Feelings ran high again

when the driver later avoided a more direct route to Sheffield and went

instead onto the Ml to the following junction for the customary police
                                                          i
check, which took place at 2.10pm.       I have since wondered whether the late

arrival of coaches at this checkpoint was communicated to those responsible

for crowd supervision at Hillsborough.            The roads were quite clear by now

and we made easy progress towards Hillsborough.            The driver, under

pressure from passengers, twice tried to stop for disembarkment near the

end of the Leppings Lane but was refused permission by police.            As a result

we had to park about half to three quarters of a mile away to join the line

of other coaches.   The time was now 2.30 - 2.35pm.




     We both jogged towards the ground, which was not easy as we had to

keep dodging amongst the large number of Liverpool fans who were steadily

(not hastily) walking towards the ground.           As usual there were numerous

teenagers enquiring if fans had spare tickets for sale.            Our arrival

outside the ground was 2.35 - 2.40pm and we immediately split up as my

son had a stand ticket and we could see that his entrance gates were not

too heavily congested.




                                     -    1   "
     I then attempted to find the best way into the terraced section.          This

proved difficult because"a wedge of fans seemed stuck by the first set of

gates and entrance looked to be limited to one door-way.          Further ahead I

could see full queues at the turnstiles.          There was no real place to join

the wedge of fans outside as it was not in any way a queue and no forward

movement was taking place.     Numbers did not seem excessive and I was able

to stand freely on the pavement by the stone bridge.          The only immediately

visible police presence seemed to be 3 mounted officers.          In view of the

stalemate nature of the position I withdrew from the crowd and stood in the

road itself, amongst a number of others, before noticing a few who were stood

at the   top   of a 10 metre highbank on the other side of the road.       From this

position I was able to view the whole area with ease between 2.40 and 2.55pm.




     Just before I went up on the bank, I observed the speedy arrival of a

land-rover, with a fixed outside loud-hailer.          The officer using this loud-

hailer could well have been the flat-capped officer, an inspector I think,

whom I saw on the BBfi news, who was then moving on foot amongst the crowd.               (I

felt this footage must have been    shot      prior to 2.35 - 2.40pm as I could

not see the land-rover and the crowd was far larger than I witnessed on

my arrival)- I saw him stand on the step of the vehicle and urge the crowd

on 2 or 3 occasions to hold back and be patient in order to relieve the

pressure on the gates.     He was also giving instructions to the 3 mounted

officers but they seemed not to be moving with any purpose or intent.          The

officer then twice called in an urgent voice, for "the mounted inspector".

There seemed to be no response to this request.          The crowd were then told

(2.45 - 2.50pm), on the loud-hailer that an attempt was being made to put

back the time of the kick-off (3.15 may have actually been mentioned).             None

of these words had any effect on the crowd position which seemed to have

remained much the same as when I first arrived, though there was a more

noticeable build-up of fans (the ones we first ran past) along Leppings Lane.




                                      -   2   -
      The officer by the land-rover then raised himself above the crowd and

gesticulated in what I thought was a frantic manner towards officers who

were behind the blue gates at the side of the terraced turn-stiles.       His

action was an obvious one, stretching his arms out straight, flats of his

hands together, and then opening them rapidly in a scissor-like fashion.

As a consequences of this action, the large blue gates on the right opened

inwards and there were a substantial ingress of fans for about a minute,

possibly a minute and a half.     In that time I could see a solid phalanx

of fans, maybe 10 to 12 abreast, moving quickly through the gate.       The

movement extended back to the gate where fans were being admitted into

the turnstile area.     In fact this gate and the double blue-door were in a

line with each other, thus assisting the flow of people.       At this time,

there were still queues 20 or 30 deep at each of the turnstiles and many

of these peeled away to join the throng going through the open gates.          I

saw uniformed police tapping these fans on the shoulder and pointing to

the open gates.     I estimated that several hundred fans, possibly more,

entered the ground by this means between 2.45 - 2.50pm.       I did not see

whether these fans entered the terraced area through the central tunnel

or from the side openings.




      Within a minute or two of the right hand gates being shut, I

saw the equivalent gates being opened on the stand turn-stiles (numbered

A to C ) .   I could see about 8 helmeted policemen then standing in the opening

as fans passed through.    The officers may have been looking at tickets

but I could not be sure of this. I was doubtful if this was the case as

the movement of fans was again quite quick.       Those fans with or without

terrace tickets would have had access to these gates, though these were also

closed after a minute or just over.       There is no question that these two

gates were fully opened, alternatively, for at least up to a minute between

2.45 - 2.50pm.



                                      -   3   -
     Having    tio w   seen the BBC evening news on 16th April, which showed the

footage of the crowd assembling in Lepping Lane, I am positive that those

scenes occurred prior to my arrival at 2.40pm.               The cameraman must have

filmed from a similar position to my own view from the banking, yet there

was no sign of the land-rover.        The crowd, which was substantially filling

the road, was also greater than at the time of my arrival.               I also saw on

the film the flat-capped Inspector, who I now think retreated from the

scene to commandeer the land-rover with the loud-hailer.               Certainly his

face on the newsfilm looked very familiar to me as the officer I saw

controlling events from the land-rover.               On the film it showed police

at the edge of the gates leading to the turnstiles, lifting a semi-conscious

child out of the crowd and I saw no sign of this during my period of

observation.      The inspector looked to me to be in a beleagured and pressured

situation.




     When the press of the crowd subsided at 2.55pm, I made my way over to the

first gates, which I was able to pass through with ease.               By this time

there were only a handful of people at the turnstiles and entrance to the

ground was a formality.        As I passed into the turnstile approaches,

uniformed police were ushering about 6 teenage fans out of the ground because

they had no tickets.        An officer then approached me and said, "you can't

get in here without a ticket."        He then allowed me through on production

of my ticket.




     I seem to recall that the roar which always greets the kick-off

occurred as I was going through the turnstiles and I saw only a few fans

in the area leading to the tunnel underneath the stand.               In fact I relieved

myself against the wall outside the toilet (adjacent to the tunnel entrance),

because so few people were around and there was a sea of urine to negotiate

before even reaching the proper toilets.              Never having stood on the

Hillsborough terraces before, I had no idea that there were two side entrances


                                          -   4   -
to the viewing area and simply walked down the sloping concrete ramp underneath

the stand towards the back of the terracing behind the goal.




     By this time the match was in progress, as I could partially observe

by standing 3 or 4 metres back from the tunnel exit and taking advantage

of the slope by looking at some of the pitch between the ceiling and the

tops of people's heads.    For a few minutes I was able to watch play switch

from one end of the ground to the other.        Perhaps a dozen fans came past

me in this 5 minute period, forcing their way into the back of the crowd.

I had already decided against this action because I was uncertain a;s to the

true position on the terraces.   My apprehension was soon borne out      when       3 or

4 adults extricated themselves from this crowd, with obvious difficulty, and

recovered themselves in the empty passageway.       Two were breathing

excessively and one was sweating profusely.       Someone said it was worse

than Heysal clown there.   I then saw, for the only time, a small squat

man in a dull yellow plastic top, who was evidently a steward.        (This was

printed in small letters on the lower back of his top).       He walked up to the

rear of the crowd, though I can't recall if he went in or came away.          The

rear of the crowd behind the goal were packed but stationary between 3.00 -

3.05pm and there was no sign of concern or panic.       None at the back attempted

to move away.




     Whilst play was still in motion,       I pondered whether there might not

be another entrance to the terraced section and accordingly retreated down the

passage, turning left past the refreshment kiosk.       I then saw that there was

an opening to the terraces by the corner flat, close to the police control

box, which I had seen on previous visits to the ground.       Again it proved

impossible to break into the crowd because of the throng and I think play

was halted as I approach this section.




                                    -   5   -
       I then stayed in this position until 3.45 - 3.50pm at which point there

was increasing rumour that the game had been abandoned.        During these 45

minutes I saw perhaps 10 - 15 people, many young women, who were coming off

the terraces in distressed states, either caused by physical or emotional

trauma.    I was able to see part of the pitch and saw the frantic attempts

to resuscitate one fan by the side touch-line.        Only at this point did the

thought strike me that people might be dying.        Odd comments from fans

later led me to think that a few people may have died in a crush, somewhere

on the terraces.




       At 3.45pm I moved out of the ground as it was apparent that the

stadium was being emptied.     I took up position 50 yards along Lepping Lane,

in Order to look for my son who eventually same along, ashen-faced, about

4.30pm.   He of course had not known that I had held back from entering

the terraces.    During this period I witnessed most of the fans exiting

from   both   stands and terraces.     People filed past me in grim mood.     Many

I would describe as walking wounded, with breathing difficulties or

clutching damaged limbs.     Almost all the females were distraught and being

consoled by their companions.        Other males were talking out loud to

themselves, clearly reliving events, whilst the more vociferous and

emboldened were approaching uniformed and mounted police and berating them

in the strongest manner possible for having been responsible for causing

people to be murdered.     In other circumstances, I am sure police would not

have tolerated such verbal abuse but, wisely in my view, they gave no

reaction to such taunts.     To have done so would unquestionably have

sparked a mini-riot because the mood of some fans was extremely ugly.




                                                             Mr. Roger G. Hewstone,
                                                             C/0 The Probation Office.


                                                             Merseyside.
                                                             Tel:
16th April, 1989
