                                                                                       M I R . 15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and time raised                               Number
                                                                                                                     i32?{
Title
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action - Y e s /M ^   l/CoP)    ^ //f '   P@   %
                                                                                                                    Receiver


                                                                                                               S ’? * * }
                                                                                                                    Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised          ^   j   ^            ^                                                       S-5C-2..
                                                                                                             Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                        O /M         SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                             L on d o n


Lord Justice   Ta y lo r




DOc/   Sia-etcs^j

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - EVIDENCE

      Whilst   not wishing to block your telephone "evidence" lines
by   providing duplicate    information,  we thought/that we should
write to record what my husband and I witnessed /bn 15th April and
that   if you    wanted  further   information  fpom us, you  could
telephone    us during  the   day on             for drop us a line
asking us to telephone you.

      We  sat towards  the  middle of the  North stand, four  rows.
back.    Almost immediately  that  the matcn naa  started, we knew
that   something was happening at the West  end of the ground, due
to   a growing presence of police.  We were not surprised when the
game was stopped.

      Fans   poured onto the pitch; no one knew what was happening;
loudspeakers    could not be heard above the       crowd's roar.       We saw
the   entire   football   pitch    fill   up with   fans and       policemen.
Having   read the accounts etc.,      we would believe that         policemen
and fans near the crush were more than helpful, but in the middle
of   the pitch    (all that   we could    see) there   were hundreds        of
people,    both policemen , some 200-300 we       would guess, and fans,
some   500 or soy milling around.     Policemen attempting to round up
fans   obstructed both ambulances and "stretcher" bearing parties.
Noone   could hear the    requests from ground      staff over the       loud
speakers    to  get   off   the   pitch,   at  least,   not until Kenny
Dalglish    made an appeal to     the crowd.   Even then, when the fans
began to take notice and policemen joined hands in a circle in an
almost half hearted way to round them up the pitch was still full
of   people.   If   only the    crowd had   been told    how serious       the
situation was, we have thought occasionally, they might well have
behaved in a more helpful way and that in turn could perhaps have
helped   the injured and dying to get       out more q u c k l y       All we
knew was     that   something dreadful     was happening,        rumours were
spread   to the effect that perhaps eight or nine people had died,
but I don't know how many people even believed that.
