                                                                       ■* * »•
                  ♦

               #* * ■                                                    ■:w




        KHUULB % - VUSHIIIQ

                                              if
/ji     Albert Llndloy - Day 5 P-51* «

/$      John Bartholomew - Day 5 p. 72
                                     s                       /
j^>     Louise Hinton - Day 6 p.101 e» p. 103 b

i|^     R.J. Thompson - Day 7 P-13 5*C|>*23 f-g                  /*(

ill     A.P. Jones - Day? p.ff» ^

        Stephanie Jones - Day 8 p. 15

        Robert* Knowles - Day 9 P*^8 b

i/ij- Matthew Could - Day 9 P* 8** c
 t>f
 ^ S’ Simon Berry - Day 10 pp.8 g - 9 b

yj~*J Steven Boardman - Day 10 pp.8? c - 88c, p.88 g-h
                                                    V
j f     Craomo H&rst - Day 11 pp. 4 - 5

/*? T.K. Hilton - Pay 11 p J 1* e-f *"

/to     Graeme Richardson - Day 11 p.36 f #•"'

/»»     R.C. Hewstone - Day 11 p-80 b-c /                _

/(L| Ch. Insp. Greaser - Day 12 p.99 -X
                                  / '
•/f P.C. Grunnlll - Day 16 p.6 c-c, p. I1* f '

:'/< P.C. Kerry - Day 18 p.1* f r"

s/|     D.A. Lackey - Day 18 p.^0 a-c *-*"

5/Ip,.Colin Mil Ion - Day 19 p.'IS b-d x

 /<     Sgt, Proctor - Day 20 p.8 b
                                     '    ^
                                          ^     ^
:/f4» P.C. Scho.ley - Day 20 p.35 b, pp. 36 - 37

«/l? P.C. A. J . Taylor - Day 20 p.48              JXT

 /ii    P.C.    Best - Ray 21 p.32                                               i ^ e c w * j £ tiJffo '(&

 ,/(.   R.W.    Cobb - Day 21 p.7** d-f/                                                                      to*
xj 7    B. RidKC - Day 22 p.6 e-f                                                 H3.
^/t<-{ Sgt. Watson - Day 23 p*5>l C ^

 iflA S.M,      Hughes - Day ?Ji p.33 b
        01         Mj 86         ®dJIS® 730442         ,.     ;.

                                                                                                ”   '
 *




      8CHBMJLB   H - PUSHING (CONTHIUBP)
                       sX     x                ■            **"                                          f         ^ \
s jk Dodd - Day 25 p.65, p.YO e - 71 d, * * & & **, i P «82 f? - fp.83                                              bj

      Langley A. - Day 26 fsslA, p.25 b/c

4/1   Langloy N. - Day 26                p. 1 2 ^ *\ P**30 *>             ^
      P . C . W right - Day 19     8y , ( p. 8 9 ,           p . 92 c / g , ^ * 1 0 1 - f *             J/u /P “
                                      ^a-s'        js!(^''     ^              -#sS!
      drier - Day 24 prii", p.23 a            #   ^ it        2 ft> ^ 2.^ •'■2 3 c. .

      Jonathan Grant - Day 26 p.10

      L.F. Campbell - Day 26 p.7 ^ K. P«78

      Norman Langley - Bay 26 pp. 119 e - 120 b                       ,
                                                                      •               (   ...

      Harry Clark# - Day 40 p. 54 t ^

      Stuart Gray - Day 42 p.8 d-e "

      Graham Seddon - Day 46 p.21 e               X,
                                                            54




                                               A. LINDLEY


     you were standing by the forecourt of your garages? -
     A. Yes.

Q. The Officer is pointing to a place which is where we
   think you were? - A. That is about the entrance to
   the car park.

Q. Is that about where you were standing? - A. Y e s .

Q.        THE CORO NE R:   That is on the northern corner we
     will call   it of Bickerton Road and Leppings Lane.
     Would you agree? - A. Just a little bit further on
     from the corner of Bickerton Road.

Q.        MR.  PAYNE:  Further on towards the stadium or
     towards the roundabout? - A. Towards the roundabout.
     About fifty yards there is about four shops and there
     is the car park.
Q. Mr. Lindley, using your own words and taking your own
   time, explain what you mean by your reference to
   "like putting a lid on a boiling kettle"? Describe
   what you are trying to explain? - A. We could see it
   looked as though there was trouble. There was a
   large number of people outside the ground and we
   could see the Police trying to do something with
   them.  It just looked as though there was something
   boiling up into trouble and we said, "There is going
   to be trouble there" and, of course, this surge of
   people came along. That is what it looked like, a
   lot of people outside the ground, massing, moving
   around, going around, and all trying to push towards
   the turnstiles and then this surge of people came
   along and just pushed them on. They just joined them
   and started pushing.  It was just awful.

Q. For how many years have you been guarding these
   garages on big events? - A. About eight or ten years
   now.

Q. Have you ever seen so many people arriving just
     before the kick-off? - A. No, never so many.
     Normally we get three or four cars round about five
     to three, just on the last two or three minutes.
     They just come in, dump their cars on the side and
     then off they go.  The number of people are usually
     finished by about ten minutes to, five minutes to
     three unless there was a late train of course.
                                                             72




Q. I know you say it did not have any effect on the
   crowd? - A. It did not seem to have, no.

Q. What were people doing at the back of the crowd at
   that time? - A. They were just pushing into the
   crowd.

q   . i do not know what evidence later on the Jury are
      going to hear but where you were, for the sound of
      the announcement to get to you, it had got to come
      from the Land Rover and across the road where you
      were standing clear of the crowd? - A. You see, where
      we were, how can I put it....

Q. I am sorry to interrupt you and I beg your pardon but
   what I want to find out is, from where you were do
   you think the crowd could not hear what was being
   said? - A. I wouldn't think so.  It was in their
   earholes more or less, you know.  That Land Rover was
   completely surrounded by people.

Q. They were closer to the Land Rover than you were? -
   A. They would be touching it. I was 40 yards away
   and I heard it as plain as the day.

Q. You had left home at twenty minutes or quarter to
   three. By the time you got down there and were
   outside the ground it must have been getting near
   kick-off but can you be more accurate than that? - A.
   We set off at a slow walk but with the momentum of
   the people we had to keep up with them because we
   were getting pushed.  So I would imagine it would be
   ten minutes to three-ish or near that time.

Q. When you got to the bridge you have told the Coroner
   that there were some people sitting? Whereabouts on
   the bridge were they? There is a photograph which
   has been very helpfully put up on the screen? - A.
   They were all sat on the pavement on that side of the
   bridge.

Q. They were sat on the pavement on the side of the
   bridge opposite to the entrance? - A. They sat on the
   floor.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   I did not hear the answer.  Could
         you repeat it? - A. They were sat on the floor with
         their backs to the bridge.  There were some stood as
         well but mainly they were all sat.

           MR. PAYNE:   Yes.
                                                               101


                                                    La J . t!I.\iO.'t




0. So you were, in fact, in a position outside that blue
   perimeter gate, that blue concertina gate? - A. Yes, I
   tnink that was open at tiia tiae. iJ/ tae time we got
   tnere taat was open.  There was nobody around.

Q. So Wiie.t aid you ask the Policeman? You aave confused
   me, or I nave confused aiysalf. - A. we had got tnrougn
   the first gate, the perimeter gate, and then we
   approacned tne concertina gate, unicn -aust nave been
   opened, and ha was stood tnere.

0. I wonder it it is easier if we looc at taa pictures?
   Could you put 258 up, please? Can you sea taose, I
   call taen perimeter ’aces - gates wita railings? - A.
   Yes.

0. Than beyond that taere are so ia turnstilas a.:.' t.12.1
   taere is a van there.   Can you see waare tae van is? -
   A. Yes.   Firstly we were stood outs id a tae peri-net er
   gates, rignt to tne rigat hand side.

Q.   .light at the rigat hand side, yes. - A. And^ then waen
     the gates were opened we proceeded to taa rignt and we
     kept going througn, past the van, and ;apt going.

0 . Jhare were you when you as :ed tne Policanan, ".Jhere do
     we go?" and he said, "Get in taa ground"? - A. ,.:e ware
     past the white van.

Q. So tnere was some Police Officer down tnere wno.n you
   wera abla to spaa’c to? - A. Yas.

0. unen you first were outsine taosa p«3 rir.eter ~ates ..■are
   tney snut, because yon said tney wera opened? - A. I
     think tae/ were snut baaause tnere was a Police~an on
     norseoack right outside an: nobody was -.aoving,
     e v e r y d a y was just pusain^ forward, so taey nust have
     been close.        I couldn't really sea.

0 . So you say tne gates were snut,   Caere was a Police
     Officer and people were pusai-ig Lorwarc? - . xas.

0. And taen they opened but you diun't sea now taat
   aappened? - A. l<o.

0. You went a Ion •» tnere as you described .iiy: you entered
   tnrouga taase blue gates? - A. Yes.

 0 . havin', ?,ot in,I think in fact you a,jJi.*oacna:: a
     steward, is taat ri ;nt? - A. Yes, tnere »’is a staward
     stood to tne rig.it.

 C. Of taat gate? - A. As you want taroa; 1, an-: I tain : it
    was tha st-iirs taat you 20 u.:-, aa id- .;as st.od tnara
                                                          103




    ✓
.jova at all, couldn't 50 o a z x , couldn t no anythin,,,
    and I just got pusnad to tne lett an~. Andrew went one
    way and I want the otnar, and I disappeared arse ha
    disappeared, and that was tne last I saw of .n n.

Q. Until later? - A. Until later, yes.

0. Did you near, whilst you ware on tne terrace, din you
   near people shouting? - A. Yes.   Once wa .-ot t.irougn
   tne tunnel people were snouting,   Sto;. 'us.nn      ..
   oanind, wa are* getting crusned nere, .nova hac < , out 11
   didn't na <3 any difference, it was just getting worse.

c.. Put t;ie terrace plan up, would you,   tne one fo..
    inar;:in:.




                       /Inat is a plan .....
                                             R. J. THOMPSON




    THE CORONER:      That is C293.

             Cross-Examined by t'.R. HALE

You have been to many matches before, I assume? - A.
Yes.

The crushing that occurred outside the turnstiles on
this occasion, had you ever experienced crushing like
taat before? - A. No.

The pressure was obviously very great there? - A. Yes.

v.;as it contained only by the structure of the
turnstiles? - A. Oh, yes.

If they aadn't been tnere wiiat would nave Happened to
that crowd of people? - A. well if tney nad collapsed
they would have all died, I think.

iio, assume tnat there was some less substantial
structure there, say crowd barriers, you know, the
portable kind, or even a line of Policemen standing
across trying to hold tnat crowd back, would tney have
succeeded? - A. I am not really sure what you are
really after.   It tnere nad been anything less strong
tnan tnat it would have gone.

It would have gone? - A. Yes.

Yes, that is what I was asking you, because wnen you
got inside the tunnel and onto the stand, the stand
itself is fairly wide, altnough it is divided cown into
segments,  uas it tne same sort of pressure that cane
from behind when you were down on the stand as the
pressure tnat you had experienced at the turnstiles? -
A. No, the pressure inside was greater.

Tnank you.

             Cross-Exaiiined by .^R. PAYN5

■ir. Tnonpson, on the question of the attempts to
control the crowd outside the turnstiles, I wonder if
you can be shown soiae photograpns, please, beginning
witn tne Coroner's nucnoer 232.

ii^. PAYN£:  I am not sure if this in in the Jury's
bundle, sir.  It was not part of tne original bundle,
but it is the one wnicn was proaucec ....

     THE COROii£rl:   We nave got it up on tne screen
anyway.
                                                11QH FSQN

Because you see your words originally were, "I only
saw one either Police Constable or Police Sergeant on
horseback"? - A. That is quite correct.

So you walked through the Leppings Larne gate? - A.
No, no. Can I just go back on that one?    I am not
saying I didn't see Policemen.   I am saying at that
particular point of me trying to get in that area.
We will say for example, we will say for argument's
sake, you have got to remember when I actually got
there there was this mass of people there.   Obviously
when we got to the actual corner there was Police
there.  I am not disputing that-   I am not disputing
any of it actually but what I am saying is that there
was definitely Police on that particular corner.    All
I am saying is that the area where I was the only
Constable I seen was on horseback.   It is in them
people I am talking about.  I am not talking about
anywhere else outside or anywhere else.   I am just
talking about that particular point.   I was actually
commenting on the actual situation and I am just
giving them as I was in that position.

I think we are only trying to clarify the point? - A.
I am sorry, I am sorry.

It just sounded from what you said, you see, as you
will appreciate from what I have read to you, that
the only Police Officer you had seen was one either
Sergeant or Constable on horseback.   Clearly in
answer to my learned friend, Mr. Payne, you have
acknowledged there were a lot of Officers around? -
A. There is no question about it.   I am talking about
the particular point of view of trying to get some
sort of order, that is all I am trying to say.   What
you have got to remember, even looking at that
photograph, I was probably stuck in the front of that
lot anyhow.  I wouldn't see them Policemen even at
the back of the actual crowd.

The Policeman who was on horseback, is that the
Policeman whose horse is just at the side of the gate
there.  Is that the one we are talking about? - A. To
be quite honest with you, I will describe personally
myself a photograph of this.  The actual horse and
rider probably just before - I wouldn't like to say
how long before, maybe a minute or two minutes, time
does not matter at that point - the horse nearly went
down amongst the crowd.  He was actually in the crowd
and the horse nearly fell as I was more or less
alongside of it.
forward slowly but then it just stopped and more people
were coning behind us.

So initially the tunnel was clear then I think the
tunnel begins to slope downward? - A. Yes.

Uas it as it was beginning to slope? - A. No, it was
just at the bottom of the slope.

At the bottom of the slope, and there was a crowd of
people there? - A. Yes.

Which was in fact blocking tne tunnel? - A. Yes.

And that crowd at that point was stationary? - A. Yes.

And you could just see the players on the field at that
point, is that right? - A. Yes.

Can you remember whether they were actually playing or
not? - A. I can't really recall.

3ut they are definitely on the field? - A. Yes.

You stopped, right? - A. Yes.

What happened then? - A. Well, we were stationary and
more people were coming in behind us, and it just got
tighter and tighter and tighter.

Witnin the tunnel? - A. Yes.

What happened then? - A. Well, it got to a point where
I was literally getting - I had no control of where I
was going - I was literally getting like lifted and
pushed to certain areas.

So in other words what you are saying is that initially
the crowd was stationary? - A. Yes.

You joined them and you were quite prepared to be
stationary as well? - A. Yes.

People came behind you and tnen pressure built up frora
behind, is that right? - A. Yes.

So there was pushing from behind, not to put too fine a
point on it? - A. well, yes.

And you lost control of your movements? - A. Yes.

And you were carried with a mass of people forward onto
the terraces? - A. Yes.
                                                    S. L. JONES




0. which second gate are we talkin’ about? - A. Gate C.

O. Gate C? - A. Yes.

Q.   That is that gate over there, in fact? - A. Yes.

Q.   vihat was he trying to do as far as you coull tell? - A.
     He was trying to split tne crowd.

0. Was he having any success? - A. No.

0.   Is that because nobody took any notice of hi:.i? - A. U o,
     it was just the sheer amount of people there was.    He
     just nad no chance on his own, and there was just
     nobody else around.  It was just it was an impossible
     task for him to perform.

0. So the only way he could have succeeded would have been
   if everybody had obeyed aini instantly? - A. N’o, I think
   if he had nad more manpower it would nave helped,
   rather than if everyone had obeyed him.

Q. I agree with you there, obviously the more people you
   nave the easier a task becomes, but are you saying that
   if people had obeyed him he would still not have had
   any success? - A. I can't really answer that.  I mean,
   I tried to get over to the right because you don't want
   the horse trampling on you, but the sheer amount of
   people you couldn't move that f3r across anyway.

Q. In fact, did the crowd pressure, if anything, beco.-ie
   even stronger at tnat point? - A. Yes, it did.

0. Did you feel uncocnf or table at that point? - A. Yes.

Q. were you a bit worried about yourself? - A. Yes, I got
   pushed right up against the gate and ray a m was
   trapped.

0. So rea lly you were in quite a difficult position tnen,
   weren't you? - A. Yes.

0. Tracey was still near you and so was Richard, is that
   right? - A. Yes.

0. And I take it they were in tne same sort of condition
   as you were? - A. Yes.

0. There were another two Police Officers, weren't taere,
   wiio.-n you mentioned? 'Where were they? - A. They were
   out of the crowd towards tne back, I did notice.

0. Could you see what they were trying to do? - A. Wo, I
   couldn't see.
                                                                     48


                                                  it„4, jq K w m s


          - A. I think they were very frustrated in tryin* to gain
          access to the ground.     The ones at the back were pushing and
          saying, "Come on.  L e t ’s get in", and the ones at the front
          knowing there was nowhere for them to go were shouting back,
_        "Please, stop pushing.     People are actually getting crushed
"        in the front part.   Please ease back", but in a situation like
          that you can't really hear or understanding.        You are just
          pushing forward trying to gain access.     I d o n ’t think they
          could hear anything being shouted from the front.

    Q. Did you hear any loudspeakers? - A. I saw a Policeman with a
       megaphone actually came from by the concertina gate and walked
       the other side of me, so I d o n ’t really hear what he was
       shouting.

    Q. You could not hear what was being said? - A. No, because I was
       on the other side of him.

    Q. I am not saying he did, but if he had shouted something about
       the timing of the game you would not have heard it? - A. No, I
       would not.

    Q.    Is that because there was such a lot of noise going on? - A.
D         It was quite noisy, people shouting.

    Q.    I am not saying he said that.   Don't get me wrong. - A. No.

    Q. Then eventually in fact you heard Officers discuss opening the
       gate? - A. We were standing right by the gate, and there was a
       line of Officers there.  I think it was a Sergeant, I remember
       I was standing particularly by him, and he did start to
       discuss the possibility of opening this gate to ease some of
       the pressure from the crowd.  They were saying if they kept
       the perimeter gates closed and eased the people by the
       turnstiles through, this may be a way of stopping, unblocking
       the turnstiles and allowing people outside to actually then to
       start to move forward.  So I stayed with the boys by that
       gate, expecting perhaps we might get through that way.

    Q.    It was your hope that would happen? - A. Yes.

    Q.    As an aside, have you ever gone through a gate as opposed       to a
          turnstile? - A. No.

    Q. In fact, that is precisely what did happen, the gate did open?
       - A. Yes.   The Policeman with the megaphone I think went
       inside, and then after perhaps a couple of minutes came back
       out, and I think it was the Sergeant that was standing by got
       a message over his radio.   I remember distinctly standing
       right by and he put his message, it was mentioned, "The gate
       will open".   He enquired, "Open the gate?".  I remember him
       saying, "Open the gate?", and it came back across the radio,
       "Yes". So he then went to the gate and knocked on the gate,
       and it was opened, slightly at first.   The 20 or 30 people
       that had been milling around that area then moved towards it.
       I think I was about two or three behind.   I was offering my
       tickets, but there was nobody even bothered about that.    The



H
                                                    M.~C. GOULD



Whilst you were out there looking in, so to speak,
you were an observer? - A. Yes.

What was happening to the crowd on this side of the
gates? - A. They were trying to get through to the
other side of them, pushing.

How could you tell that? What gave you that
impression? - A. The way that they were trying to
push through the gates that were open and to try and
open the gates that were shut.

How were they trying to open the gates that were
shut? - A. Either by physically opening them or by
asking or shouting at other people to open them.

Could you hear that with your own ears? - A. I could
not hear the words but you could guess what they were
saying by their gestures.

 Could you see whether the gate was moving?  I do not
 mean opening but moving backwards and forwards? - A.
 No, I couldn't.

 You could not see that? - A. No.

 So you are making a bit of an assumption there, that
 they were trying to open that gate? - A. I mean, I
 wouldn't have thought it was an assumption.  If
 people are trying to get through then they would need
 to open the gate.

 Okay.  I am not trying to catch you out but I am just
 trying to make sure we get it as accurately as we
 can? - A. Yes.

 While this was going on you noticed I think a big
 concertina gate? - A. Yes.

 Which is actually on the plan behind.  Turn round and
 look.  Is that right? - A. Yes.   I could see it
 through the trees because I was standing further
 away.

 I think you noticed that it opened? - A .   Yes.

. It opened slightly? - A. Yes.

. Did anybody get through at that point? - A. Only
  twenty or so at the moment.
                                                 S t ,At ,I B f f -


When you got to that position, not when you got
through, were the gates open or shut? - A. They were
shut.

How were they being secured? - A. By one Policeman.

There are several sets of gates there.  Can you
recollect by chance whether it was the middle set,
the left or the right, or can you not remember? - A.
If I had a map, the one before that?

Yes, it is 254.   Can you see it? - A. Yes, I can.

Those are the perimeter gates which control or guard,
whatever word you care to use, the turnstiles A to G.
Can you remember whether they were all shut, whether
some were open or shut? Which one was secured by the
Policeman? - A. There were some people the other side
of the gates but before the gates were shut and there
were some people the other side of the gates,
whether they had climbed over or whatever, there was
an actual Policeman on the gate but out of these I do
not know which one it was.

If you do not know please say? - A. I wouldn't like
to say.  It was one of those.

It was one or other of those? - A. Yes.

This was a foot Officer, was it? He was not on a
horse? - A. No, he was just ready to open the gates.

What time about would that have been? - A. It must
have been about ten to three, quarter to three.

The gates were shut at that time in your opinion? -
A. Yes.

They were secured, if that is the right word, by a
Police Officer? - A. Yes, whether they were locked or
not I d o n ’t know.

But just saw the one? - A. The one Policeman.

All I am interested in is what you saw.      Did you hear
anything being said within the crowd in which you
were gathered? - A. There were people complaining
because it would be about quarter to three or ten to
three and they w e re n’t in the ground yet.   Then
somebody did shout out that there was only one copper
on the gate and to rush him or push him.      Then there
                                                  S -. A - M B B Y .


was like a big surge from the crowd and obviously the
Policeman couldn't hold all the crowd.   About ten or
twelve people, with the gates opening about two feet,
managed to push through.  With me being like, sort
of, three or four away from the gate with Martin, we
were like pushed through.  We h ad no choice really.

So the s h o u t , did it come from behind you or in front
of you? - A. The shout actually came from in front of
me.  In front of me.

From in front? - A. Yes, it was in front of me.

Did the people in front of you move forward and then
the rest behind you followed or what? - A. It was
just like a universal push.  Everybody pushed.

The gate opened at that point and you got through? -
A. It didn't actually open wide.  The Policeman was
trying to hold the gate and you could see he was
really, really trying to hold it but there was no way
he could hold it against the pressure of people.
Mind you, when we got through there wasn't a steady
flow of people.  There was only ten, twelve, fifteen
people actually got through.




                                 /Q. Did he manage
                                            S . K . BOARDMAN




You didn't know any of the other people, did you?  You
were just with your friends, it was just a coach you
had boarded? - A. Yes.

You d i d n ’t know who was missing, did you? - A. No.

You just knew that there were some empty spaces? - A.
Yes.

Thank you.   You have done very well, I think anyway.

             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

When you went to get on the    coaches before you set    off
from Liverpool, there was a    delay? - A. Yes.

Because there was a bit of pushing? - A. Yes, and the
Police were taking alcohol of anyone who was trying to
take it on the coaches.

Who was doing the pushing? - A. Just people trying to
get on the coaches, just the fans.

Why did this cause a delay? - A. The Police were taking
their time checking everyone's bags and they were
thinking what was the hold up for.

Who was thinking that? - A. The fans - well I think
they were thinking what was the hold up for.

What makes you think that? - A. Because people were
getting on the coaches so slowly, because everybody's
bags were getting searched and all the alconol was
getting took off them.

What was the reaction of the people when they were
being held up like that? - A. Just, "Hurry up, we want
to get there '.

When you got outside the ground you heard someone
shouting through a loudspeaker, 'Stop pushing"? - A.
Yes.

Was anyone pushing? - A. Only the people by the
turnstiles trying to get in, because although it was
all ticket the queue wasn't going down.  It seemed to
stay the same so everybody was going through quite
slowly and people were thinking what was the hold up
again.

 And what were they doing? - A. They were trying to get
 nearer the front to get through the turnstiles.
                                                           88



                                              S.K.   BOARDMAN




Q. How were they doing that? - A. Well there was no
   queues, it was just a massed crowd.

Q. Then you saw Gate C opened and you went and took refuge
   by the river? - A. Yes.

Q. Why did you do that? - A. In our best interests, so we
   wouldn't get hurt in the pushing or the shoving.

Q. Who was pushing and shoving? - A. Just the people
   outside the ground.

Q. When you got into the pen you were trying to get away
   from the pushing? - A. Yes.

Q. Who was pushing? - A. The fans inside.

              Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING

Q. I don't think very many questions from me either.     When
   you were walking down the road from the roundabout,     you
   said, "A lot of people were walking to the ground,    I
   followed the crowd, they were quite well behaved"?    - A.
   Yes.

Q. Tell us about the ones that perhaps weren't wholly well
   behaved? - A. There were people - they were like
   sitting on walls, but they weren't doing nothing
   serious, they were just drinking, but some weren't
   drinking alcohol, some were just drinking soft drinks,
   and there was people shouting to friends, just like
   there is at a normal football match when you are
   walking to a normal football ground.

Q. You may be able to help about something that we heard
   about this morning, because we heard from a gentleman
   who was the other side, the outside of the perimeter
   gates that you got had through already, so you had the
   advantage of being able to look back and see the time
   when the gates were pushed open? - A. Yes.

Q. It is impossible to say any precise figure, but can you
   help us at least as to some guesstimate" of a figure
   of people who came through that gate after it had been
   pushed open? - A. No.  There was quite.a lot of people.

Q. Would you say there were more than, say, 15 or 20
   people went through?  You were in a group of, I think,
   10 or more that were at tne side of you that you had
   heard talking about the next time the gate opened they
   were going in? - A. Yes.

Q. Were there more people than that that came through    that
   perimeter gate? - A. Yes, I would say about 50.
                                                         4


                                                    G. HURST




Q. The ticket, I think, had a "B" entrance on it? - A. It
   did.
Q.'And there was a "B” next to where you were standing, is
   that what you are relying on? - A. That*s right, yes.

Q. In fact, you must have gone along the left-hand side of
   the tunnel? - A. The wall was on my left-hand shoulder.

Q. And you entered I think, eventually, Pen 4 - we will
   come to that in a moment - the left-hand pen, is that
   right? - A. If that is Pen 4, yes.

Q. Was it the left-hand pen? - A. It was the left-hand
   side of the goal as you are looking onto the pitch.

Q. Yes, that is the one we call Pen    4. - A. Right.

0. What was the tunnel like when you were going through? -
   A. It was jam packed solid with people.

0. When you say jam packed solid are you saying that one
   could not move, or ...? - A. You were generally carried
   with the flow of people all wanting to get onto the
   terraces.

Q. Were they walking, running or just pushing? What were
   they doing - just standing? - A. Standing, but slowly
   moving forward, again with the flow.   There was no way
   you could run. There wasn't   the space to run.

 Q.   Too many people? - A. Yes.

 Q. Did you - I don't know if you remember, but this tunnel
    rises slightly, levels off and then dips towards the
    terrace.  Can you remember that? - A. Not being honest,
    no.

 Q. Could you see the pitch at all whilst you were still in
    the tunnel? - A. I could see the goal and I think the
    pitch was at eye level.

 Q. Could you see whether or not  the players were on it,
    playing or not? - A. The players were on it and they
    were just getting read to kick off.




                       /Q. So they were lining
                                                                5




                                                          G. HURST


Q. So they were lining up you mean? - A. Yes.

q   . in their true position, so to speak? - A. Yes.

Q. You then exited on to the terrace,        is that right? -
   A. That is right.

Q. I think the game kicked off just as you got there? -
   A. Yes.
Q. When you first exited on to that terrace what was it
   like? Do not tell me when you were half way down or
   anything like but when you first got to the open air
   in the tunnel? - A. Okay.  Basically there was no
   room really to move.  You just had to go with the
   general force of people.

Q. In which way were you being carried, because that is
   basically what you are saying? - A. Basically forward
   but my own instinct said go towards the side.  You
   couldn't actually go sidewards and so it was more a
   question of diagonally.

Q. You finished up on a dividing fence between another
   enclosure, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. That      we call Pen 5? - A. Yes.

Q. That one was empty so far as you remember? - A.          I
   never actually got into the pen.

Q. You could see through the railings, could you?
   Perhaps you did not, perhaps you did not look, but if
   you did not see it, do not answer? - A. No, that sort
   of thought wasn't even on my mind.

    Q. How crowded would you say the enclosure was as you
       traversed it? - A. It was jam packed.        You can always
       tell if you can only see people's tops of heads
       rather than chest high.  You c o u l d n ’t move in there.

    Q. Are you an experienced football goer,     if that is the
       right word? - A. Yes.

    Q. Have you been on packed terraces before?      - A. I have.

    Q. Where were they? - A. I have been on the Kop.

    Q. On the Kop in Anfield? - A. Yes, and I have been at
       Wembley.
                                                              14

                                      T.K. HILTON


Q. You don't know.   About that time? - A. About that.

Q. Arid I think you had lost your friend hadn't you at this
   stage? - A. Both of them, yes.

Q. You didn't go down the tunnel, did you? - A. I went sort
   of, I think I went round, I am not sure.

Q. And you didn't see any big concertina gates open at all?
   - A. No.

Q. Had you been to this ground before? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you know one could get round the side? - A. The year
   before I had been in the stands.

Q. So what made you decide to go round the edges rather than
   round the middle? — A. I don't know.  I just did.

Q. Did you see any signs directing you in that direction?
   - A. No.

Q. You did the right thing in the event.   You did not look
   but you decided ....   Did you go left or right, can you
   remember? - A. It was right.

Q. And perhaps one other thing on theturnstiles.   Infact
   although you proffered your ticket the turnstile operator
   never took it off you, did he? - A. I still had it.  I
   gave it up to the Hillsborough fund.

Q. Were there people pushing behind to try and get through.
   Were people anxious to get through the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. Because it was getting near the .... A. Right outside the
   turnstiles that is where the real pushing was like.

Q. I see, so there was some pushing there? - A. There was a lot

Q. Was it severe or not? - A. Very.

 Q. Did you have the impression thatpeople were getting  hurt?
    Were you hurt, perhaps I will ask you? - A. No, my mate
    was having trouble staying up and I said:  "Keep on your
    feet like".  People were treading on the back of your legs.

 Q. This was from pressure from behind you? - A. This was just
    right outside the gates.

 Q. Did you see any Police Officers right outside the turnstiles
    - A. No, I d i d n ’t look.

 Q. You don't have to.  In fact the area just behind the turn­
    stiles before you set off to go round the side was fairly
    clear of people? - A. Yes.
                                              G. RICHftRDSCN
✓


You do not remember them playing at that point? - A.
No.
When you exited from the tunnel, when you came out/
which way did you go? Did you go to the right hand
enclosure or the left hand enclosure? - A. What?
When we went on to the terraces, do you mean?

Yes. - A. The right hand side.

Did you, as a matter of interest, know that this
terracing was divided into segments? ~ A. Not a clue.

You did not know that? - A. No.

But you went into the right hand side? ~ A. Yes.

I want you to tell me as you came out of the tunnel
what was happening on the pitch first of all? - A. I
c a n ’t really remember that.

What was the terrace like? - A. There was people
trying to get out.

How crowded was it? - A. Packed.

Was it so crowded that you thought, "My goodness,     I
am turning round and going back”? — A. Yes.

You did not turn round because you felt you could
not, is that right? - A. No, I went straight forward.

Did you go voluntarily forward? Did you decide on
going forward and you went? - A. No, you had no
option, you had for to go.

Why was that? - A. Because of the crush behind us.

So you are saying you were being propelled forward? -
A. Yes.

 Is that correct? - A. Yes.

 If one is propelled forward there are at least two
 varieties.  One is that you are propelled, totally
 unable to do anything about it? - A. Yes.

 And the second propelling is that you are pushed
 forward but you can still have some control over your
 movements.  What was it? ~ A. Oh no, it was the first
 one. You had no option.
                                                              80




                                                   R. G. HEWSTONE



Q. Why unquestionably? - A. Because people were so
   packed together at the b a c k .

0       What do you mean by force? What would you actually
        have had to do? - A. I would have had to use my
        shoulder and I recall those five or six fans who
        come down the tunnel whilst I was there, they
        virtually did that themseives because they took a _
        little bit of a run, a bit of a charge, from the back
        of the crowd and bulldozed their way in.  Yes, I
        think that is the description.
                    nross-Examined by M R . MANNING:

Q. You were later than you wanted to be getting to the
   ground? - A. Y e s -
0. Were you surprised or not at the numbers of people
   who were as late as you in getting to the ground.
   A. Yes, I was.
0. Therefore, does it follow you were even more
   surprised that there were, as you stood on your knoll
   at the back, some five minutes or so later still
   seeing large numbers of people coming down Leppings
   Lane ? - A. Yes.
 o      You had, as you told my learned friend, Mr. Hale, you
        lade a decision not to force your way forward? - A.
        The decision was almost forced upon me because there
        were a number of people like myself who were circling
        the edge of the wedge and constantly changing their
        position, thinking that they might improve their
        chance of moving forward and people were just not
        having any success.  It seemed to matter not where
        you stood.
    O You heard the Police loudhailer from the Land Rover
    Q ' van and the Officer using the words "Ease back"? - A.
        Some such words.  I c a n ’t remember the exact words.

    Q. The implication from that is that people were
       pressing forward? - A. Yes, I realise that.

    0    Is it something, as you viewed it, you-could clearly
         see? - A. Yes, I could see obviously there was
         pressure.
Yes, please. - A. The parapet of the bridge is there.
These premises here, are a small sweet shop,
attempted at this time to form a cordon consisting ot
p o U c e horses across there, perhaps five or six norse .
In between the horses there were gaps, I was attempting
to put police officers to fill all those gaps.

I don’t know if you can remember, but do you recollect
whether the p e r i L t e r gates, which would of course, be
this side of that, were shut or open at tnat t:L^e *
        tiae they would be open, sir.           They had been
closed in an atten.pt to stop the p r e s s u r e in tnere.   At
                                                              A
the time of this - a?ain possibly twenty to tnree - and
there were two or three officers benind tnose gates.
The gates were in fact locked into the ground oy me ans of
a sliding s t an chi on - a bolt - w h i c n fitted into a no
in the tarmac and there were pol ic e 0 fficers^ als o h o l d i n g
it   but the pres sur e of the crowd be c a m e su cn tnat it was
no *longer possible to hold it, so that gate be c a m e op e n I
would think about 2.40 pm.

Are we talking about     the gates o u t s i d e    turnstiles    A to G?
Just point to the perimetlr sates.             That is the yard we
are talking about?    - A. That s rignt,           sir.

In fact there are three sates there.       We can snow you a
picture of it, 254 and 258.     T he se are tne^ gates we are
talking about? - A. That's right, sir.        Tne gates at
the o xtreme ri*ht han d side were clo sed and tne gate*
either side of the sign that says, ”“ o through road -
10 mph." wo ul d have been open, sir.              That    is a bit O l a
fence ra th er than a gate, actually.

Those two gates...     - A. Would have been opened.

The one that event ual ly noticed is the one near est              the
river, is that right? - A. That's rignt.

Th e middle one and the far left one, do v o u recollect
whetner those were shut at any point? - A. :iO, I bel ie ve
they were open all the time, sir.

As   far as   you remember?   - A. Yes,    sir.

You formed your line across?        ~ A.   Yes,     sir.

      Mil KI'MG:          Sir, before the witness contin ues , I
 know I ' c o u l d n ’t and I am sure others didn't ca tch tne
 timin* w hi ch the officer gave a few moments aao betore
 started to explain tne gates.           I couldn t near m m .

      THE CCROHER:   You are asking for the                time whe n ne
 attempted to form tne cordon, ;r. .^ing;
                                            Ufa. N» GRUNHILL


at that time, the gates weren't really wide.     They
were sort of half closed.

This is a very important point, you see, and this is
what I am trying to establish from your observation.
If a person is incapable of movement because he is so
hemmed in it does not matter what you ask him to d o .
You would agree with that, would you not? - A. Yes.

What I want to establish is whether the people you
were appealing to had a capacity for movement? - A.
Those at the back had a capacity for movement but
there again in all the time and all the years I have
done football matches I have yet to admit, or find a
supporter that admits, he pushes.      Everybody else
pushes but he d o e s n ’t. So when you ask them, "It is
not me. It is him".

Tell me whether you observed any pushing? - A. Oh
yes, I observed pushing.

You have no doubt whatever about that? - A. Yes.

Are you saying this was pushing by people who, so far
as you could observe and as far as you could judge,
were not compelled to push? - A. I couldn't argue
about that, no sir.  The people around were being
pushed but it is momentum, isn't it?  It just comes
on and on and on until they cannot do anything.

The time came when you decided it was not safe to
stay there? - A. Yes.

Either for you, the horse or the supporters? - A. At
that time the crush had amounted to that much that my
colleague had gone and the pressure on the horse was
such I felt the horse start to get agitated, really
agitated, and he was actually as I described before
like a bar of soap.  The pressure was so great it was
starting to lift him off his feet.  A horse once he
feels the insecurity nothing - then I had to take him
out because then he would start and he would have
injured somebody.

In fact you did come out? - A. I did go out.

Did you come out towards the perimeter gates? - A. I
went out towards the perimeter gate and started to
work at the back.  At one stage we did manage to
close the perimeter gates and we started to try and
get people to come off the back of the queue but it
                                                            14

                                                F. N. GRUNHILL


0. What I want to know is during that period before the
   events that you have been dwelling  on in your evidence,
   during that period did it seem to you that the
   preparations for the arrival of the crowd were following
   a normal pattern? - A* Yes, sir.

Q. Quite.   Nothing out of the ordinary at all? -A. No.

Q. From the police point of view, that is what I am asking
   vou. from the point of view of the police the policing of
   the situation, did it appear to you that the preparations
   were proceeding quite normally? - A. From my side of it,
   from the mounted side of it, yes.

Q. Quite normally? - A. Yes.

Q. If someone at about two o'clock had said to you    that in
   forty-five minutes there was going to be such a    crush
   that people were going to be in danger of their    lives,
   what would you have said at two o'clock? - A. I    didn t
   think it would be.
Q. At that time there was no reason to think that anything
   was going to go wrong at all? - A. As far as I can
   remember - to me this is early on?

Q. That is what I am talking about.   -   A. It just seemed to
   be like a normal football match.

Q. I want to ask you two other matter judging by your
   experience.   The first is this, when there was a
   terrific crush at the front but people were still pushing
   from the back and you were appealing to them to ease
   back, you have said they didn't respond, that s right? -
   A. That's right.
q . x want you to compare this with your normal experience.
    Policing big crowds depends on co-operation between the
    crowd and the police, doesn't it? - A. We have always ^
    said so, in my experience of 30-odd years, that we police
    crowds with the crowd's consent.

Q. How does the behaviour of this crowd in response to your
   appeals compare with ordinary behaviour? - A. Well, they
   always say the same, sir, "It's not me.  It s not me.
   You cannot make a crowd stop pushing if they don t want
   to stop.
Q. That's what happened here, is it? - A. That's what
   happened there.

Q. On the question of your horse and the reaction of your
   horse on this occasion, can you tell the jury how long
   you have known this particular horse? - A. I have had
                                                          4



                                 P. KERRY


Q.    Could you see whether the crowd which you were trying
      to push back, where you were trying to enter, did that
      stretch beyond the perimeter gate at that point, could
      you see that? - A. I was not really taking much notice
      of that at the time.  I was trying to get the crowd
      back against the turnstiles. When I found that I
      could not do any good with my horse, I turned and
      looked towards the gates and I could see the people
      pushing through the gates there and I could see that
      the foot officers were having difficulty closing the
      middle gates.
Q.    The gates - do you mean the perimeter gates? - A.       Yes
      sir.
Q.    Carry on. - A. So I rode my horse down there and I
      endeavoured to assist the foot officers to close the
      centre gates so that it would take the pressure off
      the crowd inside.

Q.    Did that succeed, in fact, as far as you remember? -
      A. Yes, it did. Eventually we managed to close the
      centre gates.

Q.    What effect, if any, did that have on the crowds on
      the inside of the perimeter gates, the ones who were
      moving forwards towards and through the turnstiles? -
      A. I think it alleviated the pressure a bit because
      people were not pushing so much and, as I say, I
      endeavoured to stay there to stop the gates coming
      open again.

Q.    You have mentioned the word "pushing": did you
      observe this yourself? Were people actually pushing,
      or were they in a position, the people whom you
      observed, that they were being pushed and had no
      option in the matter? - A. The people at the back were
      pushing forward and the people in the middle were
      being pushed, so they had not got any option but to
      push themselves.

Q.    So what you are saying is that the people who were
      caught by that metal bar presumably were trapped and
      could not do anything else? - A. They could not get
      anywhere, sir, because the bar stopped them.

Q.    But the people further back, you feel, had some option
      in the matter? - A. Especially the people outside the
      gates.  I did try and shout to them to push back, but
      my instructions were just ignored in some places.
      They were that intent on getting into the ground.

 Q.   Did you hear any announcements over loudspeakers at
      all? - A. No sir.
                                                            40




                                              D«     LACKEY


Q. Can you do any better than that? I am not
   criticising you? - A. No, I don't understand you.

Q. It was a hard push, was it? - A. Yes.

Q. Just turn round and look where you have put point 1.
   There is not much space there between you and the
   back of the terrace, is there? - A. No, I sun not
   saying I was exactly there.

Q. Somewhere there? - A. Yes.

Q. Did the push shove you all the way down the terrace
   to point 2? - A. Yes.

Q. In    one go? - A. I think so, yes.

Q. Do   you remember before that push came whether the
   match had started? - A. When I first went in there,
   no.
Q. We understand that. Your answer is you do not know
   if   the match had started? - A. I wasn't in there long
   before I got pushed forward and so I don't think it
   had.
                 Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS:

Q.    When you were sitting on the bridge you must have
     thought that you were not going to get in? - A. Yes.

Q. You must have been disappointed? - A. Yes.

Q. You do not see the gate opened but somebody tells you
   the gate is opened? - A. Yes.

Q.    How far are you away from the gate at that time? - A.
     Which gate.

Q. The gate which you go through? - A. I was on the
   other side of the road.

Q. The distance you have been telling us about? - A.
   Yes.
Q. So you could see when your pal told you the gate was
   opened? - A. I couldn't see the gate.

Q. You could not see the gate? - A. No.

Q. You then walked towards the gate? - A. Yes.
                                                G.- MILTON




 Was it just one Policeman there or more than one
 Policeman? - A. I only noticed one Policeman.  As I
'say, I was busy, I kept turning round.

How many stewards would you say there were? - A . There
were two stewards helping him.to open it.

Did you notice anybody directing the people who were
coming through Gate C as to where they should go? - A.
You had no chance of directing anybody because there
was just a mad surge.

Thank you very much.

           Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE

Mr. Hilton, could you just amplify that in your own
words? You said there was a surge through, there was
no chance of directing anyone, What was it like? Was
it just like uncorking a bottle, people rushing out? -
A. That is right, yes, rushing in.

Pushing in?    Did you actually see people pushing? - A.
Rushing.

I am sorry, rushing in. They were moving more quickly
than walking? - A. Oh yes, they just charged in and
that was it.

              Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Milton, do the things you have described today
usually happen at a football match, or was this a
completely unusual situation to you? - A. It was an
unusual situation, yes.

You said people were going through your turnstile, not
through your fault, without tickets. You could not
stop them because they were being pushed so much. - A.
That's right.

But you did not see the Police Officers in the
concourse area ejecting those fans, did you? - A. No,
because it was that hectic at that time, even the
Police could not do   anything about it. I did knock to
one and told him that he had not got     aticket, and he
said, "I'm sorry, I   can't do nothing    about it*, and
that was it. There    was that many.

 Yes, but in the concourse area where the Police
 Officers were, there was a lot of room wasn't there?
 In the concourse area once people went through the
 turnstiles, the Police Officers who were in the
 concourse area beyond the turnstiles had plenty of room
                                                           8




                                   L. PROCTOR


     d o n ’t, but the crowd on the outside of the gates
     seemed to manoeuvre the horses out of the way and then
     they came to the gates and the pressure on the gates
     was such that I almost had to ride the gate to stop my
     ankles being chopped off by the gate.     The other gate
     sprang open and later on PC Scholey pointed out that
     the bolt had bent, the pressure had been so great.

Q.   We will be hearing from PC Scholey in a few minutes? -
     A. Yes.  The mere fact of the crowd coming in had
     pushed me towards the riverside, but as they came in
     one or two fell down and we helped them up to their
     feet, but I was still towards the riverside.  Some
     minutes elapsed and then there was another surge and
     at this time I had got my back to the gates.  I was
     obviously speaking to someone and one of the Mounted
     Department came through and unfortunately the horse
     decided to take it out of me and kicked me behind my
     left knee which incapacitated me somewhat.

Q.   You know this gap which you said was created? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   That was created on the inside? - A. On the inside of
     the gate between the turnstiles and the perimeter
     gate.

Q.   You are saying that the people adjacent to that gap
     did not step back at that point? - A. They didn't come
     back.  We shouted to them to come back.     We obviously
     had to remain near the gates to stop them being
     opened, but we shouted to them for them to come back
     and they just d i d n ’t take any notice. They were just
     intent on getting in.

Q.   The people on the far side of the gate in the
     Reception Area, it was they who were pressing forward
     towards the gate, is that what you are saying? - A.
     That is correct.




                                 /Q.   Were you there   . ..
                                                          35


                                                 D.' M. SCHOLEY


Q. You are certain about that? - A. There definitely was
   because I was amazed that they were packed in like a
   rugby scrum trying to get into the turnstiles.    There
   was plenty of room at the back.   There was no pressure
   from the rest of the crowd on them and yet they were
   trying to fight their way in, they were climbing up on
   the roof of the turnstiles.    There were mounted officers
   trying to push them back.   There was an Inspector trying
   to persuade them to move back and they weren t taking any
   notice.   There was no pressure at all.    They had no
   need to crush up to the turnstiles at all.

Q. These are, of course, the people close by you? - A. These
   are the ones already in when we closed the gates, sir.

Q.    People who were climbing over the turnstiles were right
     in the front, weren't they? - A. Yes.

Q. You couldn't actually see what their position was from
   where you were? - A. From where we were we could see the
   crowds in the area we are at behind us. We could see the
   crowd crushing up and we could see the people climbing
   on to the roof of those turnstiles.

Q. The Inspector, was it Inspector Purdy who you... - A. I
   don't know the Inspector's name.

Q.    Was he standing on a railing? - A. He was raised up.  He
     was above the crowd, shouting for all he was worth and
     gesticulating for the crowd to move back from the
     turnstiles.

0.   You can see aperson shouting, you   can see his mouth
 '   move, but did you hear him? - A. I believe I could hear
     him.    I seem to recall hearing him.

Q. Do you recall hearing any loudspeaker announcement? - A.
   No, unfortunately I don't.

0. You didn't see the Land Rover either? - A. N o ? sir,
   because of the crowds in front of me I couldn t see very
   much at all.

Q    Now I want to revert to the other crowd, the ones outside
     the gate now.   When you first shut that there obviously
     was a crowd there because you told me you had to force
     your way through? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. How dense was it when you first managed to shut the gate?
   - A. The thing is, once you have shut that gate it
   doesn't take more than a few seconds for the crowd to
   build up on to the gate.   The people who would otherwise
   have walked through to the turnstiles, suddenly they
                                                              36


                                                    D.- M. SCHOLEY


   couldn't because the gates were closed, so there was a
   lot of pressure almost immediately on that gate.

Q. We have heard from one or two other people who were also
   on gates who said that they opened them to let ladies
   through or children.   Did you have occasion to do that
   as far as you remember? - A. I seem to recall opening the
   gate once because we had got a young boy on the inside
   and his father was on the outside, to let him through,
   but I don't think I opened it on any other occasion.
   That was only possible because we had got two mounted
   officers in front of the gates keeping the pressure off.

Q. That is what I am trying to find out.      W a s _the pressure
   on those perimeter gates continuous or was it not? - A.
   The horseman in front of the gates, obviously every time
   the horse moved the crowd moved as well.         They tend to
   try to   keep out of the way of the horses which
   momentarily would relieve pressure on the gate.         As soon
   as the horse moved to another position the pressure was
   back on.

Q. What you are saying is that there were momentary periods
   when the pressure was less? - A. Yes, but as time went on
   pressure built up.   It was early on that I let this chap
   through to join his son.

Q. What happened to the gate in the end? - A. In the end
   myself and Sergeant Proctor were leaning against the gate
   and it  suddenly just sprung open. We were both knocked
   out of   the way. Well, certainly  I was and Sergeant
   Proctor disappeared.    The crowd surged through.    They
   were coming through in such a rush, I think they were as
   surprised as we were because one or two of them fell
   down, some had lost their shoes and we were were picking
   them up before they were trampled.     Obviously the people
   at the back couldn't see there were people on the floor.
   We were pulling them out before they got trampled by
   other people trying to get in.

Q. You have explained quite graphically how this gate
   opened.   Did the it just burst open because there was
   such pressure on it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Were there people trying to rattle it or trying to open
   it as well, as far as you remember? - A. No, there was no
   way anybody could have rattled it because of the pressure
   on it, sir.

Q. So they were at that point squashed up against it? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. For whatever reason? - A. Yes,     sir.
                                                             37


                                                    D.' M. SCHOLEY


Q.   At some point it just burst open? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.    It was like a cork out   of a bottle? - A. That is correct,
     sir.

0. You then noticed that the bolt had bent? - A. After the
   crowd had got through...    The gate had been opened and
   the crowd vanished like somebody letting a plug out and
   the water running through.   I went back with Sergeant
   Proctor and pointed it out to Sergeant Proctor, because I
   wanted to know myself what had gone off, and then I could
   see that the actual bolt fastener was bent, quarter inch
   steel was bent and there was a mark in the tarmac where
   it had bent and dragged itself out as it had been pushed
   along.

0.   I think we have got an acetate of that now.    Can we put
     it up and we will show   it to you and see whether that is
     the one you are talking about. - A. That is the same sort
     of bolt, sir.    I couldn't say it was definitely the one
     but that is identical to the bolt.     That is the same
     sort of bolt I fastened down.




                      Q. From that photo
                                                               48




                                                  A. J. TAYLOR


     people coming through.  He stayed down picking up his
     loose change and things like that.  Obviously we were
     shouting to them to calm down and stop running and
     for him to get up and get into the ground if that is
     what he wanted to do.

Q. Did you at some point then turn round and see one of
   the exit gates opened? - A. Yes, after the second
   surge and everyone had cleared from outside the
   perimeter gates I turned round and everybody had gone
   and Gate C was open at that point.

Q.   You could see it   open? - A. Yes,   I could see it   open.

Q.    Can you   remember if it was wide open or just
     partially open? - A. I do not think it was fully
     open.    I think it was quite wide open.

Q. I had better just check about the Land Rover.    Did
   you see  the Land Rover? - A. No, I didn't see it.

Q.   Did you hear any messages emanating over the
     loudspeaker systems? - A. Not from the Land Rover.
     When everyone had cleared I heard a tannoy message to
     the Liverpool fans to stop pushing which we thought
     was a bit late because everybody had gone outside.
     Obviously it was referring to people inside.

Q. You do not know that? - A. No, but I believe that to
   be the case.

Q. The first loudspeaker message that you heard was one
   that referred to people pushing and it was after the
   crowd had gone? - A. It was after the crowd had gone,
   but then there was nobody there.  There was no noise
   at all then.

Q. That you are sure came over the ground speakers? - A.
   Yes, sir.  As certain as I can be, sir.

Q. You did not have a radio and I think we have already
   established that? - A. I didn't have a radio, sir.

Q. Were you notified     that you were required in the
   ground as well? -     A. Yes, when everyone had cleared
   from outside the     ground there was a number of
   Policemen around     that area then who obviously came to
   each other and it     came over the radio then to those
   Officers who had     radios, a request for all Officers
   to get on to the     pitch.
                                                           32




                                                         A. BEST


    Q. Would it be fair to say that you saw people who were
       distressed? - A. Yes.   There were two particular ones.
       There were two children where the funnel bar was at the
       same height as their neck and they were being pushed up
       against that.   The adults with them couldn't push back
B      to let their heads out so with a little help from us we
       managed to get the kids out on to our side of the
       barrier.

    Q. You brought them to your side, to the River Don side? -
       A. That's right, yes, and there was one from the middle
       who was carried out, who was passed overhead.

    Q. Did you see whether people were joining just from the
       back or whether they were also joining from the sides? -
       A. There were numerous people - again, this drunken rowdy
       element who weren't happy at the speed they were going
       through and they were coming straight down the side of
       the barrier into the front.

    Q. Do you mean they were ducking under the barriers? - A.
       Yes, or they were attempting to. This caused some
       scuffle in between those people, us and the people who
D      were already in the queue.   Obviously they were already
       crushed and they had been waiting there some time and
       these people were trying to push in at the front to get
       through.

    0. Was this a concerted effort or was it just the odd
       youngster? - A. They all arrived together, but whether
       there was an organised element I don't know.

    Q. We are not talking about hundreds coming underneath the
       barrier, are we? - A. No, there would be thirty or forty
       stood about, but at any one time there would be perhaps
       three or four trying to get through.

    0. You were involved with one particular person? - A. That's
       right.
    0. I know you know his name but there is no point in
       mentioning it.   Just describe to me how that affected
       you? - A. Well, he was so drunk he had no idea where he
       was, to be honest.    He had a blind desire to get through
       the turnstiles.    He had been pulled out two or three
       times by myself.    He had been pushed out by people at
       the front of the queue on numerous occasions.    For his
       own safety, he had been assaulted two or three times by
       people at the front as he tried to get through, I had to
       arrest him.

    0. Did that mean you then had to go away from the scene?
       A. That's right.  I took him back round through Gate C at
       the side.
                                                                74




                                                     R. W. COBB


Q. Within the turnstile area, basically? - A. That's right,
   yes.
Q. Estimate how many there were? - A. Well, it is very
   awkward to say how many because there are only so many
   can push to the front to wave their money.

0. I realise that, but can you tell me whether we are
   talking about 10, 20, 100? - A. Well, you can be talking
   about 100.
0. Would you say there    were more than 500? - A. No.

Q. What I am trving to do is find the bracket.   It could    be
   between 100,'but it was definitely not 500? - A. No.

Q. It could have been 250? - A. No.

0. That's fair enough.  So you suggested to him, get rid of
   those people, move them outside? - A. Move them outside
   and all those with the tickets could have gone in.

0. He said, "I can't do it."? - A. "I haven't the force."

0. What happened then as far as you are concerned? - A. As
   far as I was concerned it was just a matter of holding
   tight at the gates.   At about twenty minutes to three I
   had to lock the gates with the key, which is the first
   time I have ever locked it with the keys.    The force was
   that much on the inside that the gates were gradually
   going like that.    The wrought iron gates, they are
   collapsible, but they weren't going that way, they were
   going like that.

0      By "wrought iron" you mean the concertina type gates? -
      A. That's right.    It was that bad I thought they had
      some tools or something that was doing it, with them
      being collapsible gates.    I look through the mirror but
      it was just human power that was doing it.

0 Did you form the impression that people were deliberately
 '* moving the gate or was it just that there were such a lot
    of people that they were being pressed against it? - A.
    No, no, absolutely deliberate - "If you don t open the
    gate you so-and-so, we will smash it down.

 Q.   You could hear that? - A. Definitely, yes, two or three
      t imes.
 0. You locked it because you thought it mightn't hold? - A.
    That's right, yes.
                                                     B. RIDGE


He undid those? - A. Yes, he pulled the bolts down.
Once he had undid the bolts we were all right, we were
covered.
When he did that you and your mates... - A. Opened the
doors.
What happened to the people outside the gate? - A. They
started to run in.

Them came in? - A. Yes.
Did you see where they went? - A. A lot of them went
straight to the toilets.

If you go in Gate B you come in and the tunnel is
shielded by a wall? - A. Yes.
You can get to it because there is a gap? - A. Yes.

When you first   come in    can you see the t u n n e l instantly
or do you have   to look for it? - A. You have to look for
it.
Are you saying there are toilets visible? - A. Yes, the
toilets are visible.
So quite a lot of them went to the toilets? - A. Yes.

Did you see what happened to them after that? - A. No.

There was no reason why you shouldn't? - A. No.

I think there were some people who lost their shoes when
they came in? ~ A. That is correct.
How many pairs   did you    pick up    in the end? -A.I think
five pairs and   umpteen odd ones.

Did people come back for those? - A. Well, as the
disaster had happened, people came back and some just
picked a pair of shoes up and ran and put them on.
Whether they fit or not I don't know.

What I meant was not after the disaster happened, but did
people turn round straight away and say. Where are my
shoes?" - A. Oh, no, they just ran straight into the
ground.
It was only later that people came and started hunting
around? - A. That is correct.
You didn't go into the terracing area until very much
later? - A. I didn’t go into the terracing area at all.
                                 C. G. WATSON


It is probably permissible for me to say, because
there has been a good deal of evidence, that in fact
the crowds were coming from two different directions,
so would that have diluted your horses even further,
if you had had to make two barriers, one in each
direction? - A. No.  If I had been organising it, I
would have put the horses in a position to have caught
the two, that is to say straight across the gateway.

So straight across the gateway, which is where you saw
the cordon, I think, of horses? - A. Yes, the
perimeter gates.

That would have been the best place? - A. I would have
said so, yes.

Because it would catch everybody coming from both
directions? - A. I would have said so, yes.

But, nevertheless, this crowd on the day - there has
been other evidence - got through that cordon and also
pushed your horse aside? - A. That is right, sir, yes
it did.

           Cross-Examined by MR. PAY N E :

What was the game that you were describing?  What was
the game that the spectators were playing?  You used a
word. - A. This pushing from the back, rushing forward
into the people who were at the turnstiles, it seemed
to be enormous fun to them.  As I have said, perhaps
they did not realise the gravity of the situation, but
that is why I describe it as a game.  They seemed to
find it amusing.

Was it that pushing which was causing the crushing at
the front? - A. Definitely, yes.

You have told the Jury that   you saw Gate C opened   and
that relieved the pressure?   - A. Yes.

Did you see the people going through Gate C? - A. Yes,
I saw people going through Gate C, yes.

Whereabouts, which part of the crowd was it thatwent
through Gate C? - A. It was virtually all of it.

Including those people who had been playing the game?
- A. Yes, including those.

          Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:
                                                           33




                                              S. H. HUGHES



Q. why was that? - A . ’Because there were people in front
   of them as well.

Q. Did you hear any shouts about pushing at all, either
   "push* or "don't push"? - A. Yes.

Q. What did you hear? - A. I heard people saying to the
   people in the tunnel "don't be pushing".

Q. "Don't be pushing"? - A. Yes.

Q. Could you also hear cheering and chanting? People
   cheering the team? - A. I can't really remember, no.

Q. You cannot remember? - A. No.

Q. Did you at any point look forward at the terrace
   itself? - A. Occasionally, yes.

Q. Did you see what was happening further forward near
   the front? - A. Some of it, yes.

Q. What time was it that you actually saw anything
   significant happening towards the front? - A. Just
   after the kick-off I would say.

Q. What did you see? - A. I saw a lad in a Liverpool top
   getting passed over everyone's heads and then there
   was a girl as well who got passed over.

Q. Did passed or towards the perimeter fence, is that
   right? - A. Did I what?

Q. Where were they being passed to? - A. Getting passed
   down to the front and over the fences.




                              /Q.   They managed to get.
V’
                                                                        65
     c
                                                                  A. M. DODD


                                ANDREW MICHAEL DODD Sworn

                                      Bv THE CORONER:

             O* Andrew Hichael Dodd? - A. Yes.
         B
             Q. What is your address? - A.
                Liverpool
             Q.   You are a bank clerk?     - A. Yes.
             Q.    You to the 1989 match in Hillsborough, the semi-final?    -
                  A. Yes.
             Q. You went with various people, including Gordon Horn, is
                that right? - A. Yes.
             q.   Gordon was a friend of yours and he lost his life
                  unfortunately? - A. Yes.
             0. Was that the first semi-final you had been to at
                Hillsborougn? - A. Yes, I didn't go in 1988.

             0. I think you travelled in a mini-bus? - A. Yes.

             q.   It was a privately organised one, I assume? - A. Yes, it
                  was.
             0. You left at about eleven o'clock in the morning, would
                that be about right? - A. Roundabout that time, yes.

             0. It would be fair to say that on your particular mini-bus
                people did have cans of alcohol with them which they were
                intending to drink? - A. Yes.
             0. Approximately how many a head, in just round terms? - A.
                Hell, me and Gordon we had about half a dozen cans each.

             0. This was for the journey, really? - A. Yes.
             0. I hope the driver didn't have any! - A. Oh, no, he didn't
                have any at all.
             0. You then came to Sheffield? - A. Yes.
             q.   Did you have a reasonable journey? - A. No, it was fairly
                  congested on the motorway.   Sometimes it was at a
                  s tands till.
             0. I think your first stop was at a place called the Silver
                Fox public house? - A. I think it was that name.




         H
                                                                       70

                                                A.M.
                                                .®"A DODD



            MR. ISAACS:     Is this Gordon Roberts sir?

            THE CORONERS      Gordon Horne.

Q. Yes, what it says is:
             "Myself and Gordon joined the m a s s o n t h e
             pavement outside^the first blue rail gates
             which were shut."

     A. Yes.
            . frvjno to catch you out or anything, we are just
     I am not trying         ,         a ii  no you understand
     to find out what happened that is all. uo you
     me? - A. Yes.

Q. Can  you think back now, can you reco 11 ®®J?wheJheJ0 Je®tiy
   oates were shut in the first place or not?      A. Honestly
       I can't remember because as I say it is a while ba
   no
   now.


      was your recollection clear then                 A wh il e I
       j     aft-pr Hillsborough I did feel a bit, for
      S m “ pSet like and I ain't know.   I can't actually remember
      whether the gates were open or closed you know.
 Q. Fair enough, but you do remember that you were held up,
    that there was a crush? - A. Yes.
 Q. DO you remember a Police horse anywhere near you? - A. Yes.

 q   . Tell me about the Police horse, at least the f o r e m a n on
       j.u u         * T h e r e w as itior© p r s s s u r © fro m b6ni.no a s
       the h° » ™ L s ^ r t e S i o ^ l n g on the crowd from behind.

       -   T e“       r p ^ l^ iia ^ r S S T i                      S U ?

       l a y away from there from the Police horse.


       s; & ssus? ass:;1" ^ ‘*.^5°^
       “ w S c h ” ay was It to you? - A. well I was pushed up
       against the back of the horse.
                   uac <-hp nressure on you when that was happening?
  °* -°A S7 e l l I was kind of, it was mentioned before there was
     a aap with the horse, the horse made a gap and everyone
     stopped, but everyone was keeping on pushing f
     s o that gap was scion filled in and I was one of the people
     at the front of the gap so there was nothing I could do.
                                                         71

                                      A.M. DODD



Q. So you were being pushed forward you say? - A. Well you
   say "pushed", there was a constant you know.

Q. Did you attempt to shout to supporters to ask them to stop
   pushing? - A. Yes, that is a common thing:  "Stop pushing"
   and all that. Everyone says that, yes.

Q. That occurred? - A. Yes.
Q. But that did not have any effect either? -   A. Oh no, not
   at all.
Q. Had you been in that sort of situation before where you
   were being pushed and pummelled outside the ground? - A.
   You always get pushed and shoved at a football match, it
   is part of going. You know, walking out of the ground,
   walking into the ground.
Q. I see, are you saying that is part of the fun of it? - A.
   No, it is not fun, it is not fun at all.

Q. It is just part of the experience? - A. Yes.

Q. Having been held up for a while what happened then? - A.
   Well we were just like in the crowd milling about still
   rather being pushed from here and there but me and Gordon
   kept hold of each other's jumpers and then there was a gate
   which was opened I do recall.
Q. A big gate? - A. Yes, a big blue one and we all like
   streamed in there, you knov; just like withthe constant
   pressure hands on the person's shoulders in front so you
   did not fall over.
Q. Was that a big blue gate which is behind where that white
   van is. Just have a look? Is that the one you are talking
   about? - A. That one.
Q. Or can't you remember? - A. All I remember was a gate
   open and I went through, that is all.

Q. When you got through the gate what was the first   thing
   you saw, what was the most noticeable thing that   you
   noticed inside? - A. The people in front of me.    You are
   just concentrating on not falling over, you know   what I
   mean?
Q. You saw the people in front of you and where did you go?
   - A. Well wherever they went I went, you could not get
   out of the throng.
Q. Did you go into a tunnel at all? *■ A. Yes, went through
   the tunnel.
Because you see you said to the Coroner that when you
came out of the tunnel you took a left and you could
not really take up your natch viewing position and I
got the impression from that that you had an idea in
your mind where you wanted to get to? - A. Not
really, no.
What you have just told us is that that sort of
position, just to one side of the goal, was the sort
of place you would have liked to have been able to
stand? - A. That is where I would have liked to have
stood, yes.
Did you make your way towards there despite the
number of people who were in the pen? - A. No, I was
too busy stopping myself, as you say, falling over
but after I lost Gordon, looking for Gordon.

That came a bit later, did it not? - A. Yes.

That did not happen when you came from the tunnel? -
A. No, I was too busy, as you say, watching my
footing and not wanting to fall over.

Were there not people either side of you who would
have stopped you falling over? - A. At that time you
do not think about that. You just worry, you know
what I mean? It is hard to explain.

Am I right in getting the impression that when you
came through the tunnel you actually moved towards
the place where you wanted to be? - A. I had no
choice. I had to go to the left. There was no way I
could have gone to the right. I had to stream where
the crowd was going.

Then you saw a gap in front of the barrier that you
were close to and you got under the barrier? - A.
Yes.
From there you actually made your way down to the
front? - A. I would not say "made my way". How can I
describe it? With all the swaying, pushing, shoving
and constant pressure I ended up at the front and I
half moved, well, I attempted to get to the front as
well.
Before you said that you were pushing your way
through and then you said that by that you meant
going through the crowd. Is that what you tried to
do? - A. Slipping in between people like that.

So you were moving between people? - A. Yes, but not
very well.
                                                         83




Q. You were successful because you got to where you
   wanted to go. Did you not hear people saying, "Don't
   push forwards. Go back"? Did you hear anyone saying
   anything like that? - A. Everyone was doing the sane
   tiling as me.

Q. Trying to push forward? - A. Trying to find a bit of
   space for themselves.

Q. When you are behind the goal you expect to be pretty
   crushed, do you not? - A. As I say, I have been to
   matches before and you expect that kind of thing but
   not that bad.
                 Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING:

Q. The impression generally that you had about this
   match up to that very last time was that this was an
   experience which was not very different from the sort
   of experience that you had had in the past at big
   matches? - A. As I say I have been in situations
   before at other big matches where I have been tightly
   compact but this one was much worse. My breathing
   became more difficult as well.

Q.   That was eventually? - A. Yes.

Q.    But when you got out on to the terrace from the
     tunnel and you had gone through this difficult
     experience of making sure you did not fall and
     whether it was because you feared you might get
     trampled on, or whatever conclusion the Jury draws
     from that, the fact of the matter is that you were
     being careful to tag on to your friend and hold on to
     the chap in front of you. You got into the tunnel,
     yousaw the crowd onthe terrace and your immediate
     impression was, "Here we go again.    It is another one
     of those big type crowds"? - A. Yes, but not happily.
     It was a bit worrying actually.

Q. You do not like being crushed? - A. Who does?     No one
   does.

Q. Exactly. You are used to being tightly compacted
   standing in a big crowd at a big match somewhere just
   behind the goal.

Q. I would not say "used to". You expect that at all
   big games, if you know what I mean.

Q. You expect it at big games. The swaying of the crowd
   you expect at all big games. You probably expect it
   at some smaller games but at all big games? - A. Yes,
   going back everyone sways especially when they score.

Q. Particularly when they score? - A. Yes.
                                                            84


                                                        A. M, DODD


     Q. it is part as well of the pre-match before the actual
        kick-off when the teams are called out. People
        happily hear the names of their teams, people sing
        songs and the crowd sways? - A. Yes.

B    Q. Yes. I do not think I am asking you questions that
        probably everybody does not know about or at least
        have seen about, is that fair? You said yourself if
        there weren't singing or chanting then they are
        swaying? - A. The swaying was mostly to find footing
        and with people pushing from behind as well but to
        put it bluntly it was pretty scary. It was not the
        usual stuff, if I can put it that way.

     Q. You decided then that you would look for another
        spot? - A. Yes, to try and get out of feeling like
        that. I felt a bit uneasy.

     Q. You could hear some people saying not to push? - A.
        That was later on when I was nearer to the front.

     Q. You had not been able to hear anybody saying that
        from where you were originally? From the circled
|\      position where you were to start with before you went
        under the barrier, you had not heard anybody saying
        then not to push? - A. Well, yes, I must have because
        everybody was saying, "Get off. Stop pushing", like,
        that is part and parcel of it.

                       Cross-Examined bv MR. KING

     Q.    Mr. Dodd, can you help us? You were aware of the big
          blue concertina gate being opened or simply seeing it
          opened. Did you actually see it opening or just
          merely opened, the one you went through into the
          ground? - A. Put it this way, one minute I was
          standing there and the next minute everyone was going
          through the gap which wasn't there before.

     Q. Were you in the middle of the crowd going through or
        would you say you were relatively near the front of
        it? - A. I would say I was in the middle.

     Q.    There were people thencoming up behind you following
          you through the big concertina gate? - A. Yes.

     Q. We know - and I will tell you this, Mr. Dodd - that
        it was open for some five minutes this gate and so I
        am trying to find out from your evidence at what
        stage you probably went through. . Go back to before
        you were conscious of the gate being opened or just
        before then. Where were you positioned? Where were
        you? Were you waiting at the turnstiles? - A. No, I
        wasn't near the turnstiles.




H
                                                                                                 25

                                                                                A. W. LANGLEY


Q. I n r e l a t i o n t o t h e o p e n in g o f t h e g a t e , how w o u ld y o u
   r e l a t e t h e o p e n i n g o f t h e g a t e t o t h e a m b u la n c e ? - A . As I
   s a y , tim e s a r e d i f f i c u l t b u t I w o u ld i m a g i n e . . .

Q. I f y o u c a n ' t do i t ,       d o n 't g u e s s .   - A. Ho,       I   c o u l d n 't
   guess.

Q. I d o n ' t w a n t y o u t o s a y t h i n g s y o u c a n ' t s a y .             I ju st
   w ant you to say w hat you c a n .                      D id y o u f e e l an y s u r g e s ?
   - A. V e i l , t h e r e w ere s u rg e s a l l th e tim e .                   You w e r e
   b e i n g p u s h e d o n e way a n d a n o t h e r .         A t o n e p o i n t we w e r e
   pushed back .            T h is m ust h a v e b ee n a f t e r th r e e o 'c l o c k .
   Y ou w e r e p u s h e d f o r w a r d .         You w e r e p u s h e d b a c k .      P e o p le
   w e re m a k in g t h e i r way a n d t r y i n g t o g e t o u t .               You w e r e
   pushed in a l l            d i r e c t i o n s . As I w as p u s h e d b a c k I
   stu m b le d .       I     s t u m b l e d ons o m e t h i n g a n d w o n d e re d w h a t i t
   w as.        When I        l o o k e d downI h a d g o t o n e f o o t o n a m a n ' s
   c h in a n d a n o t h e r f o o t on a m a n 's c h e s t an d p e o p le w e re
   s h o u tin g , "G et o f f h im ."              "W here c a n I go?            T h ere i s
   n o w h e r e f o r me t o g o . "             I w a s n 't t h a t p o l i t e e i t h e r !
   T h e r e w a s n o w h e r e f o r me t o g o b u t e v e n t u a l l y t h e c r o w d ,
   a n d t h e w ay i t w a s g o i n g , y o u w e r e p u s h e d o f f h i m a n y w a y .

Q . You d e s c r i b e i n y o u r s t a t e m e n t o n e s u r g e a s i f i t h a d
    b e e n a g o a l s u r g e ? - A. T h a t i s w h a t i t f e l t l i k e .        When
    you s t a n d on t h e Kop a n d t h e y s c o r e y o u g o f o r w a r d a n d
    you com e b a c k , b u t t h i s w e n t f o r w a r d a n d y o u d i d n ' t go
    back.




                       Q. D id y o u h e a r a n y c h e e r i n g
                                                                                              129


                                                                               N. G. LANGLEY


Q. I t h i n k we a r e p r o b a b l y o n a l o s e r w i t h t h i s b e c a u s e b o t h
   th e o p e n in g s a r e on t h e l e f t , a r e n t th e y ?        D oes i t
   h e l p y o u a t a l l ? - A. Ho.         A ll I can reaeab er, as I say,
   I rem em ber f e n c i n g b e in g r i p p e d o u t an d p e o p le s a y i n g ,
   "H in d y o u r h e a d , " and so o n a f t e r I w as a w a k e n in g l e f t o f
   th e g o a lp o s t on th e 6 y a rd l i n e , so w h e th e r I h ad b een
   b r o u g h t from t h i s s i d e o r t h a t s i d e I c o u ld n o t s a y .

                         Cross-Examined b y MR. IS A A C S ?

0 . J u s t one m a tte r p le a s e and t h a t i s t h i s :         you t e l l u s you
    w e r e h a l f w ay d o w n t h e t u n n e l h a v i n g g o t t h e r e t h r o u g h a
    n o r m a l, q u ic k w a lk an d th e n t h e r e i s a m a s s iv e s u r g e ? -A .
    Y e s , i t seem d t o b e a m a s s i v e s u r g e .         I t w as j u s t a r u s h
    of p eo p le.

0    T h e o n l y p o i n t I w a n t e d t o a s k y o u w as t h i s , M r. L a n g l e y :
     you w e re a c t u a l l y i n t h e m id d le o f t h e t u n n e l w hen t h i s
     s u r g e cam e b e h i n d you? - A. Y e s , b e c a u s e t h e r e h a d b e e n
     su ch b r i g h t s u n lig h t and i t w as j u s t c o m p le te b la c k and
     i t t o o k me n e a r l y h a l f t h e l e n g t h o f t h e t u n n e l j u s t t o
     g e t my e y e s i g h t . . .

Q. T h a t f o r c e p r o p e l l e d   down t h e     tu n n e l?   - A. Y e s . ,

Q. T h a t f o r c e , w o u ld t h i s b e f a i r , you h a v i n g g o t t h e r e
   t h r o u g h a q u ic k w a lk , was o v e r a n d a b o v e w h at y o u w o u ld
   h a v e e x p e c te d t o h a v e com e fro m b e h i n d y ou a t t h a t tim e ?
   You j u s t w e r e n * t e x p e c t i n g i t ? - A. I w a s n t e x p e c t i n g
   i t , b u t a t t h e s a m e t i m e b e c a u s e n o - o n e w a s t h e r e w i t h me
   w h e n we w e n t i n t h e t u n n e l , I j u s t d i d n t e x p e c t t h a t
   fo rc e th e n .       H o w e v e r, h a v i n g s a i d t h a t , I caiae r o u n d
   i n t o b e h in d th e t u r n s t i l e s w i t h p e o p le from th e o u t s i d e
   a n d t h e y w e re s t i l l t r y i n g t o g e t p e o p l e t o come i n fro m
   in b etw een th e p e r im e te r g a t e an d th e t u r n s t i l e s , i n t o
   t h a t sam e g a t e .      Now w h a t h a p p e n e d a f t e r m e , I
   c o u l d n 't ...

Q. I a p p r e c i a t e t h a t , b u t w h a t h a p p e n e d w a s t h i s :       you had
   g o n e a t a q u i c k w a l k d o w n t h e t u n n e l ? — A. Y e s .

 Q. T h e n s u d d e n l y t h e r e i s t h i s e x c e p t i o n a l f o r c e t h a t p u s h e s
    you a t a n e v e n f a s t e r s p e e d down t h e r e s t o f t h e w ay? -
    A. Y e s .        I t w a s n ' t d a n g e r o u s , b u t i t was f a s t .        T here
    w ere a l o t o f p e o p le l i k e m y s e l f .            We w e r e r u s h i n g t o
    g e t in to th e k ic k - o f f and had j u s t ru sh ed t h a t l i t t l e b i t
    e x tra .

 Q. W e l l , y o u s a y i t w a s n ' t d a n g e r o u s b u t y o u s a y y o u w e r e
    bounced o f f th e b a r r i e r ? - A. Y es, b e c a u se t h a t b a r r i e r
    w as n o t v i s i b l e .    I t h i n k e v e n w a l k i n g dow n t h a t t u n n e l
    w ith a f u l l crow d o f p e o p l e , w a lk in g i n t h e r e , t h e r e i s
    n o w ay y o u c o u l d s e e t h a t b a r r i e r .        I co u ld be a b r e a s t ,
    i n t h e m i d d l e o f t h r e e p e o p l e , w a l k i n g dow n t h a t t u n n e l .
                                                                                            130

                                                                             N. G. LANGLEY


    T here i s no l i g h t i n t h a t tu n n e l.    T h e re fo re , i f you
    cone o u t o f b r ig h t d a y lig h t and you a r e g o in g in t o a
    b r ig h t th in g you c a n 't even se e th e th in g b eca u se th e re
    a re b o d ie s in f r o n t o f you.     A ll o f a sudden you have
    g o t t h i s d o u b le b a r r i e r .

Q. I t i s j u s t t h a t I g o t t h e i m p r e s s i o n y o u h a d b e e n g o i n g
   a t a re a so n a b ly q u ic k sp eed , a q u ic k w a lk , and th e n th e re
   had been a ch an g e in p ace c a u s e d b y t h i s p r o p u ls io n -
   h o w e v e r i t w as c a u s e d • front b e h i n d y o u ? • A. Y e s .         As I
   say , i t i s j u s t n o t n o tic e a b le , th e b a r r i e r , b ecau se o f
   p e o p l e i n f r o n t o f me a n d a l l o f a s u d d e n i t c a m e o u t t h e
   b lu e .
                        C r o s s - E x a m i n e d b y MR. MANNING:

Q. I j u s t w a n t t o c o n t i n u e t h a t p o i n t .    You w e r e w a l k i n g
   q u i c k l y down t h e t u n n e l .     Y ou w o u l d h a v e t h e r e b y g a i n e d
   th e t e r r a c e , b u t a s i t w as you w ere moved i n v o l u n t a r i l y
   an d m ore q u i c k l y to w a r d s t h e t e r r a c e ? - A. Y e s .

Q. B e c a u s e o f t h a t y o u c a n ' t t e l l u s a n y t h i n g a b o u t t h e
   te rra c e i t s e l f .      Y ou w e r e j u s t p u s h e d i n t o i t a n d
   c o n tin u e d t o b e . . . - A. I c a n o n ly t e l l y o u t h e a f t e r m a t h
   of th e te r r a c e s .

Q. W h i c h i s a w f u l a n d a b o u t w h i c h I h a v e t h e g r e a t e s t
   sy m p ath y .        The seco n d q u e s tio n I a a g o in g to a s k you I
   s u p p o s e p a l e s i n t o i n s i g n i f i c a n c e , b u t som e o f t h e t h i n g s
   we h a v e t o d o i s t o t r y a n d r e c o n c i l e t h e b i t s o f
   i n f o r m a t i o n we a r e g i v e n .         We w e r e t o l d v e r y m u c h
   e a r l i e r , i n d e e d l a s t y e a r , w h e n we h e a r d a c o u p l e o f
   w itn e sse s about th e p e rim e te r g a te s .                  I t seem s a tim e
   cam e when a p o l i c e o f f i c e r a n d a s t e w a r d a c t u a l l y c l o s e d
   t h a t p e r i m e t e r g a t e th r o u g h w h ic h y o u cam e a n d th e y
   ta lk e d in te rm s o f h o a rd s and h o a rd s o f p e o p le .                   In fa c t
   t h e s t e w a r d s a i d t h a t t h e p o l i c e o f f i c e r w ho w a s o n t h e
   crow d s i d e o f t h e g a t e i n s t e a d o f t h e c l u b s i d e o f t h e
   g a t e , "He w as v e r y b r a v e .             I was s c a r e d . "     Now
   e v e n t u a l l y t h a t g a t e w as p u s h e d o p e n , t h e f o r c e o f t h e
   crow d p u s h in g i t o p e n .           I t may v e r y w e l l b e y o u d i d n ' t
   s e e a n y o f t h a t a n d when y o u g o t t o i t i t w as o p e n .                  I
   w an ted t o b e s u r e t h a t you h a d a c t u a l l y s e e n i t c l o s e d a t
   som e s t a g e , o r c o u l d i t h a v e . . . — A . W h ic h g a t e a r e y o u
    ta lk in g ab o u t?          T h ere a re th r e e s e t s o f d o u b le g a te s
    th e re .

Q. T h e p e r i m e t e r g a t e , t h e o n e n e a r t o t h e r i v e r s i d e , w h i c h
   you s a i d you w e n t th r o u g h . - A. T h a t o n e w as c l o s e d a lo n g
   w i t h t h e o t h e r tw o a c r o s s , b u t t h e o t h e r tw o a c r o s s h a d
   a l l t h e p e o p l e i n b e tw e e n th e m .       T h i s o n e h a d n o -o n e and
   t h e r e was n o p r e s s u r e .       I th in k you c o u ld h ave j u s t
   u n lo c k e d i t and gone in anyw ay, b u t t h e s te w a rd seem ed to
   be - I w o u ld n 't say a r g u in g , b u t he seem ed to g iv e th e
                                                        92
                                                        •’      f

                                           G. WRIGHT


Q.   What did you then attempt to do? - A. It was
     difficult, but I managed to close the wrought iron
      gates that I tfent to. The right-hand one I was able
      to close and then put the bolt, which is at the bottom
     of the gate, into the concrete ground.    That held that
     one in place. , The left-hand gate unfortunately
     normally padlocks to the right-hand one.    Obviously I
     am not in posse-ssion of .a padlock so I had to hold
      that one closed Using physical force.

Q.   Did you stay turnstile side of the gate, or did you
     place yourself on the outside? - A. I was on the
      turnstile side of the gate.

Q.   So you were holding it closed? - A. They closed
      outwards.  I was on the inside as they open.

Q.   So there you were with a crowd approaching the
     turnstile behind you? - A. I am sorry, sir.

Q.   There was a crowd behind you going towards the
      turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q.   Then there was you? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   Then there was a gate? - A. That is correct.

Q.   Then there was something ahead of you? - A. That is
     correct.

Q.   What was ahead of you? - A. There was a considerable
     crowd on the other side of the gates.

Q.   What was happening with that crowd as far as you could
     see? - A. Again they were pushing, they were trying to
     get the gates open.   They were trying to come forward,
     obviously determined to get in to see the start of the
     match.

Q.   Did you see any horses, can you remember? - A. I had
     seen horses when I had been on the turnstile.  One
     horse had come close in when I had been on the
     turnstile.  I was aware of horses in the area, but I
     didn't notice the specific function of the horses.

Q.   I think whilst you were on that gate you managed to
     hold it for a time, didn't you? - A. I held it for
     most of the time, but it was brought to my attention
     that there was a woman, I think, being crushed up
     against the gate at one stage, and so I managed to
     filter one or two people through, and then I managed
     to close it again.  But two or three times the force
     of the crowd against it just pushed it open.  I
     couldn't hold them.
                                                                                            21

                                                                         A . M. GRIER




  p a s t - 2 I w o u l d n ' t h a v e a n y i d e a h o w m any w e r e d r i n k i n g
  o u tsid e , no.

                      Cross-Examined by MR« PAYNE

Q. Where you have put that cross on the diagram, does that
   show the place where you stood up onto the railing? -
   A. Where we fell off, yes.
0. Did you say that you did that after the teams came out
   onto the field? - A. As they came out onto the field.
   We were singing as they came on the pitch.

Q. Did you climb up onto the railing as they came out? -
   A. Yes.
Q. Did you do that once or more than once? - A. We did it
   a few times before the teams came out, when it was
   empty, when it was fairly empty anyway, but that was
   the last time we did it, as the teams came out.

Q. The    last time was as the teams came out? -                        A. Yes.

Q. Was that when you fell forward onto the crowd in front?
   - A. Yes.
Q. Onto their heads in front? - A. Yes.

Q. Did that have any effect on the crowd in front of you
   when you did that? - A. Not particularly. Obviously
   they are breaking your fall but I don't think anybody
   was seriously injured by that, no.
Q. You don't think anybody was seriously injured? - A. No,
   not at all.
Q. How tall are you? - A. 6.3, 6.3 and a bit.

Q. Do you know what you weigh? - A. 15 stone.

Q. From the point of view of anybody watching from the
   outside, anybody who was not in the pen and looking in,
   when they saw you doing that, is that the normal kind
   of thing that they would expect to see at a football
   match? - A. Well, I would.

Q. You would not? - A. I would.  I have seen that many a
   time. You are not actually diving on the people in
   front of you. You don't dive on them. Obviously you
   fall in, and your feet go in first, you don't dive off
   head first. You fall into a space, you are not jumping
   on people's heads.
                                            A . M. GRIER




So from the point of view, for example, of the Police
trying to police the crowd, that would be quite a
normal thing to see? - A. Yes, I would say yes. I have
seen that many a time.
           Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS

Mr. Grier, when you did that there was a space for you
to fall into? - A. The space is made by you going into
it. Your feet fall into that space.

So people were able to move slightly out of theway for
you to fall into that space? - A. Yes.

That was at a time which was just before the kick-off,
after the teams had come out? - A. Just as they were
coming out.
Could I ask you about something else? The Coroner
asked you about the occasion when Peter Beardsley hit
the crossbar.  You say you didn't see that, you were
turned round? - A. Yes.
Were you able therefore to see towards the tunnel? - A.
Yes.
Could you turn round now and look at the plan? - A.
Yes.
This was therefore, it goes without saying, after the
kick-off? - A. Yes.
Crowded between you where you were standing and the
tunnel? - A. Yes.

Reasonably well packed in?   - A. Yes.

But no more than you would expect or was it worse than
you would expect? - A. I don't usually get turned round
at a game.
But you were able to turn yourself back again at that
time? - A. Yes, at that time.
When you looked backwards towards the tunnel people
were still coming in? - A. Yes.  I couldn't see them
coming in. You can't really see them coming in, it is
just a mass of heads.  You can just feel it, you see,
you obviously feel people squirming in, things like
that.
I think the point is this, that there were people
packed in, as you would expect them to be, between
yourself and the tunnel, that you could see? - A. Yes.
                                            A. M. GRIER
                                                     --




But you could feel people coming in all the time on top
of those people? I don't mean on top of their heads
but behind them? - A. Pushing, yes, pushing to squeeze
themselves in.
Could you see as far back as into the tunnel? - A. No
way, no. You could probably see the top of the tunnel,
but obviously no one coming in from the tunnel.

Can you ask this, and you may not be able to judge it,
but how obvious would it have been for people coming
down the tunnel that there was very little room for
them to come in? - A. Very obvious.
It would have been very obvious, you would say?   Thank
you very much indeed.
             Cross-Examined by MR KING

Mr. Grier, you have obviously been to many football
matches? - A. Yes.
You are an experienced person on the terraces.   I
wonder if you can help, because I think a lot of people
here may not have your experience, a terrace can
contain people who are used to being on the terrace
like yourself, and people for whom it is a new
experience? - A. Of course, yes.

I suspect over the years you have got well used to
being packed on the terrace, would that be fair? - A.
Yes.
At the time Simon said he wanted to leave because he
thought it was getting a bit full, could you understand
what he meant by that for him? - A. Yes, of course.

What was it like, could you put it in your own words,
when he said he thought it was getting a bit full? - A.
What was it like? It was full.
In terms of the people around you, the space you had,
could you describe it a bit? - A. Yes, at semi-finals,
especially the year before, at that stage it was no
worse than the year before.
I understand that.  I am just trying to get a picture,
because you are a man of experience, of what is meant
by full, not so full, not so bad, you see, because what
is to you something you can put up with might be very
different for somebody else? - A. Yes, of course.

When he said he thought it was getting a bit full could
you tell us how much room there was around you and
                                                                                J. GRANT




d o n ' t k n o v , an d I l o s t h im b e c a u s e h e f e l l .  Then th e
b i g s u r g e c a m e a n d I w a s j u s t c a r r i e d o f f my f e e t .
T h e re w a s n 't n o th in g I c o u ld do.

T hat surge a c tu a lly           c a r r i e d you to w here you f i n i s h e d
u p a t t h e e n d ? - A.         I t w as j u s t in t h e la p o f th e g o d s
w here I la n d e d .

Y ou c o u l d n o t d o a n y t h i n g   about    it?     -    A. N o, I c o u l d n ' t
do n o th in g .

And t h a t   surge     cam e from b e h i n d      you,        d id    it?   - A.   Y es.

Can y o u r e c o l l e c t , was a n y t h i n g h a p p e n i n g on t h e p i t c h
t h a t y o u c a n r e l a t e t o t h i s s u r g e ? - A. A f t e r w a r d s o r
b efore?

When t h i s b i g s u r g e c a m e w h a t t i m e  w as i t ?      W hat I am
t r y i n g t o f i n d o u t i s w h a t t i m e i t w as when t h e b i g
s u r g e c a m e ? - A. T h e g a m e w a s i n p r o g r e s s , a n d a f t e r i t
t h e r e was a l o t o f s h o u t i n g a n d s c r e a m i n g a n d t h e r e w as
p e o p le tr y i n g to c lim b o v e r th e fe n c e and g e t t i n g t o l d
to go b a c k .

N o , we w i l l c o m e t o    th a t in a m in u te .    We h a v e n o t g o t
to th a t p o in t y e t.       I am s t i l l o n t h e s u r g e . - A. A t
th a t surge I d i d n 't       know w h a t w as g o i n g o n .

D id you s e e     B eard sley h i t       th e   crossbar?            - A. No.

In y o u r s ta te m e n t you s a i d      it    was a t       4 -m in u te s-p a st-3 ?
- A. A r o u n d t h a t t i m e .

B u t you d o n ' t know r e a l l y ?      - A.    I d o n ' t know.

T h a t was a g u e s s ?    - A. Y e s .

I t d o e s n ' t m a t t e r , I am j u s t t r y i n g t o s e e o n w h a t
b a s i s you s a i d t h a t .    Y ou d i d n ' t l o o k a t y o u r w a t c h ?      -
A. N o.

You d i d n ' t s e e w h a t w as h a p p e n i n g o n t h e f i e l d ? - A.
When t h e s u r g e c a m e I c o u l d h a v e b e e n t h r o w n r o u n d , I
d o n 't r e a l l y rem em ber.

Now we co m e t o t h e f e n c i n g .         When y o u h i t t h e c r o w d a n d
w ere s t a t i o n a r y , b e f o r e t h i s s u r g e , b e f o r e t h i s b ig
s u r g e w h ic h moved you d o w n , c o u l d y o u s e e p e o p le
c l i m b i n g t h e f e n c e s ? - A. B e f o r e t h e s u r g e ?

Y es.   - A. N o.

After the surge? - A. Yes, there was people trying to
get out.
                                                                                                  76


                                                                          L.   F.    CAMPBELL




Q. Do y o u k n o w w h a t I m e a n b y          th e   p erim eter g ates?         -   A.
   The b ig b lu e g a t e s .

Q.    The b ig b lu e g a t e s , y e s .         Was i t p a c k e d o u t s i d e t h o s e ?
     - A. W e l l , p e o p l e w e r e s t i l l w a l k i n g d o w n , h a n g i n g
     a r o u n d w a i t i n g f o r t h e q u e u e s t o go dow n, b u t i t was
     g e t t i n g l a t e , to w a rd s k i c k - o f f , so p e o p le s t a r t e d to
     hurry in .

Q. Were the gates open, those perimeter gates, can you
   remember? - A. Yes, they were.

Q. They were? - A. They were to start off with.

Q.   Did you see any Officers,  either mounted or otherwise?
     - A. I seen one mounted Officer.   I have seen him at
     Anfield.

Q. He is a Mersey chap? - A. Yes.

Q. Where was he? - A. He was in front of the perimeter
   gates? The turnstile side of the perimeter gates - he
   was inside.

Q. Inside but near the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you notice what he was doing? - A. He was trying to
   get an orderly queue going but the people at the
   turnstiles were checking everyone so he couldn't quite
   get them to be orderly, because there were still people
   coming in.

Q. What was stopping him? - A. There were too many people.

Q. It was just too many? - A. Too many, yes.

Q. Did you notice whether people were pushing? - A. People
   were pushing, yes.

Q. Hard, soft? - A. Well, it is the buzz of the football
   match, the buzz that gets people going.  They are
   getting hyperactive because they are not getting in
   early enough.

 Q. So there was quite a bit of it, in other words? - A.
    There was quite a bit of pushing outside, yes.

 Q. The Officer whom you saw on the horse, was he shouting
    and waving or what was he doing? - A. He was just
    shouting to people, can they stop pushing.  In the end
    he shut the perimeter gates but he couldn't keep them
    closed on his own.  People were trying to still come in
    so he couldn't keep the gates locked on his own.
                                                                        L.    F.     CAMPBELL




opened a j a r p e o p le j u s t pushed               it     open anyw ay.          That is
when t h e c r o w d w e r e g o i n g i n .

Had y o u s e e n i t o p e n b e f o r e o r w a s t h a t t h e f i r s t t i m e
t h a t you h a d n o t i c e d i t ? - A. T h a t w as t h e f i r s t t i m e I
had n o ti c e d i t .

H av in g g o t s w e p t t h r o u g h , s o t o s p e a k , o r c a r r i e d
th rough, you f in is h e d up in s id e th e c o n c o u rse a r e a ,
d i d n ' t y o u . a b i g g i s h a r e a on t h e i n s i d e , t h a t i s
r i g h t , i s n t i t ? - A. Y e s .

You d i d n ' t   hand    in   your    tic k e t       o r a n y th in g     lik e    th a t?    -
A. No.

N o bod y a s k e d y o u ? - A .     No,   I was w a i t i n g         for    som eone         to
ask fo r th e t i c k e t .

H av in g g o t t h r o u g h t h a t b i g b l u e g a t e , d i d t h i n g s
q u i e t e n down?       W ere y o u a b l e t o g e t y o u r f e e t b a c k on
t h e g r o u n d ? - A. I s t o p p e d a n d I l o o k e d r o u n d a n d I
s e e n t h e p l a y e r s on t h e p i t c h .

How d i d y o u s e e t h o s e ?        W h e r e d i d y o u s e e t h e m ? - A. I
l o o k e d do w n t h e t u n n e l . I w a l k e d do w n t h e t u n n e l ,
p e o p l e w e re s t i l l r u s h i n g i n , a n d when I g o t t o t h e en d
o f th e t u n n e l I lo o k e d r o u n d t o s e e w h ic h was t h e
e m p t i e s t p a r t , b u t t h e n I was p u s h e d i n t o t h e l e f t h a n d
sid e of th e tu n n e l.

So y o u w e r e a b l e t o a c t u a l l y w a l k d o w n t h e t u n n e l u n d e r
y o u r own s t e a m , s o t o s p e a k ?      T h e r e may h a v e b e e n a l o t
o f p e o p l e a r o u n d b u t y o u w e r e n ' t b e i n g c a r r i e d ? - A. I
w a s n 't b e in g c a r r i e d , n o .

You g o t t o t h e e x i t , i f I c a n u s e t h a t w o r d , a n d y o u
w ere j u s t s u r v e y i n g t h e s c e n e , t r y i n g t o make up y o u r
m in d w h i c h w ay t o g o , a n d y o u s a y y o u t h e n g o t c a r r i e d ?
- A. P u s h e d d o w n , f u r t h e r do w n t h e p e n , t h e n I w a s
g e ttin g c ru sh e d a g a in s t th e b a r r i e r so I s o r t of
lo w e re d m y s e lf u n d e r n e a t h i t , t h i n k i n g i t w o u ld b e okay
th e o t h e r s i d e o f th e b a r r i e r , b u t th e n e v e r y o n e seem ed
to c a r r y on p u s h i n g , p e o p l e w e re co m in g u n d e r n e a t h i t
anyw ay.         I g o t m y se lf i n t o th e c e n t r e w here th e
p e r i m e t e r f e n c e w a s , a n d I was s t a n d i n g t h e r e n e x t t o
S t e v e n R o b i n s o n , who u n f o r t u n a t e l y d i d n ' t m a k e i t o u t .
I t r i e d t o h e l p him .         He w a s w i t h a y o u n g l a d .

D id y o u kn o w S t e v e n R o b i n s o n ?    -     A.    N o,   I d id n 't     know
h im a t a l l .

 When y o u f i r s t e n t e r e d t h e p e n - I am j u s t g o i n g t o
 t a k e y o u b a c k a m o m en t - we k n o w t h e p l a y e r s w e r e on
                                                                                    119




                                                                      N. 6 .   LANGLEY


flu n g open, th e one n e a r e s t th e bank i t s e l f *   Then
e v e n tu a lly th e o t h e r one m ust h a v e been opened*

I w alk ed i n q u i t e c o m f o r ta b ly *    I w as n o t p u sh ed o r
ru sh e d in any w ay.         I ended up g o in g i n t o th e la r g e
g a te , around th e s id e o f th e t u r n s t i l e s .         T h e re w as one
p o licem an t h e r e   w h o I o f f e r e d ray t i c k e t t o a n d h e s a i d ,
"No, j u s t c a r r y   o n , m ake y o u r way i n . "

The o n ly o t h e r p o l i c e m a n I saw w as a t t h e r e a r o f t h e
tu rn s tile s .      I t w as o n l y o n e    p o licem an t h e r e .      In fro n t
o f me t h e r e w a s       a tu n n e l w ith A o r B above th e tu n n e l.
T here w ere no o t h e r d i r e c t i o n s to say t h e r e w ere o t h e r
t u n n e l s and t h e r e w as no v i s i b l e m eans o f o t h e r t u n n e l s ,
so I assum ed s t r a i g h t th r o u g h t h e sam e t u n n e l a s
everybody e l s e .           A t t h i s tim e t h e r e w a s n 't a l o t o f
peo p le t h e r e .      T h e re was j u s t p e o p l e b r i s k l y w a lk in g i n .

I e n te re d th e tu n n e l.            I t had been a v ery b r ig h t day and
a s I g o t i n t o t h e t u n n e l i t w as p i t c h b l a c k a n d i t w as a
c a se o f you w ere f e e l i n g y o u r w ay, b a s i c a l l y , w ith y o u r
f e e t o r w h a te v e r.       T h e re w ere o t h e r p e o p le w ith you so
you te n d e d t o go a l o n g , m ak in g c e r t a i n yo u w e r e n 't g o in g
to s l i p on a s t e p o r a n y t h in g .            A l l o f a s u d d e n , when
y o u r e y e s w ere a d j u s t e d , th e n y o u c o u l d s e e w h at w as
h ap p en in g a t th e end o f th e t u n n e l .              By t h i s t i m e I w a s
a b o u t h a l f o r t h r e e - q u a r t e r s o f t h e way t h r o u g h t h e
tu n n e l.

The n e x t m i n u t e t h e r e seem ed t o b e a r u s h , a s u r g e , o f
p eo p le.      I t j u s t s t a r t e d from a n o rm a l, q u i c k , b r i s k
w alk t h r o u g h t h e t u n n e l i n t o a m a s s i v e s u r g e a t t h e e n d
of th e tu n n e l.        So m uch s o t h a t I w a s n ' t a w a r e t h e r e w as
a b a r r i e r a t t h e e n d o f t h i s t u n n e l u n t i l when I g o t t o
th e end I q u ic k ly bounced o f f th e s i d e o f th e b a r r i e r and
was th r o w n t o t h e l e f t h a n d s i d e .




                       As I    say,    as   I w as
                                                    120

                                 N.G. LANGLEY



      As I say as I was approaching towards the end of
the tunnel I could see there was players on the football
field because I could see a red and a green shirt.

      The next thing I was into the pen surging down the
steps over one barrier on to the floor, a couple of like
that and we got up. A couple of us had gone over or under
the barrier of some description.  I quickly got up and
then you were pushed again you were surged down and then
several times I had gone down again, by which time I was
near the base of the steps but I was against people, I
was being weaved in between people through the pressure
and before you know it I was not quite standing I was
more half crouched than anything else trying to get up
each time and at the same time as you were trying to get
up people were pushing you forward and you were going
down and you were still trying to get up all the time.

      Soon I was down on the floor.   It seemed to be
a while.  One lad was sayings   "This lad's down, let's
get him up".  Someone tried to get me up and as he was
trying to get me up he came down and then we finally
sort of like were squashed.   We were getting unbearably
squashed.  It got to a stage where you would not have
been able to rise from the floor from a crouching position
and shortly after I could hear people then just shouting:
"Get back” and then when I managed to rise this one
time I could hear, I presume they were Stewards and Police
behind the goal because then I was virtually within feet
of them and they were shoutings   "Push back, push back"
and I could hear people sayings   "How the hell can you
push, you can't even bloody breathe in here" and it was
just impossible to move any of them, so much so that
I was down again and I could not get up this time.

       THE CORONERs  Just take your time.  Have a little
drink.   Do you want a break? Shall we just break for
a few minutes.   I think we can stop for five minutes
and allow this witness to recover all right. We will
stop for a few minutes and give you a chance.   Okay.
Then we will let you carry on.   You are doing very very
well indeed.

      MR. MANNINGS  I wonder if the jury could be
excused and I might just address you sir?

      THE CORONER:   Yes.

                     (The jury retire)

      MR. MANNING:   We have all clearly got a problem
here sir.
                                                                                                54

                                                                                  H . J . CLARK


Q.    W hen y o u g o t o u t i n t h e f i r s t i n s t a n c e ,     d id you see
     a n y th in g h ap p en in g on th e p itc h a t a l l ?           - A. No.
                                                                 v
Q.    W hat w as i t l i k e on t h e t e r r a c i n g a t t h a t p o i n t ?       -    A.
     J u s t t h e n o rm a l Sem i F i n a l a t t h a t p o i n t .

Q.   Do y o u l i k e b e i n g b e h i n d t h e g o a l n o r m a l l y o r d o y o u
     p r e f e r t o b e i n w h at I c a l l t h e w in g ? - A. I l i k e
     b e in g in th e t e r r a c i n g b eh in d th e g o a l b u t I d o n 't
     l i k e b e i n g d i r e c t l y b e h in d t h e g o a l b e c a u s e y o u know
     th e r e i s g o in g to be q u it e a b i t o f p u sh in g .               I lik e
     to be a t an a n g le to th e g o a l.

Q. W h a t d i d y o u d o , h a v i n g s o r t o f e x i t e d ?  D id y o u f i n d
   a p o s i t i o n ? - A . As s o o n a s we g o t i n , a s we s a i d ,
   t u r n e d r i g h t a n d t h e n t o o k t h e f i r s t fe w s t e p s down
   t o t h e f i r s t b a r r i e r a n d we j u s t l i k e s t o o d b e h i n d
   th e f i r s t b a r r i e r f o r a w h ile o r th e f i r s t co u p le o f
   b a r r i e r s f o r a w h i l e a s I eon n o t s u r e w h i c h o n e .

Q. A t t h a t p o i n t I t h i n k y o u s a i d y o u w e r e n o t t o o
   c o n c e r n e d , i t w as j u s t a n o t h e r b i g m a tc h ? - A. Y es.

Q.   D id y o u t h e n s e e t h e p l a y e r s com e o u t b e f o r e t h e
     k i c k - o f f ? - A. Y es, I t h i n k I d i d s e e t h a t .         I
     c o u l d n 't sw ear to i t .          I s e e n th e m on t h e p i t c h b u t I
     d i d n ' t a c t u a l l y s e e th e m com e o u t .    They w e r e n 't
     t h e r e when I f i r s t s e e n t h e p i t c h .

Q. W h en y o u f i r s t s a w t h e p l a y e r s o n t h e p i t c h w e r e y o u
   s t i l l in t h i s f i r s t p o s itio n o r had you a lre a d y
   m oved? - A. No, we w e r e s t i l l t h e r e I t h i n k .

Q. W h a t h a p p e n e d t h e n ? - A . S u d d e n l y w h e n w e w e r e i n t h e
   tu n n e l i t w as o k ay .       S u d d e n ly l o a d s w e re co m in g i n
   th e tu n n e l and you w ere g e ttin g su d d e n ly pushed
   f u r t h e r an d f u r t h e r down.        We c o u l d n ' t s t a n d w h e r e we
   o r i g i n a l l y p la n n e d on s ta n d in g .     We w e r e g e t t i n g
   p u sh ed f u r t h e r and f u r t h e r dow nw ards.

Q. W as i t a t s u d d e n p r e s s u r e ? - A . A t f i r s t , y e s .   T h ere
   w as a s u r g e , and th e n a slo w s u r g e , and th e n t h e r e
   w o u ld b e a s u r g e a g a i n a c o u p le o f m i n u te s l a t e r .

Q.   D id t h e s e s u r g e s w h ic h y o u h a v e m e n t i o n e d ,   d id th e y
     o c c u r w hen t h e p l a y e r s w e re a l r e a d y on t h e       fie ld ? -
     A. Y es.

Q.   I t w as a t t h a t p o i n t t h a t you l o s t c o n t a c t w i t h       G ary
     a n d M a r t i n , i s t h a t r i g h t ? - A. Y e s .

Q. A s f a r a s y o u w e r e c o n c e r n e d h a d y o u e n d e d u p r i g h t
   a t o n e o f t h e f e n c e s ? - A. A t t h e e n d I e n d e d u p
   r i g h t in t h e b o tto m c o r n e r on t h e l e f t h and s i d e .
                                                                                                        8

                                                                                    S.   M.   D.      GRAY


     b i g f o o t b a l l crow ds I h ad n e v e r w itn e s s e d a n y th in g l i k e
     i t befo re.           A l m o s t i m m e d i a t e l y we h a d p u s h e d i n l e f t y o u
     w e r e a w a r e y o u c o u l d n ' t move a n d y o u w e re a w a r e ,
     o b v i o u s l y , o f w h a t was g o i n g o n a r o u n d y o u .

Q. Y o u s a y p e o p l e w e r e b e i n g      p u lle d   up   in to     th e    sta n d s     at
   t h a t p o i n t ? - A. Y es.

Q.   Had y o u e v e r s e e n t h a t b e f o r e , p e o p l e b e i n g   p u lle d           up?    -
     A. O n ly o n c e b e f o r e .

Q. Where was that? - A. That was at Goodison - Everton's
   football ground.

Q. Not at Hillsborough? - A. No.

Q.    I think you did tell me you were                        at the1988 match                   as
     well? - A. That is correct.

Q. Were you in the same part of the ground or were you
   somewhere different? - A. No, I was in one of the stands.

Q. Having taken your steps to the left, describe to me what
   happened then as far as you were concerned? - A. Almost
   within - I'm sure it was only a matter of seconds of
   pushing in there was a surge from behind.    When I say it
   may have been three or four steps, it was probably only
   one or two.We had only just really got     in and there
   was this surge from behind.    Before I knew what had
   happened I had probably gone down a dozen or so paces
   down the terracing, half way between the back of the
   terracing and the fence at the front.    I wasn t walking
   or anything.    I think probably my feet were off the
   ground most of the time.

Q. So your movement was involuntary from there up to that
   position? - A. Totally involuntary and in a forward
   position.    I couldn't push back to stand at all.

0. At one point I think you spoke to your friend Edie and
   you mentioned you could see a particular player.   Can
   you tell me when that was? - A. Within seconds of...
   Almost as we moved to the left.

0. Was that before this surge or after? - A. Immediately
   before.

Q. His comment was he couldn't see the pitch? - A. That s
   right.    He was actually facing me and couldn t turn
   round or anything.

Q. Did you see the match kick-off at all?                               - A. Yes.

Q. You did seeit kick-off? - A. Yes.
i


                                                                  21

                                                         G. I. SEDDON


    Q. You had no idea at all what was going on down in front
       of you? - A. No, pot at that time.

                   C ro ss-E x am in ed   b y MR. KING

    0. Mr. Seddon, can you just help us on some of the matters
       you have been asked about already for the moment?  Wnen
       you talk about going with the crowd, and the weight of
       the crowd, what do you mean by that? - A. If there is a
       large number of people going the same place it is a lot
       of weight.

    0. Do you yourself as an individual have much control over
       your own movements when you are in a crowd like that? -
       A. No.

    Q. It has been suggested to you that you stopped and then
       you moved forward again.  What caused you to move
       forward again? - A. At what point was tnis?

    Q. While you were by the horse, the Police horse. - A.
       With the weight of the crowd the Police horse
       dispersed.

    0. Were you yourself consciously forcing your way in? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. In so doing was it with the people around you, tnat you
       were up against the people in front of you then, and
       the person in front of you was naving the weight of you
       behind them? - A. No.   When the Police horses
       separated, I moved.   I went to the turnstile.

    Q. And the person in front of you, they went too? - A. I
       think at that time we were near enough at the front.

    0. I see, you were at the front, so you did not have to
       force your way in by the sound of it? - A. No, tne
       Police horses got out of the way, pushed or separated
       themselves, I don't know.

    0. Sorry, I misunderstood you.  I thought you said you
       forced your way in and clearly you did not nave to
       force your way? - A. No, you went with the weight of
       tne crowd behind you.

    0. Let me then take you into the ground, and this does
       interest me.  You say that you went through a gate
       which we know is gate B - I wonder if Hr. Griffiths
       could just show us gate B - that would take you into
       the concourse on the other side of the dividing wall
       from the tunnel? - A. That is right.

    0. You see the gateway you went through? - A. Yes.
