17th ~M&« 1989
                                                                                         ^O R
                                              Brent Anthony John S20RSY,Police Constable 1949,
                                                                                                Z   j
        "                                     Kamraerton Road Police .station,Sheffield




 I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police,presently stationed at Hasmerton Soad
 Police Station,Sheffield.Since 1983 I have regularly worked at Hillsborough Football Ground
 and at different tines have worked within all areas of the stadium.

 At 9#00am on Saturday 15th April 1369 I was on duty at Hamer",)!: ..end Police Station,Sheffield
 for the occasion of the 2.A. cup oetai-i'inal match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
 At.10.00am that date I attended at Hillsborough Football Qrou-'.a,together with other Officers
 for a briefing.At this time i was designated as part of Seriel 3 under the direct supervision
 of Police Sergeant 577 Gardner.After the briefing,together with other members of the Seriel
 1 made a starch of the Upper Deck of the oouth Stand and then reverted to duties on
 turnstiles    numbers29 to 32 which were in sole use for the Kottingham Forest supporters.Ihis
 duty vv&o in company     with PC 2817 Hudson,PC 261 Cooper and PC 3341 -itcnel!,with occasional
 visits from supervisory Officers.From 12 midday to approximately 1.30pm a slow trickle of
 supporters entered through these turnstiles and from 1.45pm this tric&e became a steady stream
 but at no time did I see more than five or six people having to queue at any turnstile.Prior
 to 3.0'Jpm 1 aiu not leave this area and at that time 1 remained in the same vicinity together
 with PC Hudson for any latecomers,but there were very few.At approximately 3.10pa it was
 quiet enough to resume to the uouth «tand upper deck.'together with PC Hudson 1 went to the
 Upper jjeck and on entering the stand above trie pitch I could see that, there appea.ed to have
 been a pitch invasion in front of the Leppings lane taraces and I could see Police Officers,
 sua^orters ana Pressmen massed around that end of the pitch,! could see that a number of
 suf^>rt-.rs were hanging on tue goalposts and causing them to aiuve quite violently*

 Prior to entering the stand _ waa not in contact with a Pclice radio.I remained in the same
 stand for at least another ten minutes during which time I sav. a large nuber of -..fficers come
 on to t;vc pitch,initially lining down the length of the pitch in front of the North Jttnd
 and then moving in.a lino acoross the centre of the pitch.By this time I could see several
 supporters were using advertising hoardings as stretchers and I could see several peo. le being
 given first aid on t.ue pitch by supporters,police Officers and the St,Johns Ambulance Brigade.

 At approximately 3.30pm,myself and PC Hudson left the stand area and made our way to the bar,
 where a number of Nottingham Forest supporters were leaving the ground.V.e then made our way
 to the rear of the South stand and walked to the Leppings Lane area.Alongside the railings
 bordering the river at that location,! could-see. approximately 12 peolple apparently dead
 with their faces covered.! then went to the area immediately to the rear of the West Stand
 where I assisted injured people from that area and joined a number of other officers in
 directing supporters away from that immediate area.

 At appruximat sly € .00p... together with other officers,r made- my way to the north Stand and a
            iater v.a-- released from duty.




                    1949
