                                                                                       M IR .15
            . S nelL- m m Ref: j 11 w X
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised   24-1 (4 (33 g-iS j          Number


Title      ^ J L K X Q jN   jV tfr V \
(Include source and any document number i f relevdtuM


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Ye*/No
                                                                                                               Receiver




                                                                                                                  Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                    €   l     \      &
                                                                                                           Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                  Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                      0 /M          SIO




                                                                                                                  Indexer
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                      1
Lord Chief Justice Taylor.
Hillsborough Inquiry,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground,
Sheffield, Yorkshire.                          20th April, 1989.




Dear Sir,


       In your Television Interview you intimated that any who
wished to contribute would be given an opportunity if a safe
remedy could be offered at your inquiry.
       The above research company specialises in safety and our
reaction naturally centred on the "cage" which was overpressurised.
No Liquid or Gas Vessel would ever be designed without an automatic
relief valve.
       To prevent an unruly crowd from invading the pitch requires
Policing Barriers which will give progressively under crowd
pressure.   If the Hillsborough Barriers had been sectionally designed
to fit on base slides, the 20 foot section in question would have been
pushed outwards towards the pitch allowing breathing space and escape
exits at each end of the frame.
       Our view is that existing barriers only need to be modified so
that the Police can easily identify the pressure points and so react
accordingly.    We shall be happy to offer further details if required.


Yours sincerely.                              PHESSUBE
     i




                                /S'
                                 < V   |      < 2>

                                03 2PAPR C
                                       1233



Lord Chief Justice Taylor.
Hillsborough Inquiry,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground,
Sheffield,
Yorkshire.




                                                     3
