                                                     / /2/
                                                   10 7      30   .




MCMANUS



POLICE CONSTABLE 2819



At 9am on Saturday 15 April 1 9 8 9 , I paraded for duty at Barnsley

Divisional Headquarters and subsequently travelled to Hillsborough

Football Ground for the F.A. Cup Semi-Final between Liverpool and

Nottingham Forest, arriving at the ground at 9-30am.

I then attended a briefing held in the main North Stand by Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield.    The main emphasis of this briefing seemed

to be that on no account would anyone be allowed into the ground without

a ticket.

After a brief meal break I then attended together with the rest of my

serial (14) under the supervision of Police Sergeant 1341 Crawford on

the Leppings Lane terrace for a further briefing held by Inspector

White.    This briefing was concerned with the searching of persons

entering the ground.    We were instructed to give them a good search.     I

was also instructed that in the event of the emergency evacuation

procedure being implemented ie the message ’THE ATTENDANCE OF MR MEADOWS

IS URGENTLY REQUIRED AT POLICE CONTROL' was passed over the loudspeaker,

that I was to go to the tunnel at the Leppings Lane terrace and assist

with the evacuation of the ground.    I am unsure how I was supposed to do

this and indeed, if the situation of an evacuation had arisen, I think

that it would have been impossible even to get into the tunnel.

At around 1.30am together with the rest of serial 14 I took up a
position at the inside of the Leppings Lane turnstiles.      By this time

two turnstiles were already open and the rest were opened over the next

15 to 20 minutes.

Together with Police Constable 2887 Grant I took responsibility for

turnstiles   'F' and 'G'.    We arranged with the turnstile operators that

if they were in difficulty they would bang on a small window situated at

the rear of each turnstile in order to attract our attention.

At around 12 noon the first Liverpool fans began arriving at the ground.

They were few in number and were in good humour.      I could see that they

were being searched outside the ground and let them straight through.

We were then told by Inspector White to search everyone even if we could

see that they had been searched before.      By about 1.30pm the flow of

fans was increasing, however, it was still only a steady flow and most

were searched.   A few did object to being searched but agreed after the

situation had been explained to them.     The view through the turnstiles

was still clear and it was not crowded outside the ground.

At about 2pm the turnstile operator knocked on the window stating that a

fan was trying to get in without a ticket.     He came through the

turnstile and was then ejected through Gate 'C' whilst doing this we

were surrounded by his friends who abused us, claiming he had got a

ticket.   This happened about a dozen times in the next 20 minutes.        I

also saw two or three people offer money to the operators which was

refused and the fans who did this then went away.

At about 2.30pm large numbers of supporters arrived and began to crowd

around the turnstiles.      It quickly became apparent that it was
impossible to carry on searching and this was abandoned in favour of

getting people into the ground as quickly as possible and ejecting those

without tickets.     Whilst attempting to eject one man through Gate 'C',

the steward refused to open the gate because he feared that supporters

would rush in.     He was instructed to open the gate and then the man was

ejected without significant problems.

It was apparent that large numbers of people coming through the

turnstiles were under the influence of alcohol but it was impractical to

eject them due to their huge numbers.

By about 2.45pm it was apparent there were some problems outside the

ground.   Many people coming through the turnstiles were obviously

distressed.   Some collapsed, others were holding their ribs and were

obviously in pain.

The turnstiles, particularly       , kept jamming under the weight of

people, this resulted in the person at the front being crushed on the

turnstile by those behind.     One man was cut free using a knife after his

clothing became caught trapping him in the turnstile.

Officers, myself included, were being jostled, abused and threatened by

Liverpool fans, blaming us for the crush outside the ground and

demanding that we do something about it.     I did not have a radio and was

not in sight of a supervisory officer.     As far as I could see there were

only officers from serial 14 and that section of the ground who were all

receiving similar treatment from the Liverpool fans.    We were obviously

very heavily outnumbered and in my opinion on the point of coming under

physical attack.     I would say that it is one of the most intimidating
and frightening situations that I have faced.

A number of fans were scaling the outer walls and climbing into the

ground.   I was unable to do anything to stop this.

After a time a senior officer who I do not know but I believe to be an

Inspector, came and instructed thatGate 'C' was to be opened.       The gate

was opened and this was followed     by a mad rush. I can only describe

what happened as like a cattle stampede.    Several people at the front

fell over and were trampled upon     by the rest of the crowd who ran in.

After the main body of the crowdhad passed the     gate was forced shut.       I

would estimate that by this time about 2,000 people had run through.

The gate was opened again and about 200 - 300 people ran in.      This

accounted for the majority of fans but people kept coming through the

turnstiles for several minutes.    In addition, Gate 'C' was left

partially open to act as an extra turnstile.

Shortly after 3pm, the flow of fans had stopped.      I then became aware of

a tannoy message to the effect,    'Liverpool supporters get off the

pitch.'   An officer, I can't remember who, told us that there was a

pitch invasion and as a serial we went to the pitch via the South Stand.

On reaching the pitch it became apparent immediately that there was not

a pitch invasion but that people were scaling the security fence in

order to escape overcrowding.

I made my way over to the fencing and could see that people were being

crushed against the wall and security fence by the crowd behind them.
Other officers were at    the gates in the fence trying to pull people out

of the     crowd, but were having difficulty, due to the numbers involved

and the sheer weight of people behind them.        The effect of this was to

cause a 'log jam' at the gates.

At this stage there was no room around the gates in order to get to

people who were trapped and give assistance.        I stood on an advertising

board adjacent to the fence and shouted in a loud voice for people

further back to move back, this was met with a hail of abuse from

elements in the crowd, a number of small items which I believe to be

coins,     were thrown but none of these hit me.

I then     began to assist people over the fence on to the pitch     however,

this was hampered by their clothing and in one case flesh being caught

on the spikes at the top of the fence.     After helping 3 or 4 people

over, the advertising hoarding on which I was standing gave way and I

was no longer able to do this.

This took place directly behind the goal and just to my right an attempt

was being made to tear down the fencing.     I joined in this attempt and a

gap was made in the fencing through which several people were unable to

escape .

I would say that upon my arrival at the pitch I could see that people

were being crushed but I could not see anyone dead.       I could see people

gradually having more difficulty breathing and eventually passing out.

After some time when the more badly injured and dead were being brought

out of pen 3 via the gate, I went to assist in clearing them away from

the gate on to the pitch.
                             -   6   -




With the assistance of a St John's Ambulanceman, I dragged one man to

the pitch and began to resuscitate him.     After a few minutes the man

came round and began breathing on his own.     I then left him.   I cannot

describe this man.

I then saw Police Sergeant 690 Hall who was attempting resuscitation on

a youth.    I assisted him in an attempt to resuscitate the youth.    The

youth                breathed on his own but then stopped breathing again.

We continued with mouth to mouth resuscitation                              I

then felt his mouth go very stiff and I knew he was dead.     I left him

and saw another officer who I do not know attempting to resuscitate a

man.    I assisted him and we continued for several minutes without

response.     I was then approached by a man who was a doctor who asked if

he could help.    He looked at the man and told us there was no point in

continuing.

On looking around I could see that most casualties were being seen to,

with help from Liverpool fans the man was placed on to a piece of

advertising hoarding and taken to the gym underneath the North Stand.

On arrival I was told by a CID Officer to stay with the body.     I argued

against this because I wanted to go back to see if I could offer further

assistance.    As a result of this my collar number was written on the

hand of the body and I went back outside.

By this time it appeared that the dead and seriously injured were being

taken care of.    I then went to where a number of people were sitting and

laying at the edge of the pitch and checked that they were not in

immediate need of assistance.
