                                                                                                                                                                                          r ■'J4/ub
                                                                                                                                                                   e.jT.                         .)
                                                                                                                                                                     i/t
                                                                                                                                                                             fv ^ W   L
                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                               /*y/v



            l      .     u      e           b           p          o        o       ^       ^                                                           c         l          u   b




            V
            — J — aSsrSSES
                 O f fic ft. 1 S p o n s o r
                                                                                  T e . « 6 a 7 6 6 ° 5J    ;2 | 3 3 3 6 1 / a
                                                                                                                      Pax 0 5 1 - S e o UK-
                                                                                  M °CCh »^orm.t*on Serwio. o ,f ‘      E"9'»"d
                                                                                          osi-eeo s9as         y Ma- I>Ti^.1 orriw,. e„W Hi*w D,,y
                                                                                                                         001-660 8880



                 •
                 “ “ S S T c L i : ^                                             c°—
                 Cook Street,
                 Liverpool
                L2 9SH.
                                                                                                                         24 th      May 1989
                Dear




                mat cheda-lre °n 5tewardl^ Uan d eFirstdAi d d 9th1M a y '                                                              The information
                                  ys> prior to the Hiii^ - o Ugh                                                                                                 «

             City Building ^Surveyor                                                               WkiCh iS lssued by the 1 ■
             calls for a tQt .                                     ?        ’ the esta W l s h m e n t     for first L                                  Liverpool

             awards                 and thelr k n J C T n ^ L t                                      ^    " lnl" u"
                                                                                                distrxbutxon are given b e l o w -
                                  E         Q+-______ _
                                    y i t - Stewards
                                  Exit
                                                                                                                   41
                                  R
                                  r :   U       f   ^          U       $   t ™   * r d s
                                 Crowd Stewards                                                                    15
                                 Safety Stewards                                                                   46
                                                                                                               J   -JL


                                                                                                               116

           number                                                                                  190 stewards per e o M                                 T,
           increase ln



                                                                                                                    a"d 7 •>'<"* ■te»«d.


          nl»      » '"trance areas and 5 admim-                                                  °verInK players and other




          1 2 in number.                                                          at            close of each match a M                            total




      f    i0(*^~«Vmbered jacket.                                                                    e<^tc^and
                                                                                            °P*iate task   y 1,16 I/C with a
                                                                                                                issued     <



t.F.C.                                                      K-M. OAlGiJSH M a £                                          contd....
 rteflisisrwTfsdob , m   s
                                                            PLAV« ' T E A M M a N a G E *                      P S. ROSlMSQN

                                                                                                               c h ie f e x e c u t iv e / g e n e r a l s e c r e t a r y
 between chief stewards, club offici l        publlc. communication
 by portable radio (6 ) L d Z t t Z t , U ’ P°lice and d^ y stewards i
 situated in every area of the start.manned tel*pbone points (24)
 control and complication centre flT'n ^         lnternal ^lephfne
 computer and printer, togethefwitJ ! J T * * the Crowd contr*ol
 anJ^ s c a n n in S by p o l i c e p e rs o n n e l from 7        ° 661466,1 r e c e i v i n g
 and o u t s i t th e s ta d lu m # P ? ° n®* £ o m J e a j e r a 6 c o v e r in g i n s l d e g
 control within the stadium.                  pollce have 2 separeate rooms for



 of the ground i n ^ h e ^ J d o c k E n c l o ^ r f                         at either e«d
     gade c o v e r e v e r y e v e n t a t i-ho    "                    John Ambulance
members p r e s e n t , w it h an a m L ! g r ?Und W lth 24 o f f i c e r s and
s tre tc h e rs a v a ila b le .                 6 a t t e n d a n c e , w it h 30



the Leppings L a n e ^ n d ^ f ^ i l               °f lhe suPPorters entering
proportion with any accuracy               ^ r°Ugh this ls dif^ t    t o *


Hillsborough Steering C o M i J t e r a n d ^ f *1 U * * helPful to the
Please do not hesitate to contact me. ¥ W requlre •"ything further


                                        Yours sincsrfily(




                                                    Assistant Secretary
                             '— I
                                    ■31 May 89 18:51 N o . 004 P . 03/05




    C«-C*W|i.vC^■■   ^

)                        Y
✓
                                                                                          MIR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and tim e raised                             Number



Title
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions - - urgent action — Yes/No              X
                                                                                                                Receiver




                                                                                                                   Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                            Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                   Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined • further action to be taken                                                                       O /M         SIO




                                                                                                                   Indexer
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master N um ber Form
n           vo ^ 3 , ^ ^

    \ j ^   Z   S   o
AND ATHLETICS GROUNDS P.L.C


UNDER THEXSAFETY           GROUNDS ACT




                     \
              HOLDER PETER BECKETT ROBINSON
           CHIEF EXECUTIVE - GENERAI SECRETARY
                                                 a
INDEX



Page 1           Introduction


Page 3           Schedule 1          General Conditions


Page 7           Schedule 2          Capacity of Stadium


Page 9           Schedule 3          General Safety Provisions


Page 11          Schedule 4          Lighting and Emergency
                                     Electric Supply


Page 12          Schedule 5          Fire Safety


Page 13          Schedule 6          Stewarding


Page 17          Schedule 7           Steward Locations


Page 22      -   Schedule 8           Inspections and Tests


Supplement       Amendments to General Safety Certificate and
                 Schedule 9     -     Securing Closed Manned Exits
GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE UNDER THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975




Address of the premises        )         ANFIELD,
with respect to which          )         ANFIELD ROAD,
this Certificate is            )         LIVERPOOL.
issued.                        )         L4 OTH.




Occupier and Owner of          )         LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL CLUB
those premises.                )         AND ATHLETIC GROUNDS PLC.




Holder                         )         PETER BECKETT ROBINSON,
                                         Chief Executive/General Secretary
                                         of the occupying Company.




1.       IT IS HEREBY CERTIFIED THAT :     THE PREMISES AT THE ABOVE ADDRESS
                                   *
         and shown on the   sixteen drawings   annexed hereto numbered from
         A5-A/1 to A5-A/16, being a Sports     Stadium designated by the
         Safety of Sports—grounds (Designation) Order 1976, made under
         Section 1 of the   Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, ABE from
         the date hereof,   SUBJECT TO the terms and   conditions contained
         in the Schedules 1 to 8 hereto,    (being such as the Local Authority
         consider necessary or expedient to secure, reasonable safety
         at the said stadium when it is in use for the activities specified
         herein) PROVIDED WITH MEANS OF REASONABLE SAFETY for the
         spectators accommodated.




2.       This general safety certificate is a replacement for the
         certificate issued by the Merseyside County Council on the
         18th July 1977, which shall cease to have effect.
                                  - 2 -



3.       THIS CERTIFICATE IS ISSUED ONLY IN RESPECT OF the use of the
         stadium for the activity of the playing of Football matches
         attended by spectators, and that shall include the time two
         hours before the start and one hour after the finish, or such
         extended time as may be approved in writing by the Police.
         During those times, one or more of the following additional
         ancillary activities may be permitted by the Holder :-


              (i)     The playing of music or singing.


              (ii)    The provision of news or comment associated
                      with football.


              (iii)   The sale and consumption of refreshments.


              (iv)    The sale of tickets for forthcoming activities,
                      programmes, news sheets and souvenirs.


              (v)     Public collections of any nature, with the
                      prior written approval of the Local Authority.


              (vi)    The recording and/or transmission of sound
                      'commes-tary and/q^ pictures of the certified
                      use.


              (vii)   Any other activity associated with the
                      certified use of which the Local Authority
                      has approved in writing.




                      Signed

                                   City Building Surveyor
                       on behalf of, and duly authorised by,
                                   LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL.



              H 6 M A R 1987
Date :

Amended 11.9.87 - Page Nos. 7, 19, 20

Amended 5.9.88
Page No. 2 (Supplement)
SCHEDULE 1

GENERAL CONDITIONS


1.1   In this and the following Schedules where the context so admits

       (a)    'the Act1 means the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
              and any amendment thereof.


       (b)    'a Certified U s e 1 means a use of the stadium for the
              activity in respect of which this certificate is issued.


       (c)    'the Holder1 means the person determined by the Local
              Authority as being in a position to prevent contravention
              of the terms and conditions of this Certificate, referred
              to in the Act as a "qualified person" and named in this
              certificate, or such other person to whom this certificate
              is transferred under Section 4(5) of the Act, or, in the
              event of any occasional absence of that person, his
              competent nominee appointed by him in writing and approved
             - in writing by the Local Authority.


       (d)    'the Local <^5ithc>rity' rifeans the Liverpool City Council
              (and for the implementation and enforcement of the
              provisions of the Act,- its functions have been delegated
              to the City Building Surveyor).


       (e)    'theFblice' means the chief officer of police or, as the
              case may require, the police officer having charge of the
              stadium on the occasion of a certified use.


       (f)    'the Stadium' means the Liverpool A.F.C. Ground, known
              as Anfield, at Anfield Road, Liverpool, as shown edged
              red on the drawing numbered A5-A/4 annexed to this certificate.


       (g)    Other expressions have the same meaning as in the Act.


       (h)    References to 'the drawings' are references to the relevant
              parts of those sixteen drawings annexed to this certificate,
              numbered from A5-A/1 to A5-A/16.
                               - 4 -



1.2   The Holder shall be present at all times during a certified
      use, and shall ensure compliance with the terms and conditions
      of this certificate.


1.3   Any "responsible person" shall not obstruct the Holder but shall
      assist him to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions

      of this certificate.


1.4   Where the prior written approval of the Local Authority is required
      under the terms and conditions hereof, it shall be obtained
      at least 14 days before the occurrence in respect of which it
      is required, unless the circumstances make that impossible, when
      it shall be obtained as soon as practicable,   but nevertheless
      before the occurrence.


1.5   The Holder shall make and keep the written records listed below,
      which shall be available at all reasonable times for inspection
      by persons authorised by the Act, and copies of the whole or
      any part of such record^ shall be provided to the Local Authority
      at its reasonable request.


      (1)   A record of the number of spectators admitted to the stadium
            during a certified use and in each separate enclosure
            mentioned in Schedule 2 hereto.


      (2)   A record of the inspections, checks or tests required by
            Condition 8.2 of this certificate, signed by the responsible
            person at the time each is completed.


      (3)   A record of any accident or incident occurring during a
            certified use which causes injury to a spectator,   such
            record to include the name, address, age and sex of the
            spectator injured, the nature of the injury and how it
            was caused,   (as far as can be ascertained by diligent
            enquiry) and the location of the incident.
(4)    A record of all training and instruction given, including
       any exercises held, to the stewards required by Schedule 6
       hereof, which shall include the following

             %

       (a)       Copies of any written instructions.


       (b)       Date, duration and nature of any other
                 training or instruction.


       (c)       Identity of persons giving (a) or (b).


       (d)       Identity of persons receiving (a) or (b).


The Holder shall ensure the attendance during a certified use
of an adequate number of persons appropriately qualified in
first aid and shall maintain suitably equipped the first aid
rooms shown on the drawings.


The Holder shall arrange- for the attendance of an adequate number
of Police Officers within the stadium to secure orderly and
decent behaviour.       Such number for each certified use shall
be agreed with tffe* police at least 14 days beforehand.


The Holder shall be the person responsible for the evacuation
of the stadium or any part thereof at any time during a certified
use.   Nevertheless, he shall comply with any requirement of
the police to evacuate all or any part of the stadium promptly.


The Holder shall ensure that electrical fittings, wiring, switches,
and all electrical apparatus or appliances shall be maintained
safe and free of any hazard to the standards as recommended
by the Institution of Electrical Engineers, or the British
Standards Institution, respectively, and the satisfaction of
the Local Authority.       Any alteration to the same shall be subject
to the prior written approval of the Local Authority.        A competent
electrician employed by the Holder, and familiar with the stadium
electrical installation, shall be present during a certified
                                 - 6 -


1.10   Equipment brought into and used in the stadium by photographers
       and television or sound personnel shall not cause obstruction
       or hazard.   Only those structures or locations which have been
       approved -by the Local Authority shall be used for such equipment,
       except where it is a hand-held camera or microphone not connected
       to any cables.   The Holder shall ensure that all persons associated
       with such equipment undertake to comply with any instruction
       given to them, in the interest of safety or good order, by a
       steward or the police.-


1.11   The stadium shall be maintained throughout in a safe condition
       and any repairs, cleaning, or clearing of snow or ice, which
       impairs that condition, shall be carried out prior to the
       admission of spectators to a certified use, except where the
       Local Authority have otherwise approved in writing.   In this
       condition the term 'the stadium' shall include any fitting,
       service or equipment which contributes to the safety of
       spectators, and is mentioned as an item requiring regular
       inspection in Schedule 8" hereof.


1.12   Any'temporary condition specified by the Local Authority or
       the police in the interests of safety, where a risk arises from
       a failure to comply with any condition of this certificate,
       or during the carrying out of an alteration to the stadium,
       or from any other irregular cause, including measures which
       may be required to control admission to the stadium or
       segregation of the home and visiting supporters, shall be
       complied with before the admission of any spectators to a
       certified use.
                                                                   vmmacanxsnswtotiM**   ..




    SCHEDULE 2

    CAPACITY OF STADIUM


    2.1    The number of spectators permitted to occupy any part of the
           stadium shall not exceed the figures set out below.


                  Main Stand                       ,
                                                   8 -»773 seats

                  Paddock                          2,337   plus
                                                      16 spaces for
                                                         wheelchai r-bound
                                                         disabled persons

                  Anfield Road Stand               4,233 seats

                  Anfield Road Visitors Terrace    1,800 standing

                  Visitors overspill Terrace         800 standing



J
                  (adjacent to Kemlyn Road
                  seating)

                  Kemlyn Road Stand                6,030 seats


J                 Spion Kop Terrace               21,500 standing



J                 Press Box

                  Directors'
                                                      48 seats

                                                     148 seats



J                                                 45,685



    2.2   Apparatus shall be maintained to show the number of spectators
          present, in total, and in each of the enclosures listed above,
          except the Press Box and the Directors' Box, at all times during
          a certified use.     This condition shall apply notwithstanding
          that tickets may be necessary to gain admittance.


    2.3   Spectators provided with a ticket to occupy a seat or space in
          any relevant enclosure, who are not automatically recorded by
          passing through a turnstile on entry, shall be recorded on the
          apparatus provided, manually, and before other spectators are
          permitted into the stadium.



             L.
                             - 8 -


2.4   A distinctive audible warning signal shall be provided at every
      turnstile, and this shall be used to instruct the timely
      closing of the relevant turnstiles to avoid exceeding the
      numbers specified in 2.1 above.
                                 _ 9 _


SCHEDULE 3

GENERAL SAFETY PROVISIONS

                 %
3.1   The number, size and situation of entrances to and exits from
       the stadium and the means of access to any such entrances or
      exits shall be those shown on the drawings.


3.2   All ingress and egress routes between any part of the stadium
      which may be occupied during a certified use by spectators and
      a public highway, shall be kept free of any obstruction, whether
      temporary, or mobile, or otherwise, and available for immediate
      use, except for the turnstiles at entrances shown on the
      drawings and those exit doors or gates mentioned in the next
      condition.



3.3   Those exit doors or gates which are indicated on the drawings
      to be a 'manned exit' (ME) or 'single exit door' (SED)   shall
      be kept closed and may be locked with a single key-operated
      lock, to prevent unauthorised entry to the stadium, until
      15 minutes before the end of the football match, or such extended
      time as may be rgguired by tr!e police, except when 'manned exits'
      are to be opened for an emergency evacuation, or a 'single exit
      door' is required to be used by any spectator wishing to leave
      the stadium.


3.4   Those exit gates indicated on the drawings to be under   'police
      control'   (P.C.) shall be kept in the open position except when
      the police require them to be closed, but not locked.


B.5   The bells provided adjacent to every 'manned exit' and near
      the 'police controlled' exit gates shall be used to signal the
      need for those doors and gates to be opened urgently to facilitate
      an emergency evacuation.    All those bells may be sounded simultaneously,
      or those bells provided adjacent to every such exit from one or
      more of the spectator enclosures listed in Schedule 2 may be
      sounded, according to the circumstances of the emergency.
                                      10   -




     3.6     In the event' of failure of the incoming main normal electric
             supply to any fitting, service or equipment which contributes
             to the safety of spectators, and is mentioned ‘as an item
             requiring regular inspection in Schedule 8 , other than that
             specified proportion of the lighting permitted by Condition 4.2,
              the emergency generator provided shall automatically supply
             adequate electricity to these services within 8 seconds of that

             failure.                             •■■***&




     3.7     Doors or gates shown on the drawings for use by spectators at
             any time shall not be altered in any respect without the prior
             approval of the Local Authority.


     3.8     All egress routes and doors or gates from the spectator enclosures
             any any other parts of the stadium used by spectators, shall
             be provided with signs of the kind shown on the drawings, to


I
/*
             indicate clearly the way out of the stadium.       Such signs shall
             be illuminated by tjie primary or the emergency lighting when


I            insufficiently clear by daylight.




I    3.9     The number and situation of crush barriers in those parts of
             the stadium usegCby standing spectators,       including those barriers



I
             which serve to contain spectators in those parts, shall be those
             shown on the drawings.   Tl\e strength of those barriers shall
             comply with the recommendations of Paragraph 118 of the 'Guide


I            to Safety at Sports Grounds' published by H.M. Stationery Office
             for the Home Office, 1986 edition.


I     3.10   No parking of vehicles within the boundary of the stadium shall



I            be permitted except that which has been approved and indicated
              on the drawings numbered A5-A/5 and A5-A/6.       The temporary



I
              parking position for the visiting players' coach shall not be
              occupied in the period between one hour before the start and
              30 minutes after the finish of a football match.


I
1
I
                               - 11 -



SCHEDULE 4

LIGHTING AND EMERGENCY ELECTRIC SUPPLY


4.1   All parts? of the stadium accessible to spectators, shall be
       adequately illuminated for safe use, by electric lighting,
       during a certified use, where or when they are not adequately
       lit by natural light.   The turnstiles are not included in this
       requirement when the access door to them is closed.


4.2    In the event of the primary artificial lighting required by
       the last condition failing, all those same parts of the
       stadium shall be lit by the emergency lighting supplied with
       electricity from the emergency generator provided within
       8 seconds of that failure.   The level of illumination provided
       by the emergency lighting shall not be less than 30 per cent
       of that of the primary lighting, and it shall be evenly
       distributed and sufficient to enable all egress routes,
       including any steps t>r stairs, to be used safely.    All those
       signs required by Condition 3.8 and the turnstiles, shall be
       illuminated by the emergency lighting to the level provided
       by the primary lighting.
                            - 12 -


SCHEDULE 5

FIRE SAFETY


5.1   The fire fighting equipment indicated on the drawings shall be
      serviced annually, or at the supplier's recommended frequency,
      whichever is the shorter period, and kept available for use.


5.2   In the event of a fire or any suspicion of a fire, the Fire Brigade
      shall be called and the Holder shall immediately assess and act
      upon any need to evacuate the whole, or any part, of the stadium,
      in accordance with the procedures established and exercised in
      the duties and training of the stewards required by Schedule 6 .


5.3   No containers holding gas or flammable liquids or substance for
      producing light, or heat, or liable to explosion shall be kept or
      brought into the stadium, except in such quantity and under such
      conditions as may be permitted in writing by the Local Authority.


5.4   No accumulation of flammable rubbish, dirt, surplus materials or
      goods shall be permitted to remain in any part of the stadium,
      except in a plac«5“ and quantity approved by the Local Authority.


5.5   No door indicated on the drawings ipo be fire—resisting shall be
      replaced without that work is approved by the Local Authority,
      and all such doors shall be kept closed effectively by its self-
      closing device, and shall not be kept in an open position.
                                    - 13 -


  SCHEDULE 6


  STEWARDING


  6.1
         A Head Steward and the minimum number of other stewards required
         by Condition 6.6 shall be provided to perform the functions and
         duties specified herein.     They shall be fit and capable of carrying
         out those duties, and not over the age of sixty-five years.            The
         Holder shall ensure that they are appropriately and adequately
         instructed and trained for these purposes. They shall be provided
         with, and wear, conspicuous tabards or coats marked with their
         title and any keys, or other equipment, required to enable them
         to perform their duties.


 6.2     When any part of the stadium is not to be used, the numbers of
         stewards may be reduced to the extent approved in writing and
         subject to any temporary conditions imposed by the Local Authority.
         Stewards may leave the stadium after the finish of a football match
         when the duties for which they are responsible are completed.


6.3
        The stewards'   instruction and training shall include sessions in
        the months of August and'January each year, addressed by

        representatives of the Local Authority, the Police and the Fire
        Authority.   It shall also include exercises of procedures for
        dealing s m o o t h l y * ^ promptly with emergencies, especially the
        evacuation of the stadium, including exercises carried out from
        time to time during a certified use without forewarning, so far
        as that is possible without endangering th,e public.       Written
        instructions shall be provided to each steward specifying his
        duties as set out in Condition 6.5 below,' together with any other
        instruction, advice, or information approved by the Local Authority.
        No SAFETY Steward shall be employed who has not received instruction
        from, and to the satisfaction of the Fire Authority, on how to deal
        with any outbreak of fire..



6.4     The Head Steward shall supervise the effective stewarding of the

        stadium so far as that is not practicable by the Holder, who shall
        nevertheless exercise all due diligence in that respect.
                                -   14 -


6.5    Other stewards shall be known by one of four titles, and their
       duties and functions shall be as follows accordingly


       EXIT Steward - shall be present immediately adjacent to the locked/
       closed exit gate/door giving egress from enclosures, or the buildings
       indicated on the drawings, during a certified use, except when
       properly relieved by a RELIEF EXIT Steward.    Immediately prior
       to the admittance of any spectators to the stadium, he shall open

       his gate/door fully, to ensure that it is not obstructed,, defective
       or difficult to open.    He shall then resecure the gate/door closed,
       but only when any obstruction, defect or difficulty in opening
       it has been remedied.    He shall ensure that his exit is not used
       for unauthorised entry and shall unlock and/or open his gate/door
       promptly to permit its use for evacuation, normally when authorised
       approximately fifteen minutes before the finish of the football
      match, or in an emergency, when his gate bell sounds.     Immediately
      af^er opening his gate/door in an emergency, he shall check,       if
      required to do so by Condition 7.3, that the specified adjacent
      gate/door has been opened.     If it has not, he shall unlock and

      open that other gate/door.     Thereafter, and in normal circumstances,
      he shall remain at his open exit until evacuation is complete and
      shall ensure that^ftp unauthorised person enters the ground through
      his exit.



      RELIEF EXIT Steward - shall remain nearby and in supervisory contact
      with those EXIT Stewards to which he is assigned by Condition 7.2
      and within unmistakable earshot of the exit bells throughout the
      period of the certified use.    He shall relieve and carry out the

      duties of his EXIT Stewards, each individually, for a short period -
      of time to permit their refreshment.    He shall attend to permit
      any spectator, who wishes to leave the ground before exits are
      normally opened,   to use the single exit door indicated on the
      drawings (if any) in the area supervised by him.    In the event
      of an emergency evacuation, he shall check first and immediately
      the particular gate specified in Condition 7.3 (if any) and open
      that gate/door himself if need be.
 CROWD Steward - shall direct, assist and control the public

 entering, within and leaving the stadium normally, to secure good
 order and general safety throughout the period of the certified
 use.       In the event of an emergency evacuation of the area to which
 he is assigned being required, he shall secure the rapid clearance
 °f all the public before leaving himself.



 SAFETY Steward - shall patrol constantly and regularly throughout
 the period of the certified use, that part of the stadium to which
 he is assigned by Condition 7.4.         That shall include all rooms
 or other spaces.        Prior to the admittance of any spectators he
 shall check that in his area of patrol all the fire fighting
 equipment indicated on the drawings is in position and available
for use, including the water supply to hose reels, and that
Conditions 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5 of this certificate are complied with.
He shall ensure that any outbreak of fire, or other occurrence
which hazards the public, is promptly detected, and after first
informing the Holder, or Head Steward, or the Police, and alarming
any person in the immediate vicinity,          shall,   if the danger arises
from a fire, activate any manual fire alarm operating point in
his area, andj.n any case, take all possible steps, to eliminate
the hazard sSTely.        Where the nature of the incident requires the
SAFETY Steward toleave its          vicinity   for hisown safety,   he   shall
stand-by      in asafe   position and maintain bestcontact with the
Police to assist with his knowledge of the matter.



The minimum number of stewards for the duties and functions described
and their distribution,       shall be as specified in the table which
follows. Their exact or nominal position is also marked, on the '
annexed drawings.


^l&ofj^ble                 Title         Symbol on Plan

        3                  EXIT
                                                ©
        4                  RELIEF EXIT
                                                ©
        5                  CROWD
                                                ©
        6                  SAFETY
                                                ©
                                          - 16 -


  Table of Stewards


  Col. 1
                                                  3         4        5        6
 Drwg.            Location
                                                      Number Required
 No.

 A/5              Main Stand - Paddock                      3        3        2
 A/6              Main Stand - Paddock                      1        J        1
 A/7              Main Stand
                  1st and 2nd Floors
                                                                 17
 A/9           Anfield Road
               Ground Floor

 A/10          Anfield Road
               Seating

A/ll           Kemlyn Road
               Ground Floor (l)

A/12          Kemlyn Road
              Ground Floor (2 )

A/13          Kemlyn Road
              Seatinp

A/14 &
A/15          Spion Kop
                             sa*                                          1

                                             41        15       46       14


              GRAND TOTAL          116.


6.7
         Instant communication between the Holder,              the Head Steward, the
         Ponce,    and to at least one of those from any RELIEF EXIT Steward
         CROWD Steward, or SAFETY Steward, shall be available using the
         telephone system within the stadium, or hand radio transmitter/
         receiver sets.
                                - 17 -


SCHEDULE 7


LOCATIONS


7.1
       EXIT Stewards shall be assigned to a specific door or gate and
       shall be identified therewith b y >the number shown on the
      drawings.


7.2   RELIEF EXIi Stewards shall be responsible for the exits and
      EXIT Stewards listed in the table below, and shall be identified
      by the lowest number of EXIT Steward for whom they are responsible,
      prefixed R for clarity.


      Table to Condition 7.2


      RELIEF EXIT Steward No.         EXIT Stewards Controlled

               R1                          1    ,   2
               R3                          3,           4, 12
               R5                          5, 6 , 10, 36
               R7                        ’ 7, 8 , 9
               Rll                         11,                      34, 35
               R13   —           <a       ■13 , 14
               R15                         15, 17
               R19                         19, 2 0 , 22
               R23                         23, 2 3 A , 24, 25
               R26                        ;26, 27,, 27A , 28
               R29                         29, 30,-37, 38
               R31                         31, 3 2 A , 39, 40
               R32                        ■32

               R33                         33
               R41                         41
                          - 18 -


These EXIT or RELIEF EXIT Stewards shall be responsible,   in the
event of an emergency evacuation, to check that an adjacent steward
has opened his door or gate as specified in the following table.

Table to Condition 7.3

Steward No.   '    Shall Check on Steward No.

   1                         2
   9

  R3                         3
  4                          12
  12                         4
  5                          6
  R5                         10
  6                          5
  R7                         7
  8                          9
  9                          8
  11                         34
  34                         11
                         *
  13                      14
  14                      13
  15              —•*>    17 <a
  17                      15
  19                      20 .
  R19                     22 '
  20                      19
  23                      24
  24                      23
 R23                      25
 25                      23A
 26                      27A
 R26                     26

        Continued Over ...
                          - 19 -

Steward No.         Shall check on Steward No.

    29                         30
    30                         29
    R29                        37

    31              ,          32A
   32A                         3i

   R32                         32

   R33                         33    '
   37                          39
   39                         37
   38                         40
   40                         38


SAFETY Stewards shall be responsible for the parts of the
stadium set    out in the following table.    (Their numbers,
prefixed     S, are marked on the drawings at a point within
each area.

Steward No.       Area to be Patrolled


   51             The roof space of the Main Stand including the
                 • external stair at the north end and the T.V.
                  Platform.


  52              The Main Stand' ground   floor central corridor
                  and circulation area from reception foyer to
                  trainer's staff room,    and all rooms and areas
                  to the north,' to the wall on the north side of
                  the visitors' changing room and bath, including
                  the various catering stores, staff toilets and
                  beer store adjacent to Exit 2.


  53              The Main Stand ground    floor central corridor and
                  circulation area from reception foyer to Trainer's
                  staff room, and all rooms and areas to the south,
                  to the wall on the south side of the Players'
                  Lounge and Crown Lounge, including the kitchen
                  and toilet facilities.
                                                        Tm>Tr>3-ic.~r'rJjlwgg^'iTi\




                         - 20 -


Steward No.       Area to be Patrolled


    54            The Main Stand first floor level, and concourse
                  area serving vomitory exits 1, 3, 5 and 7, all
                  toilets and refreshment bars, And the paddock
                  concourse to the north side.


   55             The Main Stand first floor level to the north side
                  of the central staircase to cover the Trophy and
                  Function Lounge, Day Sponsors Dining suite,
                  including all kitchens, stores and toilet
                  accommodation.


   S6             The Main Stand first floor level to the south
                  side of the central staircase to cover the Directors
                  Guest Lounge, Directors Room, Ladies' Room,
                  Shareholders' Lounge, Press Lounge and all offices,
                  stores and toilet accommodation.


   S7             The Main Stand first floor level to cover concourse
                  area^and serving vomitory exits 9, 11 and 13,
                  including toilet areas and refreshment bar and
                  store, including Stadium Manager's Office, and
                  the Paddock concourse to the south side.


   58             The Main Stand second floor level to cover concourse
                  area, toilets and refreshment bars, and serving
                  vomitory exits 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 and 14, including
                  plant room, boiler room, switch room and stores.


   59             The Anfield Road Stand ground floor level to cover
                  the yard area, the catering and general store
                  and including the refreshment bar.


   S10            The Anfield Road Stand ground floor level from the
                  centre line of the stand westward to cover the
                  concourse area, general store, irrigation store,
                  toilets and refreshment bars.

              f
                       - 21 -


Steward No.    Area to be Patrolled

  Sll          The Anfield Road Stand ground floor level from
               the centre line of the stand eastward to cover
               the concourse area, boiler room, soil store,
               switch rooms and toilets, including refreshment
               bars.


  S12         The Kemlyn Road Stand first floor level from the
              centre line ol the stand southward to cover the
              first floor concourse,   including caterers' store,
              timber store and paint store, and the ground floor
              concourse area, the Kemlyn Lounge and toilets
              and refreshment bars.


  S13         The Kemlyn Road Stand from the centre line of the

              stand northward to cover the first floor concourse,
              maintenance store, switch room, cleaners' room,
              plumbing, store, caterers' store and refreshment bar,
              and ground floor concourse, toi.let areas and
              including boiler room, cash office and stores.
               —

 S14
              The Lake Street entrances and exits area to the
              Spion Kop enclosure to cover the refreshment bar,
              generator and switch room, and toilet areas.
                               - 22 -


SCHEDULE 8


INSPECTIONS AND TESTS



8.1   Those parts of the stadium, including those fittings, services
       or equipment, which are specified in the tables to Conditions
       8.2 and 8.5 shall be inspected by the Holder, or his competent
       representative, to ensure that they are in good order, maintained
       free of danger, and /or that' they function properly to protect
       the safety of spectators.     Such checks shall include whatever
       testing is required to verify these conditions and any check or
       testing which is specifically required by the Local Authority at
       any reasonable time.     Tests of the strength or stability of any
       part of the stadium specified, shall be supervised and reported
       upon by a Chartered Structural Engineer on behalf of the Holder.
       Inspections shall be carried out at least at those times or
       maximum intervals indicated in the relevant tables, and after
       the repair of any defect found, that part of the stadium shall
       be similarly re-inspected.


8.2   The inspections set out in the table to this condition are those
       for which a recced is required to be kept by Condition 1.5(2) of
       this Certificate.


       Table to Condition 8.2

       Inspection Required                         ''   Maximum Interval

(1)    The whole of the electrical installation.        12 months.

(2)    The detail condition of the general
       fabric of all buildings or other
       structures of the stadium not
       mentioned in items     6 or 7 below.             12   months.

(3)    The manned or Police-controlled exit
       gate/door bells and the turnstile
       warning systems.                                 12   months.

(4)    The condition and operational efficiency
       of all portable fire extinguishers and
       hose reels.                                      12   months.
                         - 23 -


 Inspection Required                            Maximum Interval

 The closed circuit television installation,
 including the six cameras and screens and
 the two (video) monitor screens (one of the
 later being located adjacent to the
 attendance counter)-.                          12 months.


 The detail condition and strength of
 crush barriers, balustrading and
handrails to all raised levels and stairs,
and the fencJj and barriers provided
between the separate enclosures of the
stadium listed in Schedule 2, and the
blocks -of seating in the Anfield Road
              £1
Stand and the separated ingress and
egress routes thereto, and the pitch
perimeter fencing.                              6 months.


The detail condition of all standing
surfaces, seats, steps, stairs, ramps
and all those doors, gates, gate posts,
boundary or other walls accessible to
the public within or outside the stadium.       3 months.

The public address system.                      3 months.

The apparatus for recording the number
of spectators present (referred to
in Condition 2.2).                              3 months.

The fire alarm installation.                    3 months.

The emergency lighting and emergency
electric supply generator.                      1 month.



The records required by Condition 1.5(2) shall include any
reports or recommendations made by persons carrying out an
inspection and a record of any defect found and of the
re— inspection of that part after its repair.
                                  - 24 -




8.4    Arrangements shall be made to carry out the inspections

       numbered (l), (2),     (6) and (7) in the table to Condition 8.2,
       at a time convenient to the Local Authority, to enable it
       to be represented at those, or parts of those inspections.


8.5    1he inspections set out in the table to this Condition are
       those for which a record need not be kept.       Nevertheless, any
       delects found which cause a contravention of Condition 1.11 shall
       be remedied a n d the facts reported to the Holder.


       Table to Condition 8.5,

                 t

      —      Inspections; required following   each certified use-of the Stad lum


       (1)     A general visual    inspection of the. stadium   as defined in
                Condition 1.11,    including all those items    mentioned in
                items (2),   (6) and (7) of the Table to Condition c.2, for
                any damage which might impair its safe condition.



      --     j-ft.s Pecti?gg required before each certified use of the Stadium


      (1)      lhe operation of    the manned or Police-controlled exits
                bells referred to in Condition 3.5.

      (2)       The manual operation of the fire alarms, using successively
               a different call point each time, so as to check all call
               points periodically.


      (3)      The operation of the emergency electric supply, including
               the batteries and generator, to

                (a)   the emergency lighting
               (b)    the public address system

               (c)    the manned or Police-controlled exits bells
               (d)    the turnstile warning bells
               (e)    the fire alarms.


      (4)      The clear and easy opening of all    -manned exit' doors/gates.
                           - 25 -




(5)    The operation of the public address system, including
       the cut-in and volume control located in the Police
       control room.


(6)    The operation of the     six Police-operated closed
       circuit television cameras and screens, including the
       two (video) monitor screens.


(7)    The operation of internal telephone lines,    including
       those to and between the Police control room, the
       Police detention rooms, and the first aid room.
                       V




(8)    The operation of the    hand radio transmitter/receiver
       sets provided to comply with Condition 6.7.


(9)    The operation of the    six loud hailers kept in the
       Police control room.


(10)   The operation of both the healthy/defective indicators
       for the fire alarm system, one located in the Police

       control room, and the other above the attendance counter
       on the first floor of the main stand.


(11)   The operation of the spectator attendance counter repeater
       located in the Police control room.


(12)   The operation of the turnstile closing signals from the
       Police control room.
SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975


AMENDMENTS TO THE GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE HELD BY
LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL CLUB AND ATHLETIC GROUNDS P.L.C.



The General Safety Certificate under the above Act, dated 16t;h March 1987,
is hereby amended as follows



1.     In paragraph 1, line 7, amend the Schedule numbers "1 to 8" to
       read "1 to 9".

                             It
2.    ’ Delete the condition in Schedule 3 numbered 3.3, and substitute the
       following condition
                                      V



           Those exit,doors or gates which are indicated on the
                            a
           drawings to be a 'manned exit' (ME) or 'single exit
           door'   (SED) shall be kept closed, to prevent unauthorised
           entry to the stadium, until 15 minutes before the end of
             the football match, or such extended time as may be
           requi-'red for all or any of them by the police, except
           when    'manned exits' are to be opened for an emergency
           evacuation, or a 'single exit door' is required to be
           used by any spectator wishing to leave the stadium.
             'Manned exit' doors or gates shall be kept closed, as
           required above, in the manner permitted by Schedule 9.
             'Single exit doors' shall be locked closed when not
             being used.


3.     Add a Schedule 9 to the conditions of the Certificate, as follows


SCHEDULE 9

SECURING CLOSED 'MANNED EXITS'


9.1     Those doors and gates indicated on the drawings to be a 'manned

       e x it 1 (ME) shall be secured in the closed position when required
        by Condition 3.3, only in the manner described in the following
        three conditions.
                                           -        —•   ..




9.2   Those   'manned exits' listed below (as numbered on the drawings)
      have roller shutter doors, openable by hand by chains on the inside,
      and shall not be secured with any fastening, and shall rely on
      their own weight only to remain closed.


                     Gate/Exit No.   E32


9.3   Those   'manned exits' ]|L|Sted below (as numbered on the drawings)
      shall   be secured by approved bolts and/or bars removeable by
      hand from the inside only and with a single key-operated lock.
                                      V




                     Gate/Exit No.   E13        «
                                     E14
                                     E15
                                     E18
                                     E19
                                     E20
                                     E21
                                     E30


9.4   Those   'manned exits' listed below (as numbered on the drawings)
      shall be secured by approved bolts and/or bars removeable by hand
      from., the inside only.   If and when the Police so require, in the
      interests of safety, these doors or gates shall be locked with a
      single key-operated padlock which shall replace the hand-withdrawable

      pin fastening provided for security on such doors.


                     Gate/Exit No.    El
                                      E2
                                      E3
                                      E4
                                      E5
                                      E6
                                      E7
                                      E8
                                      E9
                                      E10
                                      Ell
                                      E12
                                      E16
                                      E17
                                      E22
                                      E23/23a
                                      E24

                                      Continued over
                              - 3 -


                       Gate/Exit No. E25
                                     E26
                                     E27/27a
                                     E28
                                     E29
                                     E31
                                     E32a
                                     E33
                                     E34
                                     E37
                                     E38
                                     E39
                                     E40
                                     E41




              Signed
                         City Building Surveyor
                 on behalf of, and duly authorised by
                         LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL.




       2nd November, 1987
Date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CLUB    CAR PARK




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        accorts


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  police         'bins
                                                                                                                                                                                           crown roo m                                                            room
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 bathroom

                                                                                    snack bar L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L boot i drying        home team                                                                                                                                    ! snack
                                                                                                                                                                                 players lounge          equipment        store; room                                 bathroom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dressing room                                                                                                                                I bar 12
                                                                                                                                                snack bar 3                                              store
                                                                                                                                                       a                                   ... «                                                                                                             stewards        snack bar 1
                                                                                                                                                                                   j i t                                                                               •.                                                            *
                                       >   \' '■'•\      •'vA                                                                                                                                                                                                         visitors
                                                                                                                                                                 female;         ager      -scout coach i trainer     ■        physio   j       ! officials! [        m m '” 9                                                                             first
                                                   bar                                                                                                             -       ---A— j                                                                                                           fflfltg a              lo        fflale *
                                               \                                                                                                                                                             *' ' *- -                                        • ...                                                                                        roomU
                                           1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ffiDrne .^vFsitorsJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PWYER54tJflNEt
souvenir shop \ \                                                i :!:!!!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           male toilets


                                                                   ■'|1!il     \l
                                                                  ll'liijr -':i;ii!i
                                                                liililli!*"

        d e v e lo p m e n t^ \
        association




                                  I;

                                                                  : spion kop
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    =t




                                                                                                  i!i:1JiiPW1
                                                                                                       1i;i>H;*1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t-Hr)sle-tet(e4s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i




                                                                                                                            m ale toilets                               m a le toilets                                                                                            m ale toilets                                 f    m ale toilets
                                                                                                                           •-- •__ a                                   *-- •---•-- c                                 •         •    •       •       •     ,                                                                    -1~“.. •-- e—         - t

                                                                                                                                                           up     CONCOURSE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           kemlyn lounge                                                 CONCOURSE                  u

                                                                                                                                                                cash o ffic e
                                                                                        snack bar5                           s     . ;      n                       •        *                                                                                   4-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t7l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n          iv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           >temalE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ofetsf - t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       snack bnr9




                                                                                                          CLUB       CAR PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C L U B CAR P A R K

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           j}                      •, -I ‘i',T-'•fjri'i’ • : <
                                                                                                                                                                                            PEDESTRIAN                                                                                                                                                                                                 !' ■(             7 ■ '
                                                                                                                                                                                            ENTRANCE




                                                                                                                                                                   Kemlyn                                Road

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CITY OF LIVERPOOL'
                                                                                                                    LIVERPOOL F0(                                                                                                            b Ai                         L CLUB                                                                                                         CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR’S DEPARTMENT

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _T   T p J - jT - '                                                                                                                                   L.N.BUSH      F.R.I.C.S. C.Eng. M.l.Struct   F.I.A.S.
                                                                                                                    GROUNID LEVEI
                                                                                                                   -1--------------- r ------ 1---------                                                                                                                                 1               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5th floor, Kings way House, Hatton Garden,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Liverpool L3 2AJ         Telephone 051 -236 9231
                                                                                                                                                                                                         T     —          I'       " t — — 1 - “1 —
                                                                                                                   4 4 —                               h                                             |                                                                                                          f        ;                                         :
                                                                                                                    1                           ii-                                                                                       i                                                                              |                                                                                              1 : 500
                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         drawn                          AKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                —rr:~~                                                                                                                                                                   date                           MARCH *86
                                                                                      (male female
                                                                                                                                                  kitchen



                                                                                                     iftistars
                                                                                                                                                                       t    ’   " T   i l
                       A n fie ld Lounge                                                                                                                 f r - ' female j Directors
                                           strongroon   General Office                                                                    office ■ femalei;       re. ^ ! Room
                                         J       ®            y -   |- ^ y - 4 Press | t |
                                    C OH rCOURSE
                                           nuosp              -LIE__U ___            __
                                                                                                                                                                   C O NCO UR SE
                                                                                                                      male toilets
                                                                                                                                                                                s t r »




                                                                                                                                                                                                    i.s^SL'




                                                                                                                                                                                            vjnne




                                                                                                                                                                                        c



                               . STORE
                                                                                                          U4U

                                                                                                     CONCOURSE
                                                                                                            31- ------ e —- — * ---- It




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             •J:




                                                    Kemlyn                       Road
                                                                                                                       -4 ^




             lAl!                                                                                                                                                                                              CITY OF LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                          CD




-V.
  \ \\
                    LIVERPOOL                                                        FOi 31                                               lL                   CLUB                                            CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR’S DEPARTMENT /
                                                                                                                    ...




 \   \                                                                                                                                                                                                         LN.BUSH      F.R.I.C.S. C.Eng. M.I.Struct   F.l.A.S.
         \                                                                                                            —        1 4 1      —                                                           '~Wl
                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices
  \ V
   \ \              I P \/F I                           HMF                           .                                                                                                                        5th floor,Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
^-■v \                                                                                                                                                                                                         Liverpool L3 2AJ        Telephone 051 -236 9231
    \
     \                                                                                                                                                                                                         scale         1 : 500


                                                                                                                                                                                                         Til
                                                                                                                                                                                                               drawn
                                                                                                                                                                                                               date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MARCH ‘86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A 5-A / 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2676H T
                                                      switchroorr   ■ boiler room & plant room




                                                                                  I

                                                                                                                                                                              -T
                                                                                        | home ' |visitors|
                                                                                          PLAYERS TUNNEL


                                                                                                                                                    /

                                                                                                                                                                                               -f.
                                                                                                                                                                                   \
                                                                                                                                                                                       \
                                                                                                                                                                                           \

                                                                                                                                                                      J   4




                                                                                                              tunnel




r 0r>   S t




                                                                                                                                  i i


                                                  m       m



                                                                                                                       wm                   \
                                                                                                                                                DNDS
                                                                                                                                                :


                                      Kemlyn

                                                                                                                            CITY OF LIVERPOOL
              LIVERPOOL                                             FC O'r ^ A LL CLUB                                      CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR’S DEPARTMENT

                                                                                                                            L.N.BUSH      F.R.I.C.S. C.Eng. M.I.Struct     F.I.A.S.

              1   C   \   /   C   I   T   V   A   /   A
                                                                             -I
                                                                                            w-                              City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices
                                                                                                                            5th floor, Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
                                                                                                                            Liverpool L3 2AJ         . Telephone 051 -236 9231
                                                                                                                            scale1         1--500 .
                                                                                                                            drawn          \AK5
                                                                                                                                           MARCH        ’86
                                                                                                                                                                                   LO TH AIR            ROAD

                                                                                                  -T

                                                                                                   22            82

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             £   ' I




                                                                                                                                                                         CAR             PARK       (SEE • DRWG5       Nos. 5 8. 6) .

                                                                        3
                                                                            V                                    z
                                                                  V--




                                                                                                                                                                               M A IN               STA N D
                                                                                                                                                                               ! SEE     DRWGS       N° 5 6    7 £3)

\



                  cO                                                                                                                                                                     PA DD O C K        (SEE    DRWGS Nos. 5 & 6 ).



                                  c4
                                  cP




            ' 0   R       £


                              ■   S    7 7 t   e   £   r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NOTES ON SAFETY MATTERS
                                                                                                                                       LO                                                                                                                                         All the features shown on this drawing especially those noted
                                                                                                                                       c5                                                                                                                                         below and by means of standard symbols are important
                                                                                                                                       <r                                                                                                                                         to s a fety and should be maintained without alteration
                                                                                                                      Cl               r-
                                                                                                                                       o                                                                                                                        .o
                                                                                                                      O           LU                                                                                                                                              unless approval is obtained
                                                                                                                      x:          O    01
                                                                                      staircase                                   <    o
                                                                                       tower                                      cr   £
                                                                                                                      z           cr   cr
                                                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                                      o           LU
                                                                                                                      CL
                                                                                                                                  i—   LU
                                                                                                                                                                    1/
                                                                                                                                       LU
                                                                                                                      CO               01

    ^OWs o            n

                                                           T




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  STANDARD SYMBOLS USED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  < 3 ! ndicates egress routes to be kept unobstructed

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  □    Indicates a fire protected enclosure of an escape route
                                                                                                                                                                                       K E M LY N          ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  □    Indicates a fire resisting enclosure of a fire risk
                                                                                                                                                                                                S TA N D                                                                          O    ln^ icates a self closing fire resisting door with deep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rebates (Number gives the hours grade)
                                                                                                                                                                                       (SEE     DRWGS      Nc 11 12 & 13)
      H a     k t             Nu p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |Q   Indicates a sign marking an egress route
                                                                                                        'flagpole'
                                                       S77? £ £   r                                     ■ stairs                                                                                                                                                                  p g Indicates a door fitted with panic bolt(s)with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ri      ‘ instruction for use sign
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L O . Ind'cates a door or gate to be locked in the open
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        position wjien the premises are occupied
                                                                                                                                                     CAR-PARK   B                                                   CAR      PARK       A'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AMENDMENTS

                                                                                                                                                                         K EMLYN                ROAD

                                                                                \ \
                                                                                                                           NJ '                                                                                                                                      N)
                                                                                                                           CT>                                                                                                                                       -F"
                                                                                                                           f n
                                                                                                                                            2                                                 20                                                       40   L        - f'-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LIVERPOOL F.C.
                                                                                        cO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BLOCK PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IV>
                                                                                                                                                1J        1         LJ   L,J              1 I           1j ___         LJ                                            -F "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     cn




                                                                                                               LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL                                                                    CA UR
                                                                                                               BLOCK PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CITY OF LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR’S DEPARTMENT

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L.N.BUSH      F.R.I.C.S. C.Eng. M.I.Struct  F.I.A.S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5th floor, Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Liverpool L3 2AJ         Telephone 051 -236 9231 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  scale        1 v500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  drawn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MARCH     '86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A 5 -A /4                  26 76 H T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T OUCH             LINE

                                                                                                                                                                             BLOCK           OF .
                                                                                                                                                                             46 SEATS            _                                                         ^   L i ns   of   r o o f over                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ^       Edge   of gr as s

     r    L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Players      & officials   onl y                      ' ASH        TR'A'CK                                      "k»

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Parapet        wal l

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3Q3seat s                                                         3 3 8 s ea t s                                                                                            /tv
                                                                                                                                                                      \ /                                                                                                                                                                                                                     V I S I T I N G 308 d i a l                                                             313 seats                                                                                          3 2 3 seats
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -TR A I N E R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TRAINER

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            :r i   i - L 4_t.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A    \   -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :u p                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H T

                                                                                                                                                         VOID                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 J    i   ll

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4 1       I     i


                                                                                                                                       POLICE CONTROL                 ROOM



                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MALE        LAVATORY                     STORE-                 MALE        LAVATORY                                                                                                             4v
     Cf
         7 ’
           \

                                                                                                                                                              FEMALE                                                                                                                                                                                         VISITORS                                      BOOT
                                                                                                                                     FIRST
                                                                                                                                                              L AVATORY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HS                                 r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CHANGING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           store!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    REFEREE                                        PH YS IO T H ER APY                           TRAINERS                  STAFF        Y OU T H
                                                                                                                                      AID                                               X I/                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DN                                                                                                                                            DEVELOPMENT
                                                                   SEE          DRWG      N° 9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OFFICER
                                                                                                                                     ROOM                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ROOM
                                                                                                                                                                                             ©
                                                                                                         POLICE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4 k
                                                                                                          ROOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ME
                                                                                                                                                                            □                                         -H                               n                                                                             U                                                    n                                              &                                                r1hr.
                                                                                                                                    GAS MAIN                                                             REFRESHMENT                BAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 STEWARBS        ROOM.
                                                                                                                                                      « h r
                                                                                                                                     & METER*



                                                                                                                               S.E.D.12                                                                  ■ B   t l



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HOME        TEAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D RYING                   B OOT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ROOM                     STORE-
                                                                    I,! ticket office            ^                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C H A N G I NG



                                                                                                 -i"
                                                                                                                                                  i       11r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROOM                                                                                                                          ir



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             EL

                                                                                           STAIR 10 TV                                                                                           T T                                                              X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ) /    \ . r

                                                     E34                                   PLATFORM                                                                                                                                 X

                                                                                                                                                                                  Ell                                                                                   E4                                                    E3                                                                                                                                                                            DN
                                                                                                                                                                                                     L                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ise                  ialilnoiAjh.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -f-lc o r e d                  . F . F - 1—

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HALE7
                                                                                                                                                                            r o l l o r __                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               exact'tom
                                                                                                                                                                            shu t t e r                                                                                                                                                                          /FEMALE                      TOILET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TOILET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NOTES ON SAFETY MATTERS
           PC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BEER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 STORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r                                                                       - P     E N T R A NC E   HALL                                                            All the features shown on this drawing especially those notec
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   below and by means of standard symbols are important
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             •^/C A TE R E R S \^                                                                                                                                                       *   a   !brF                               to s a fety and should be maintained without alteration
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     i n                                                                                                                                          STORE.                                                                                                                    LIFT i                                                                                 unless approval is obtained
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 fS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     f   t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rt:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E'L                                                                                                                                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       JJ=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E1                                 E2.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4-              -up.                                                                                                                                TELEPHONE]]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BEER                                                             m                        J E -X IT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RECEPTION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ACCOUNTS                              GENERAL OFFICE                  OFFICE                                  FOYER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     STORE                                                                                                                                            - ....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IIf t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     te st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ntt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     COMPUTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PLAYERS                                                                      ZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       store                                                                                    TICKET     SALES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NTRANCE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          s                                                     =*=±r                                                a                             ■u                                   □                                             .a                           STANDARD SYMBOLS USED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      roller s h u t t e r                                              T E M P O R A R Y SHUTTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P L A Y E R S ENTRANCE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Indicates egress routes to be kept unobstructed

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   □       Indicates a fire protected enclosure of an, escape route
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Indicates a fire resisting enclosure of a fire risk
TP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            line of external wall over
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TEMPORARY.                   PARKLNG                                                                                                                                                                                                  ( ^ ) Indicates a self closing fire resisting door with deep
                            1st and 2 nd             floor   t his area                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rebates (Number gives the hours grade)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '        PLAYERS             COACH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   jgj     Indicates a sign marking an egress route

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PB.      Indicates a door fitted with panic bolt(s)with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ' instruction for use sign
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LO       Indicates a door or gate to be locked in the open
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ' position when the premises ji^e occupied


                                                                    SOUVENIER           SHOP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AMENDMENTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               'A        KJcuj -Sou ve.nL&.T'                 N e * o Feaxalcloc^kf S « a t u ^ , N-cj-o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S t o T-«. «*- C        o     .      '     f     c     l      ^     <? 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                B               &OLius       tu. ^      EJ2
                                                                                                                   o f f ice
                                        -At                  countQ r
                I


                                                                        sales    area                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LIVERPOOL FC.
                                        staff??
                                        to i lot                                                         safe I
                                                                                                                       office
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MAIN STAND
                             WC
                I
                        a                     r 1!                                                            X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GROUND FLOOR & PADDOCK (1)
                                                                                                                                            o
                    V
                            hoist                                                                             ho ist

                                                                                                                                                                                                         LIVERPOOL  FOOTRAI  CLUB
                                                                                                                                                       OFFICE


                t                                    LEISURE WEAR SHOP                                    r
                                                                                                                                    MAIL                                                                 MAIN STAND                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o

                                                                                                                                    ORDER                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CITY OF LIVERPOOL
                                    U
                                                                                                                                J
                                                                                                                                L                                                                        GROUND FLOOR LEVEL & PADDOCK                                                                                                                                 SEATINGH                                                                                                                                                                                                  CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR’S DEPARTMENT

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LN.BUSH      F.R.I.C.S. C.Eng. M.I.Struct   F.I.A.S.
                                                                                                               KITCHE                                   OFFICE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5th floor,Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
                              wc                                                                                                             r4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Liverpool L3 2AJ        Telephone 051 -236 9231
                    L                                                                                                                                             □
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                scale                  1- 96
                                                                                                                           SECOND ■ FLOOR
                                          FIRST        FLOOR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cfrawn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MARCH ’86                    A5-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         KOP

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SEE      PLAN   N°14

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     /'

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    //




                                                                                                                                                                    4 06 seats




                            r r r      i   l   i   i j_ l   ij     i   n       i i
                                                                                                                                                   U    uTT
I   i'i   i i i i i I I I I I i ; I L. I | l I i I X
I_L_Lj_.L_i._I



                                   M




                                                                                                                                                       MALE   L A VA TO RY                              PUMP                                                                <r
                               COACH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        o
                                                                       MANAGER                                              DISABLED
                                                                                                   FEMALE        MALE                                                                                   H O U S E
                                                                                                                            PERSONS
                                                                                                     LAVATORY   LAVATORY    TOILET
                                                                                                                      n

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cO  W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ji; co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FIRST
                                                                                □ □                                                                                                                                                                                    LU
                                                                                                  dowf^'—                                                                                                                                                              LU CO
                                                                              femoie                                                    x                                                                                ROOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cn Lu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i- o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LO <t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          cO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cn co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       o    <
               EXIT                                                                       EX IT                  REFRESHMENT      BAR       SPONSORS          CROWN        OFFICE                                                                                      Ll   CL

                                                                                                                                             STORE             TIN         SUPP.
                                                                                                                       'rnTyrnTT'fT                             TTHll     1"! r r t ! 7
                                                       PLAYERS.
                                                        LOUNGE (100 MAX)
                                                                                                                                                                           ;I‘f f i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S.E.D:5



                                                                                                                            ENTRANCE
                                                                                                                           PLAYERS
                                                                                                                           LOUNGE



                                                                                  TCHEN


                                                                                                                                                        S.EQ-4                                                                                              NOTES ON SAFETY MATTERS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            All the features shown on this drawing especially those noted|
     CANDY        LOUNGE (200 MAX)                                                                                                                                                                                                                          below and by means of standard symbols are important
     (Re st a ur a nt       150)                                                                                                                                                                                                                            to s a fety and should be maintained without alteration
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            unless approval is obtained
                        o

                                                                 LAD IE S




                                                                                 CLOAKS



                                                                 1 FO Y E 3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            STANDARD SYMBOLS USED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <^3 Indicates egress routes to be kept unobstructed

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [       | Indicates a fire protected enclosure of an escape route
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            □         Indicates a fire resisting enclosure of a fire risk

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Indicates a self closing fire resisting door with deep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rebates (Number gives the hours grade)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |Q        Indicates a sign marking an egress route

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PB.       Indicates a door fitted with panic bolt(s)with
                                                                                                                                                                           TV   VEHICLE N°1                                                                         ' instruction for use sign
                                                                                                                                                                          [12 X 32 6]                                                                       |_ Q Indicates a door or gate to be locked in the open
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ’ position when the premises are occupied

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AMENDMENTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A1                   £n^4rge^c.jj     ut. cs.oLjcvc-ec^t fc<= Crcn-ii^ L_<d        ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |   t   -fv-oi^v Fl^-sT ^Moor O ^ L C C J                 •          Arwg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B       E.xi+ (^ci-te.s E •S                                         A-i^g    SS
                                                                                                                                                                          ^ 9   X 32




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LIVERPOOL FC.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TV CABLES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MAIN STAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GROUND FLOOR & PADDOCKC
                                                                                                                                                                                          NOTE  BAYS 4 0 - 4 5 NOT TO

                   LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL CLUB                                                                                                                            /
                                                                                                                                                                      \
                                                                                                                                                                                          BE USED FOR TE LEVISED MATCHES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ------>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              /


                   MAIN STAND
                   GROUND FLOOR LEVEL & PADDOCK SEATING(2)                                                                                                                                                                                                  CITY OF LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR’S DEPARTMENT

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LN.BUSH      F.R.I.C.S. C.Eng. M.I.Struct   F.I.A.S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5th floor,Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Liverpool L3 2AJ        Telephone 051 -236 9231
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            scale                  T: 96
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            drawn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MARCH    ’86           A 5 -A /6                                ?<l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      V
                                                                                                                                    EXITS          FROM                         UPPER           PART                  S E AT I N G                                                                    OF        S T E P S                 SHOWN              ( num bers               c o r r e s p o n d            SEE




                                           --- 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 swn C M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RC O M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cd
                                                                                                                  cc                                           Kiosk                                   P ro g r a m m e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Vent,       ducting                                                                         Prcgramrn                    Kiosk                                                                                                       amnp e
                  Programme
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            stall                                                                                                                              stall
                    sta                                                                                                                                                                                    sta




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        £02
                   LE             MALE   LAVATORY                                                      CATERE                              FEMALE       LAVATORY
                     LAVATORY                                                                                                                                                                                                        PLANT           ROOM                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MALE         LAVATORY                                                                                         DN
                                                                                                       STORE                                                                                                                                                                                          BOILER                ROOM                        SWITCH     ROOM                           M A L E LAVATORY
      DN
                                                                                                                    REFRESHMENT            BAR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      REFRESHMENT     BAR




i -
                                                   • J   ...                                   F   L   O    J   v




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ©




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             < — CONTINUED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BELOW




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             From                                                                  From     From
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EXIT




                                                         7     N° V O M I T O RY           EXITS           FROM        THE     LOWER             PART    OF      SEATING          LEVEL          ( [H IS     END      AND      OTHER    SI DE   OF    PRESS    EXIT)

                                                          FULL         F IG H T       OP           STEPS        SHOWN         (N U M B E R S      - CORRESPOND                        ■   SEE   DRWG       N°8)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ©

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DN




                                                                          FEMALE


           ramm
                                                                          LAVATORY
                                                                                                                                                          K io s k
                                                                                                                                                                                rm m e                           MALE          LAVATORY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CJj
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FEMALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r_D        rr                                                                    m a le to ile ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                STADIUM MANAGERS             OFFICE                               T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LAVATORY     LAVATORY                                                     PRESS LOUNGE                                                                                                                                                                                                      Z       CONHNUEC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a                                                                                                                                                                                      ABO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             kitchen.                                                femaleL
                                                                       PBTO;
                                                                                          S WI T C H       GURftQARD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   J
                                                                 ( 0   E X IT r   N g y    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EX I.T                                         CATERERS
                        FEMALE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .SWITCH
                        TOILET                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 STORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GEAR

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    location of screen y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    certificated u s e /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FEMALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OFFICE           STRONGROOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LAVATORY
                         MALE            SPONSORS DINING SUITE                                                                  KITCHEN          AND    PREP
                        TOI LET                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DISPLAY
                                            (Maximum 150 people)
                                            ( R e s ta u r a n t        100 )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DIRECTORS       GUEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       location of screen                                                            LOUN|GE & MUSEUM
                                                                                                                                                                        wasn up                                                                                                                                                                                               (Maximum 15f people)                                                                              SHAREHOLDERS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c e r t if ic a t e d use
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [display boards stored in                                                                LOUNG-E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (accounts office during                                                                (Maximum 100 people)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           chair store                                                                                                   ^ c e r t i f i c a t e d use

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m    m

                                                                                                                                                                     i-^-eown                                                                                                                                 EXIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TROPHY     ROOM AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SECRETARY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FUNCTION     SUIT'E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LIVERPOOL F.C.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (Maxirrfum 350 people) (Re staurant -275)                                                                                                         female
                                                                                                                                                                                  n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 cloaks j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             toilet                                                                                                                                                   M A IN STAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FIRST & SECOND FLOOR.
                                                                                                                             k itc h e n                  beer store
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DlRECTORS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ACCOUNTS        MR. P. B'.ROBINSON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LADIES      ROOM                                 ROOM            malQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       female toilets            ■. male toilets                                                                           toilet                                                                                                     CITY OF LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DEPARTMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6                                                      folding screen                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L.N.BUSH      F.R.I.C.S. C.Eng. M.I.Struct  F.l.A.S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A/WaS£.UUAa. .                       5th floor, Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Liverpool L3 2AJ         Telephone 05 1-236 9231
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Rev. A            E,>c+e<AS,io
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      scale.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            J       °           %1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      drawn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MARC H 86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SSSSrHk,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    •I




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t.C.T.V "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .t.C.T.V.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 / camera                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CAMERA



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D IR E C T O R S                                                       PRESS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C o n tin u e d      b e lo w -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           - ..           \i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Front   b a lu s tra d e
                                                        /\
                           BLOC K OF
                                                                                                                    3 = C L E                  —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          •'h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      nn                t: —                                                                                                                 XU                  _ .P   : _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '/N                                ix r x ix                                                                          /N                                                          — i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1 ------1------H-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sT\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B L O C K OP-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -p l x x ~ o       ii     :                                                                                 m                                                                                                                                  I -11 1                                                                           U Z X X X X --                                                                                                                                j-~ ir—••
                           32 SEATS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  32 ’SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3 = -"-^ =                                                   s                                                                    •fe b d K -b p                                                                             IX
                                                                                                         - tin — r r r .                                                                                                       n n r —c s                                                                                                      P H                         ,* - Ln                . d: LQCK             OF                  148'S^AT5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i              r l      . f    f       J:    J      ~                             ; 48 SEATS-                                                                    ^         m                   =

                  it                   9 - ROWS    OF           36    SEATS
                                                                                                         J3 3 = C S = -
                                                                                                                                                          ■9 ROWS OF 41              SEATS -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               31                    £ 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -9 ROWS OF 30              SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     m            u             l.l                                                                           •8 ROWS OF 16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   X rx x rn                                                      9 ROWS OF 37 SEATS                                                                r-V -|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -9 ROWS     OF         40 S E A T S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n      m            n             i im                                                                                                                       Z D                  X         T !                                                                                                                       ->  ^ 1—
                                                                                                                                 nr                                                                                           .L IT :                                                                                                                                                                     J = U , I - 1 :U .                                                                                                                              X X X X X ^ ;                                                                                                                                 J           L

                                                                                                               n in i 'n n r                                                                                                  'rmxri                                ~                                                                      X iX                                                           n           u m ;                                                                      X                          \/                             n x r x x x :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ..                                    Ms_                                                                                                             -1 ROW                   OF 53                                                                                                                                                                                          \y
  DN                                                    'N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      /K                                                                                                                                                                                                            =©=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DP                    T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   XX-                                                                                                                                                                                           A\                                                                                                      DN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    m                                                                                                                             op                                                                                                                                                                                          XXX:                                                       IX                                                                                                                  DN                          I X                                                                                                     DN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ZPPXXn                                                                                                             X X                                                                                                                                                                                                                           X:
 =0                                                                                                                                                                                                                      it                                  t;.   t '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          X IX                                                                                                                    P-                   :X _
                                       ■&'■ ROWS   OF            33 < SEATS                                                                                                                                                                                                              ■8    ROWS       OF 25         SEATS                                                                                                                   8 ROWS       OF 4<9 SEATS                                                                                                                                                        -8 ROWS          OF    32    SEATS                               =¥                                         —       *=                   ■8 ROWS OF 37 SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E l                                                                                                                                                                             X X                                              ~ tr
                                                                                                                                                           9 ROWS. OF 35             SEATS                                                                -r~ r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         - ^ I X                                                                              X                                                                                                                                                                                               xjzt-                 c:;r;! n n                                                                                                              in                                                   urn
                           BLOCK OF                                            BLOCK OF 3                                                                                                            BLOCK O F - J                     II                    XXX                                                  BLOCK OF                                   £                                                                                                                                                          BLOCK OF                                   xn                                    XX                                                                      BLOCK OF                                                                                                                                            BLOCK OF
                       r   24 SEATS
                                                     \<
                                                                              J X s e a j s ^T r r T T T n : . . a : i :                                                                             16 SEATS - r                                            xix                                          N/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16 SEATS        T X X             x r x iip                                                                                                                                                           16 S E AT S X P_T                      ■   H ..-L ..I          1- J         t    1      .1...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16 SEATS            ' "i i i_.i:_r i p p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16 SEATS - m           q im E Q
                                                                                                               = a                                                                                                 x :                                                                                                            m       r m       i m : - i - i - i t p i .n x t                                                                              \ i/                                                                          ] . t: i             i - i ; :i r                    p i            p                               \p                                        pp i : T .- T p i,,p i;ir ' r-Q ^ n p p -                                                                                                                         x m
                  *                     •1 ROW     OF 31 SEATS                                                                                                                                                                                        tS                                  I...RO-W OF 2 6               SEAT5-                                                                                    a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ■3 ROWS      OP 4 3 SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Him-                           " T T '- r r .                                                                                            z ix i- iB — p ;l....l i _~                                                             r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .2 ROWS OF        40 ____________
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SE ATS
                                                /h .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          p X P I,                                                                                                                                                                                                            ■3 ROWS         OF    35    SEATS                                                                                                                 "4/                                                                         ¥
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ...                                                                                                         ~t t : ^                         -p^     r r:
                   V                     2 ROWS OF 33 SEATS                                                                                                    2 ROWS OF 39 SEATS                                                                                                         .2 ROWS OF 39 SEATS                                                                                       r^r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ■1 ROW     OF- 37          SE ATS
                                          ___________   -s U   ___________ :
                                                                           ____                                    » l .( £ j t L - L X .                               _________________                                                                                                    i ________ ______________ __                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n       '4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1 !t: r 0 : i n n n _ -                                                                sis                                                                        w
                                                                                                                                                                      'K
  DN                                                    A\
                                                                                             X'Q
                                                                                              - f    r   7 -
                                                                                                                        DN
                                                                                                                                f
                                                                                                                                       XT
                                                                                                                                           T   -   r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :n                DN        P X IH ---                                             A\                                                                 - 3 in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   p !p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DN                                                    A\                                                                                                      DN                                                                                                                                                                   irni                                                                                                                   DN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          'T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n ir iL - -                                                                                                    n o                                                               -E                                                                                                    '=L1± = r J — ■                                   n n j:
                                        -5 ROWS, OF 30 SEATS                                                             3                                 -5 ROWS         OF 35 S E A T S                                                                                                •5 ROWS OF 35 SEATS                                                                                                                                 - p n _ROVyS„_OF 39 S E A T S                                                                                                                                                       ■5 ROWS OF             31 S E A T S                                                                                                      5 ROWS      OF       34 S E A T S                                                        &
                                                                                                                                         'te r r -                                                                                                     £ s r= r                                                                                                     .. : x i ± i p                                                                                                                                                               ^ p:
                                                                                                r*             - p.a_u                                           y
                                                                                            -=p                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   —           n n xH                                                                                                                                                                  B                                iP X
                                                    ^ __                                        i.   .....J                              U .X ..                                                                                                 “ x . j, x :                                             \i/                                                               m                 :                   i i. n..                                     jskL                                                                   —        n n r-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .— r ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -L— I       : -i -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       v                                                           -n
                                                     /K                                                                      m       i                                                                                        m            n,nii -                                                                                                                                                             nj r 'p                                          /K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      - i-'-nnn, n.ui
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ; r a             nn~.                                                                                                                                                         t       l l                                                                                                                                 iin                     n           i 'n
                             BLOCK OF
                             4 8 SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n             nr—                                                                                                                                               : L jn n : m                  n                                                                                                                             n n r ip x .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              \ * r~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i. - P .                                                                                                 m —on                                                                                                                        • B L OCK OF-p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A 8 S E A T S |- /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n o n i-                 ..                                                                                                                                                     iz . .                                                                                                                             iL m          :'   ni.n.                                                                                                                J im — i x r

                                       -11 ROWS     OF           32    SEATS                                                                               11 ROWS          OF 39     S-EAT.S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ■fell:-.                          -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0 ROWS OF 39                SEATS                                                                                                                         -10 ROWS          OF 45      SEATS                                                            -m e r                      ■n ix :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -11 ROWS OF .35              S E A T S -------
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n r in r                                                          -11 ROWS     OF        36      SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i r                                                                                                                                 n . _ n r ‘- p &                            n                                                                                               T -B r                          ■■-.!£ £ £ ■= :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2         e                                                                                                                         ■n:njr n r,n
                                                                                                         X T             p~ npm                                                                                                                      . ±..   -■                                                                                                                           nnr                  m    i;                                                                                                                                -id                              npi._                                                                                                             I I >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       . i      I        i    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   --f -T•'- •*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t,   J       i   .

                                                                               ■■   1                                    :n m n ri                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m                    x -i i:                                                                                                                                ,:m                '         t          1;;                                                                                                  m                    - p n in                                .

                                                                                                                               x:                                                                                    -J J J Z IX J                                                                     \1/                                                                                m           :                                                        _ _ \k .                                                                                   'in]                        n .[.;                                                                                                                   D                    *— j.... i _

                                          ROW’     OF 41              SEATS
                                                                                                                             mum                                      SK
                                                                                                                                                                  ROW OF        41    SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       - jT T r n t r r r                                                        ROW ■ OF -26           SEATS-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                _J=_,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               - j -------------     r-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ^f=T9 ^ E A T 5 - ^ - i ^ - j 9 s E A T S ^ g p - r ^ ^ l . ROW-OF 21 S E A T S                                                 ^     7-1 j - p j                       *1 m i                                                     .\p                                                                                                                                   S/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1 ROW OF 45 S E A T S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LL                                                   ROW     OF 28          SEATS                       m u                                                                                            iS - a S E A T ^ ~ l f t j T - ^      ROW O F. 23 SEATS                                n fi]                                                                                       -1 ROW OF 38           SEATS                                 -                 I . l ^-P - U                       ....

                                                                              TP                                                 X                               X                                  X                                            X                                                       PH                                x :                                                                . x l. :                                                                                                                                                                                                                I     :                        ‘       X                                                 X                                                     x :
                                                    1340             SEATS                                               P   f                                            -1423 SEATS                                                                                                                  -1225      SEATS                                                                                                                                                      ■1416      SE ATS                                                                                                                                        -------------- 1288 SEATS          -                                                                                                                              -1488 S E A T S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             p p                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           f o l lo w c e n t r e line of g a n g w a y
                                                                                                                                                                                            1ft      11 in.         4in       1f t   Oin      .11 in  4in                         1^ -    B in
                                                                                                                                                                                     rr
                                                                                                                                                                                     j-
                                                                                                                                                                                             s e a t way                                    s eat way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            seat down
                                                                                                                                                                                           seat       raised                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TOTAL                          N°- OF       SEATS      8772
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BLOCK             OF
                                                                                                                                                                                       n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8        SEATS                                                                                                                                                                          /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            F ro n t b a lu s tra d e         .C o ntin ue d            above
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13        SEATS>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          28 SEATS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  v


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          28 SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      - 2 9 SEATS

                                                                                                                                                       12^in    (2 s t e p s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30 SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                 x 5      in)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n iQ iia n                                                    30 S E A T S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           31 SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Z2
  -A .
         .1   )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           31 S E A T S                                                                                                          BLOCK   OF                                                                                                  AMENDMENTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           32 SE ATS                                                                                                             12 SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3 2 ' s e :a t s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '-klx                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      32 S E A T S
                                                                                                                                                                                            2 ft        3 in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           33 -SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                       2 t r e a d s x 13 ^ in )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               33 SEATS                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         :    111=1 n                                                          3 4 'SEATS                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in LIVERPOOL F.C.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ItZ T T                   IT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               34 SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               M A IN STAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               35 SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ; r i : T “ r ; 1 1_n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          - jiz r 'i i n n < r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               35 SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            QJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SEATING    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               42 SE ATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         . - U 7 T 'I Z r :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SAFEPl               ^L-^ORT©-              ,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H      3 X        r        ^

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL CLUB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MAIN STAND                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  'P                                                                                     592   SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CITY OF LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DEPARTMENT

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UN.BUSH      F.R.I.C.S. C.Erig. M.I.Struct  F.I.A.S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5th floor,Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Liverpool L3 2AJ        Telephone 051 *236 9231
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            scale               1 * 96
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            drawn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MARCH ‘86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          V'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A 5 - A/8
p& n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P \<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r-   - ■   .1
                                                                                        -------   J   -   --------^
                                                                                                  L




               *v« *•




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PI TCH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ASH        TRACK


                                  DRWG   N os 12 &17.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SEE                           DRWG                                    N °-5 .
                                                                                                                         ' E X IT ©                                                                                                                                               EXIT ©       ' EXIT ©                                                                                                                                   E X IT '®
                                                                                                                                                     extg fence & gate retained




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for terrace tretei j s s e e drawi ng-.rN* 10.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TV

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    STAIRS




                                                                                                                                                                             GROUNDSMANS        &     GENERAL          STORE                                                                                                                                GENERAL         STORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IRRIGATION
                                                                                                                                s e a le d doorway
                                                                      BOILER ROOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rLZ-D^


                                                 LA D IE S                                                             FEMALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LDiTEKYf                                                                                                                                                                               FEMAL
                                                                                                                       LAVATORY I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LAVATORY

                                                                   STORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .   1                                                                                                                                                           ®4 |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1 proposition divisional,
      I:.'.'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CATERING
                                                    s w e e t d is t r ib u t io n p o in t"                                                                                                                                                         barrier & gates


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ph
                                               on       m a tc h     .days                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   STORE



                              ©                                                                                                                                                                      ffl

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1                                                                                                                                                           ^ 1 -                     '   / ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1    8-

                                                                                                                      MALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T     M /fL E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                                LAVAMORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LAVATORY
                                                                              SWITCH
                                                                                                                             ^■existing
                                                                                                                                                                                    X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ^G E N E R A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S T OR
                                                                                                                               barrier
                                                                                                                                retained
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                REFRESHMENT                BAR"                                                                            REFRESHMENT             BAR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      REFRESHMENT. BAR

                                                                               turnstile                                                                                                                                                              . / B \ •/ W   \p                                                                    /B \   A   k

                                                                                                                                                                                            .       R o lle r   sh u tte rs ■                                                           _|         h-   .   >— R o lle r     s h u tte r                       .                    R o lle r   sh j t t e r S
fI ■
                        E29                             E30                                                                                                                           E31                                                                                                    E32                                                                                                     E33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       _1 _              !<?■.-'''•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '.y\                                            ■    1        f         'I--'.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S    %      /:.?                                                                                           ■-%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ’•'L.   \//x

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ;                      ■ ■"               . •.         ' ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r't                                                                                    M. ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '           *                         \     ■ V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             - -     ,                         ^

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ■.J                                                                                                *       ■                              ■I r-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    - .              .   ■              .        ■       s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          V•. ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '                                                                                  :'.. v                                                                                   .           N                          l v /


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             •     ... ■            — -   ’S t . - 1-      .                                ' ^          ^ v '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ■   ‘                              ■                         . ‘                   •       -         f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -f'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i

! \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ■                  ^                         '       ....... '                    ........
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .   ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -            1                                                                                                                              *

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          :•




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AMENDMENTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     >~7



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (/)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL                                                            CLUB                                                                                                                                                                             UJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL CLUE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UJ       A N F IE L D ROAD "•
                                                                                                                                                                \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A N FIE LD ROAD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ai
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GROUND FLOOR LEVEL
i                                                                                                                                                                                     r

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FLOOR LEVEL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               os                32pm r-m»m                                                       m




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CITY OF LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DEPARTMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LN.BUSH’ F.R.i.C.S. C.Eng. M.I.Struct     F.LA.S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5th floor,Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Liverpool L3 2AJ      Telephone 051 -236 9231



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '   -r::V.*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,i■imi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .iiifiLin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            drawn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1-96
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MARCH *86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A 5 - A /9                                                                                      t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     . . '                                                     k            ' v:- ’•-                                                              '\               ;           ' '■ ‘•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *   ^mm^ssnsmmx                                                       ,j                          . ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  - •-.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            V




         kemlyn road stand                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   main stand

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         edge of playing surface ^


                   S E E D R A W I N G               N ° A /1 3

                   F C R       E X ' T         S T E W A R D              P O S F T IO N S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SEE DRAWING N° A /9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 edge of pitch ^
                                                                                                                  ^   crow d control b arrie r retained along this'length.                                                                                                          FOR E X rT STEWARD POSITIONS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           new 3 -8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  min 3 6 wide gate                              take down top panel of pitch perimeter fence ^                                                      c‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mm     5 - 0n "                                                                                                                                         ,           min 3 ^                              -                                                                                                   min 3- [
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        good to steel exposed
                                                                                                                                                                                                 intprmpfiiate steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '/Tp min H DD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    min 1100                                                                                                                                               c p.c conc intermediate steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y                                        -                                    .                                                                                       f                                                                   exit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ■2 / J    -$<ux\s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I'si                         isiyS2                               iv? ^ vvsjm-                     14-3 j 142 I'M \^rfi 13^ 13% lY l lif e H S I M 133 132
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1,10 112^ \L!h i n   12^ 126 124 m 121 I I ' 120 H°1 114 i n                        r 1/4 Hi 111 III 110 loq IOS |07 lob
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tunnel exit                            < \5    ^ 3 <Ki ° ii ^ 0 m       s i]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    uP    |j<                                                             2B s ea t s                                                                     7             u:P     <                                            — ------        IL                                                      >!              up
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                \^ o ) w   \ ‘V 6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i£ 4 $ 3 $ 2 81 8 0 i q "74 1 7 no, 1 5 n4 T i ~ it ~ll To 'o0! u             loT 1= 1. W      W    lo l 'oZ b I UpO 5 4 S4 5 7                          ~~\54 ^3 52                          51<3o 4A A-4> 41 4<» 45 44 41 At 4\ 40 M M . n W W M                             12 3lp                           ~g?|-27 l - 2 f c | Z 5 l ^ | ^ 3 k ^ R l
                           boTR-ier
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7                                                      tIT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [54 53 52                     5l5o 44 44 47 4b 46 44 41 47-'"                                                      a ir

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               C :          V T                                                                               ■7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [54 53 <i2                    5160 44 4% 47 ,41* 45 44 43

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1                                                      m         i- in r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [54 53 52                     51So 44 4% 4-7 41.4$ 44 43                                                                                             14 m                n-5            \-vb

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -f                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               “[54 53 52. 51 60 4“1 44 47 41. 46 44 43
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I                                                                                                                                                                                                     f " reduce sidewalls to height                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |5 4       5 3 52 SI             So 44      44 4 7 4i» 4 ^ 4 4 4 3                                                                                                1i7[^‘b|^4                       |-n         \0\ 1%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ^>•910 'high divisional fence                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       min width I ^ O 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3 -0 * above new pitch lin t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7                                                      r     ~                                                                          r         " " 1                                                   ‘ o f te rra c e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r               ~ [5 4       53          52 51     50 4“1 4 ft 47 4U> 45 4 4 4 3                                                                                                     H o \V » \T A \ f b


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i z : :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r_             :z i                                                                                                                                             j                         [5 4       6?, 5 2 51        60 44 4% 47 4lo 46 4 4 43                                                                                          Vb\vx k le 16 I k I v \                                     i°i 1*     n

                                                                                                                                                                                             ;    r -- - - - - - - - - - - - -             ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t-       |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i                                                                                                                                   x           ~ l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ]                 [‘5 4          63 52 51          60 4<1 4$      47 4 b 45 4 4 . 43                                                                             yin          II     T - '* \ v , \   M [T-T> 2T['J| I'co                                                                                              reduce'hei ght of si de w a ll to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3 'O'above new terrace pitch line.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r        |      i.                                                                                                                                      r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ■'■■■                 [154. 53 e,i *,) c,0 4c, 44 47 4I046 44 43                                                                                                 r, kfe |vi~l xio [^4 [ >4~[';.•!>                       j T.i~|"'£TTt^~r\‘6 n         ife
                                                                                                                                                                                             i    i           ■                                                                                                                                                                i = -                                                                                          "I                                                                                                                                                         :z l                                                                                                                                                 r                 ‘                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       / v       /             %/                   .        /
                                                                                                                                                           63mm
                                                                                                                                                                                           ! t                               /»
                                                                                                                                                                                        __ L _ U REPOSITIONED' BARRIER ( 5^ 0 high )
                                                                                                                                                                                           p | b olted down.to existing conc terrace.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T~ |

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r        I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i                                                  -!=
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r reposition wall to facilitate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1 0 'N° s e a ts b ehind,see engsdej ails
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ~Z1                                                                                                                                              T~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [54 53 51 5i 60 49 4$ 47 4V, 45 44 43

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [54 53 *)Z 51 <50 44 44 47 4fc45 4443
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .    ~fn jn ^io~['.-5|'i^r[n

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '•:la^l'rTtv               ^ \ - v ^ \ T i\ x b \ ix
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |u |io |,g |\<k m

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n 12otW \j n 1 iv, | i ? p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             / \ ‘i Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A / . . 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            / ' / .-V '-/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ■' s .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '/■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .   /


                                                                                                                                                                                        -    \    I- - - - - - - - - - - - - :    ------------r       - - - - - - - -                                                  - ri                                                                                                                                                                                                105 104 W3 102 1 0 1 100                ‘ Y l ^ lo                                                                                                                                                                                                             t                                ^           ^2ilS^ V " 5 0 4«1 46 47 4b 4 6 44 4 1                                                      3\ |                                     in laiolae l-i.^ |i^juTirNol ^ |^                                    lb l-b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '      ~ 2*8 s e a t s
                                                                                                                                                                                             i T                                                                                                        r        i          i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [5 4 5 3               57 51     =,0 41     4« 47 4V. 4 5    44 4 3                                                    !             "              li.%| t \ 1 u» l ‘v T t'5 5 Ix 'i              | n Uo       i q | u | P Ti u |1*I >4 , W '               / , /    ,\

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        i                                                                          -3^D^high division fence                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   j                     [5 4 5 3 61 5 '              So A<\     4% 47   4W 4 5 4 4 4 3                                                 31 ^                                                                            Ul U ° l iq~p4~| 11 1|7TT57'4 113 ,                                     -s • ■' ./
                                                                                                                                                                                             : r                                                                                                        i        i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   “b o lte d to conc terrace
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1"“                       [5 4 5 ^ 57 51               50 4^      46 47 4 ^ 4 $ 4 ^ 43,                                                                                            ^ I ^ I ^ T ^ 1 ^ ! | ^ I2 0 1 iT j l ^ ~ [ n T T i » | '6 1 14 | i T | -S\/                                   . -■; •-" /V\
                                                                                                                                                                             MF 3   a        l" ~ 1 ~ " '3 ‘-O ^ g a te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .... ......... !                   .i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TV             GANTRY                                                                                                                                                                                             1-
                                                                                                                                                                                        :    r~ f                                    ........................                                           r   _|              1                                                                                                                                   r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              “ [5 4 5 3 52                  51 «>o       44 4T 4V» 4 5 4 4 A 3                                                   •31 ^                             M       11     IB     tt       K    11 l l     tl M h«\         It    >\ Ite IS 1A ■'!             '


                                                                                                                                                                                            ;i        r -                        ---------------------                     |_ i          i .1           r |           “ I                                                                                                                                                                                                      C.C.T.V                                             OVER                                   r :               1 =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           53 52              51 60 44 4« 47 4 k 4 5 4 4 4 ?                                                       ■5\ T                  4-                In |bT[i?1 ia [z.'bl2x |ii 120                                 n
. exit staircase N° I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CAMERA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 •-/                   - \ ©
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ■ j =     r ,    -                                                                                                                                                                                                     .XI                                                                                                                                                                                                  _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ___
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              'Iso          44 47 At, 4 5 4 4 4 3                                                  "3i r                  '•:'jaib|n 12bT^~T€TlxvTi-z 71 Ifl |C| I * n                                           1V>   l">        13 I \X                                                                                                   9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   for details at column                                                                                                                                                                                         .     for details at column                                                                                    for details at column
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L see drawing 714 -5                                                                                                                                     3 4          ft '                  ~)60 4<ai 44 A7 4l» 4 5 4 4 43                                                                           •: V 'i4 |n jiU |15 |14 |2J f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r - E           H                                       -1— i          I    |   4 -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             see d w g 7 H - 5 v- . - i                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ij.                                 t E 3 1> » I» I» X > '                       ’ -V            ^

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n                     a:                                                                                                                                                              T64 J _ J 5 Z                 51 ‘ 60 4 « i' 44 >47 4lo 45 4 4 43                                                                         ;- T !l‘b|              K 1.116 |             | V > i~zT['ii 11 t i g 1 i ? T ' n j ' ° ~ [ T 6 ~ r i 4 1131 !•

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               “ [5 4 5 -J ‘bz 61 60 4«| 4 4 47 4l« 4 5 4 4 43                                                                                            x i   k4[^i 1                             W|i3i ^1 ^'^•■^i^rpgr'5r'4^r'Tp^T'^T'°

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r    t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r;                                                                                                                                                              j                     T64 5T> 6,2                  51 50 4 q 4 4     47 41° 4 5   44 43     ^                                                                         Iz1?Kt IZ             b \T A \z * \is > \      ^ •^■I^i^ q i T r v 6 T i 4 |'3 |U |li Ila| q~t

                                                                                                                                                 SSSSMi                                                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ]                     J 54           63 5 2        »>l 60 4«1 46     AY 4 1 ^ 4 5 4 4 43                                                                              [26|Z7 Kb |t6 I-Z.4jci| [!T[^r''<\114 In |\U I16114 113 |u Ill |

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n                                                                                                                                                               I                   T T !^       5 1 52            51 6 0 4 “l       4 7 fl'°_ 4 5 4 4 43                                                                             | -a, | zn | iv> 1 26 24 | i i | nI aT}^0^ ifL)                                 1._L'.l_l.|4. |.i? | ' i (_                  y/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I'                    [6 4           53 5 2       5) 50 4 ^ 4 % 4 7 4 t, AS 4 4 A3                                                                              -•■•[ t g ~ r T [ 2 b [ £ 5                                                      n

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          l»                 iio T o f^ *                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r                     [5 4       53 52 51 50_4«i_4fl 4 7 4V. 45 4 4 41                                                                                                U t 1z i                                       a « zo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ■■T            ,nh            rn-fp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r                                                                                                                                                               57r                                  -53 51. 5 l 50 4 ^ 4 4 4 7 4v» 4 5 44 43                                                                                                 a t I x i lav, 15                               ii         iq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    - tubular steel barrier


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       down
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              u r r i' 1•* - [ ' ' " T T                                            iJP~l ' T ,             51 60 4<j A4 47 A»o 45 4 4 43                                                                                           14 27 26 15 1 4                      13    U    11    U    k)    14    17

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                T                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r j '[■'' j ' r f ! L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              reduce h e ig h t o f ^ |T                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T         -                                                                                                                                                                            ~ '      “ill 5o        4$ 4 7 A^> 4 5 4 4 4 3                                                                                    lg .          Jb i s                           ii |io |iq |~i4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              side & front walls r




                                                                                                                                                                                        Vfa0[isfl}ss[isr>|isv,|i5s[~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        exit staircase N° j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I I I I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              to 3'D"abovenev,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              pitchline


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S&O|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \ip>

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \&\ |\2Aa 1XlS                                               lib 115 li4 Hi U2 in u°
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -C   back wallof stand ^          TL                                      “ X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               >1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 in

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -84, 47
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ri± h «

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ^ tU     1^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     43   %z 41


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               “i 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <5o

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '-t!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   it   n   -15 n v ^3 -XL n l 70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J td l

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            exit -staircase-H° 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    m             y               \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !    51 50 4 ^ 4       4 7 4*a 4 5 4 -^ 4 3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sb | 61 5o 4<^ 44 4i_4> 45 44 43 42. 4i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I'. - i c i [ ^ o 4 ^ 44 A'1 ‘Vc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40   VI   3% Y )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r£
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                35   34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               • ' " ‘ ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3}   «


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          JiJ11o •«. Trt 33 1 1 11         30.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r i \Vo Ws -LH- 7.1 7.1 2.1 110 iq

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |2 f a R 6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.4- 2 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AMENDMENTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    extg seats removed                                                  FDR DETAILS SEE DWG N° 7 1 4 -T                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FOR DETAILS D FEX IT SEE DRAWING 7 1 1 - 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -v       ^                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ^                   U '               A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C m in i.' 10*                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C min 1 - 10ff
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               min I "u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           s e a t positions to be d e te rm in e d on site
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           seat posit ons to be determin ed on site                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [SEE DRAWING 7 1 4 - 5 ]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [ SEE DRAWING 7 H - 5 ]                                                                                                                                        [ SEE D R A W IN G 7 H - 5 ]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            green                                                                                                                                           white                                                                                                           red                                                                                                                                                              l ilac                                                                                                                                                            yellow                                                                                                                                                                     orangp
                                                                                                                                                                                ¥                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               - - K                                                                                                                                                                 - K -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LIVERPOOL F.C.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AN FIELD ROAD
                                                                                              •••■:.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BEATING.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     v""':! s D S   A C T



                                                -/


                                                                                                                  *


                                                                                                                                                           '-.t t**

-r‘" '
                                                                                   7’


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CITY OF LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL CLUB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR’S DEPARTMENT

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L.N.BUSH      F.R.I.C.S. C.Eng. M.I.Struct  F.I.A.S.                                      \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices

                                                                                                        .i.
                                                                                                        -S • '.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A N FIE LD R O A D -S E A T IN G & VISITORS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TERRACING                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /fv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5th floor, Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Liverpool L3 2AJ         Telephone 051 -236 9231


                                                     ' . ' ; - . ..Lt::. . : : .   •'', ' r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         T "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      drawn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1 - 96
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A5-A/10 A
                        'a •               K                                       vs-:t.;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            date                               M ARCH .'86
                           •    'TiV-' '
                                  SEE     DRWb    N'-'.i'*

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VOI D




                                                                                                    Disus.eqi
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Spare s t o r e                        (flammable)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NOTES ON SAFETY MATTERS
                                                                                                    store
                                                                                                                                                 I        I                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             b ee r      store                      bar                All the features shown on this drawing especially those noted
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       below and by means of standard symbols are important
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1hr
                                                                                                                                 MALE     LAVATORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to s a fe ty and should be maintained without alteration
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MALE         LA V A T O R Y                   famale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       unless approval is obtained
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DN
                                                                                                                            n           :__ rc                 J    t                                         t :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ----- ------------------ I n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       j        v        J                                 m                    J T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a         n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ■


                                                                                   Ladder                                                                                                                                                             -N / —
                                                                                   &walkir
                                                                                  board
                                                                                  store                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S e c u rity shu-tter to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              be locked when, only                              KEMLYN    LOUNGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Kemlyn Lounge in use


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      < >

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i-                           STANDARD SYMBOLS USED
                                                                                                                            r-
                                                                                                                                                                                                          m



                                                                                                                                                                                                              c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (T-S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W                                                                                                                     "P

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Indicates egress routes to be kept unobstructed

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Indicates a fire protected enclosure of an escape route
                                                                                                                            F E M A L E LAVATORY                                                                                                                           CASH      OFFICE
                                        LINE OF KOP R E F R E S H M E N T B A R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    $ T BOILER                          I       I Indicates a fire resisting enclosure of a fire risk
                                          OVER.   (CLEAR HT        • .)                                         i
                                                                                                                                                                                      r       PQ                                                                                                                                                                            EXIT                                                Indicates a self closing fire resisting door with deep
                                                                                               II    '          - v ':’ :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rebates (Number gives the hours grade)
                                                                                             Rotler      shutter                                                   Roller   shutter
y   FOR   CONTINUATION                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R o lle r s h u t t e r                                                                         jgj         Indicates a sign marking an egress route
                                                                                                                                                                                                          .P R IV A T E                                       PASSAGE
      ..SEE   DRWG   N°?tt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          p g Indicates a door fitted with panic bolt(s)with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ' instruction for use sign
                             XL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L Q ■ndicates a door or gate to be locked in the open
                                                                                                                                                                                           ._n:                                                                     J— L              -T~L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ' position when the premises are occupied

                                                                                                                        PUB.LIC    REAR    PA S S A G E   TO        HOUSES       IN       KEMLYN        ROAD                                                                                                                                                                                                           AMENDMENTS                                                                            \


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A      E-xL^b   ^23                                                               S7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DETAILS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          KE.MLYN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OF CASH O F F I C E - '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LOUNGE SEE DWG N° 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LIVERPOOL EC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           v-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               KEMLYN ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GROUND FLOOR L E V E L -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FOOTBALL                                                     CLUB                                                                                                                                       o - r r - f .of. spoors mamm - a c t mi5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               'w          •XVSM!^


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CO.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   _l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   o


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CITY OF LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GITY BUILDING SURVEYOR’S DEPARTMENT

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LN.BUSH       F.R.I.C.S C.Eng. M.I.Struct • F.I.A.S.                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5th floor, Kingsway HouSe, Hatton Garden,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Liverpool L3 2AJ        Telephone 051-236 9231
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    scale               1 =96
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    drawn               AKS                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    date                MARCH ‘86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ■ * r r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1            2676H T




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -■     -3      ; •       V       .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    „C----■vW.'-J.v.'■-■"■ ■••• ._u_--
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ANFIELD        ROA D     TERRACE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NOTES ON SAFETY MATTERS
                                                                                                                                                                                          STORE
                                                       store                                            POLICE   ROOM.                                                                                                                                                                            All the featu res shown on this drawing especially those noted
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  below and by means of standard symbols are important
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to s a fe ty and should be maintained without alteration
                                                                     MALE     LAVATORY                                              MALE      L A V AT I                                                                                                                                          unless approval is obtained
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 X) I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  o ■
                                                                                                                                                            screen                                                                                                                o .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 or •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       j



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TS? i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1

                 w>                                                                                                                                                                                                            beam over                                         <1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c
                                                                                                                                                                          screen
                                                                                                                                                                                                        staircase up   JLEE DRWG                                                 .h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y / column                                                 u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CJ
                          K E ML Y N    .LOUNGE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SEE D R A W IN G N<? A / 9 i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FOR                                                C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  STANDARD SYMBOLS USED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RELIEF E X I T STEWAR I                                            < J ] Indicates egress routes to be kept unobstructed

                                                                                         PROGRAM M ES                                                                                                                                                                                             CD      Indicates a fire protected enclosure of an escape route

                 BOILER
                                                                                                                                                           \FEM ALE   IA V A T O R Y                                                                          S.EH‘8 T                            c n Indicates a fire resisting enclosure of a fire risk
                                                    EXIT                                                                                                                  screen                                                                                         Rol l er s h u t t e r           Indicates a self closing fire resisting door with deep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rebates (Number gives the hours grade)
                                                                   Roller   shutter                                      Rol l er   shutter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [JTj    Indicates a sign marking an egress route

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PB. Indicates       a door fitted with panic bolt(s)with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '     ’ instruction for use sign                                            j
                                                               ©
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | _ Q Indicates a door or gate to be locked in the open
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ' position when the premises are occupied
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ------ 1------------
^   •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1—                                                               AMENDMENTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I                                                               'A *           Lt                     Ki u -w v -Id e-r-ej=t                        “S       i

                                                                                                                                                                                       FOR DETAILS OF IN FILL TO                  I
                          FOR DETAILS   OF KEMLYN                                                                                                                                                                                                POLICE HORSE BOX.
                                                                                                                                                                                       V IS ITO R S OVERFLOW PEN
                          LOUNGE  SEE   DWG N°18
                                                                                                                                                                                       SEE' DWG N° 17.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ■POLICE HORSE BOX                                        LIVERPOOL F.C.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I                                                                    KEMLYN ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GROUND FLOOR LEVEL 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      of   s p o rts   mxnm:         ach         nsvr


                                                                                      LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL                 CLUB
                                                                                                                                                                      \
                                                                                      KEMLYN ROAD
                                                                                      GROUND FLOOR                                                                                                                                                                                                CITY OF LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR’S DEPARTMENT

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L.N,BUSH      F,R.I.C,S, C,Eng, M,l,Struct   F.I.A.S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5th floor, Kingsway House, Hatton G ard e n ,.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Liverpool L3 2AJ         Telephone 051-236*9231
        - •v -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ¥
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  scale            1*96
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7        \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  drawn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MARCH ’86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A5-A/12 A
i k




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I
 it
 i;;




                         ■ Y V t-




                 ii V*                         r ~ L                                       J T                 _TL.                                 3                          n                               J“U.             n                                      ~7fT~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              __n                                                                    n                   n _ J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     □                L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               _n

                                                                                  I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CATERERS                                                                                                                                   CATERERS                  TfM BER         STORE             PAINT                                                                 store     .
                                                                                                      CLEANERS'                                                                        CATERERS                                                                                                                       . STORE                      -                                                                                                             •'STORE                                                   ^ S T ORE
                   DN                 SWITCH     ROOM                PASSAGE      •                                                                     PLUMBING    STORE
                                                                                                                                                                                        STQPE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /•Cl^
                                                                     THR O UG H TO                    REST     ROOM                                                                                                                                                    D   n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,17^
                                                                     - VOID                                                                                                                       *'
                                                                                                                                   w

                                                                                                                                        ©
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ©             ■ NOT IN                                                                                                                ©
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             - USE                    •    REFRESHMENT                              BAR
                                                                                                                                                                             REFRESHMENT                        BAR
                   ©                       M A IN T E N A N C E
                                               ST 3RE '
                                                                                                                      IS13]

                                                                                                                                                               ©
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ©
                                                                                                                                            .if-



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tra p d o o r

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B E -N C I I IN-Qr
                                                                                                                                                                                   H           DU C T                                                             In                             rv                                                                      J L             _n_
                                                                                                                                                   HR          .n                                                                   O
                                                rr                _TL                                          J L                X T


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1ft   3^in            8 ^ iin                       1ft       bin

                                                                                                                                                                                                  se a tw a y                           seatway
                                                                                                                                                                                                 seat raised                             sea t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         dow n




      i I ■■ v




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NOTE !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                WHEN "OVERSPILL SECTION IS OCCUPIED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BY VISITORS SUPPORTERS                 E X lt STEWARD,'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N? E41 is :I 0 MAN EXIT                     QAT|S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SHOWN . BY DOTtED             CIRCLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         touchline


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         edge o f grass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 K        ine of roof

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tracK                                                                                    P arapet    w a ll                                                     crowd control barrier




        llii




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13 ROWS OF              4 6 -S E A T S                                            - T'3 'ROW'S OF 25—
                                                                                                                                                                                   13 ROWS               OF      A 6- SEATS                                                                                               13 ROWS OF                        50   SEATS
                                                                     13       ROWS OF            A3   SEATS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7       ROWS OF- 41 SEATS                                                           7   ROWS OF 23
                                                                                                                                                                               -       7       ROWS OF          ■ 41   SEATS                                                                                              7 ROWS                       OF 45 SEATS
                                                                        7     ROWS OF \4 0--           SEATS
                                                                              ‘       T"   vt




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1   ROW    OF        42 SEATS                                                   1 ROW    OF 23-
                                                                                                                                                                                           1    ROW       OF     42    SEATS                                                                                                  1        ROW             OF    46    SEATS
                                                                          1       ROW OF         41    SEATS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /K
                                                                                                                                                                                                           t
                                    E 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I__I                                      4    ROWS OF 46 SEATS                                                              5    ROWS OF 25
                                                                                                                                                                                       4        ROW'S      OF     46     SEAT5                                                                                            4           ROWS-OF                50    SEATS
                                                                   -5         ROWS         OF    43     SEATS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \ l/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   /K ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ROWS-OF- 4 3 SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .. r.                                                          h   o   m   e   .
                                                                                                                                                                                    2 ROWS                 OF     43     SEATS                                                                                            2           ROW S -OF 45                SEATS                                                                                                                                                                     1   ROW OF 25.^—> r: /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M/
                                                                        1         ROW      OF    41   SEATS                                                                   2 3 SEATS                                                                                                                                                     \K                                                                                                           r i i    r i i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L-U                                                                                  :------------ 21 SEATS                                                19 SEATS                           21 SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                        21 SEATS                                                         19 SEATS                                                       21   5 EATS
                                                          19 SEATS                                                     19'    SEATS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20. SEATS                          21 SEATS                                         2 3 SEATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         19 SEATS                                                       21   SEATS                                                                21 SEATS
                                                                                                                      .2 0    SEATS                                     21. SEATS
                                                          19 SEATS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                T   j l y   l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1SK SEATS                                                   SEATS                                T ^ = y .8 .   SEA TS
                                                                                                                                                                        m SEATS                                                          19 SEATS                                                       W    S EATS
                                                          17 SEATS                                                     18     S EATS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I .
                                                                                                                                                                    r _ ;^                                                               I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BLOCK H                                                                          BLOCK G                                        o f ■s p o r t s   a
                                                                                                                                                                                                       BLOCK     K                                                                                                                                BLOCK J                                                                                                                                                                                           722 seats
                                                                                           BLOCK L                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1314 seats
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1314seats                                                                                                                                 1422 seats
                                                                                           1248 seats                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               M A L M seals 6020     L I V E R P O O L                         F C . ( KEM. RD

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SEATING AND CONCOURSE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ■y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CITY OF LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR’S DEPARTMENT

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           KEMLYN               ROAD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L.N.BUSH      FR.I.C.S. C.Eng. M.I.Struct  FI.A.S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5th floor, Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                & FIRST                                                                       CONCOURSE                                                                                                                                                       Liverpool L3 2AJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              scale         1 : 96
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Telephone 051 -236 9231


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              drawn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AKrS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MARCH          86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A5-A/13                           26 7f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        --r ■
                                                  r y
                                                                                           I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :> ■ /
                                            ■    \ .- T V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \ '"N '

    v.
■f
■Y ■.v




                       Mi




                                                                         SEE-    DRWG          N°-6.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SEE    DRWG      N      11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Go a l   l i ne



                                                                                                                                                                                                      L i n e of r o o f   over                                       IS   Edge     of grass




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Passage u n d e r r e f r e s h m e n t b a r       leading
                                                                                                              lM ^ t o r y 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to r e a r of Kemlyn Road Stand
                                                                            Ras^V
                                                                              jT S It-S .T S itS   ftfc
                                                                            ddb n/i


                                                                             SED-6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ME.                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            11v";       "~S-Roller S h u tte r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                         SUB-STATION                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               cr
                                                                GENERATORS &
                                                                SWITCH
                                                                5WITC    R O gjvU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r
                                                                OVER                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               >■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FOR EXACT LOCATION OF CRUSH BARRIERS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          __ i

                                                                                                          MALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ' SEE ST. E N G IN EE R S DV/GS.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LU
                                                                                                           LAVATORY



                                                                                                             FEMALE LAVATORY


                                                                                                                V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        stand
                                      /A



                                                                                                                                           SteppedL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Vj_sta>rways _<
                                                                                                                                            ramp                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          :T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        over                                                                            ^mbankment
                                                                                                                                           (obsolete                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NOTES ON SAFETY MATTERS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               All the features shown on this drawing especially those noted
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               below and -by means of standard symbols are important      1
                                                                                                                                                                           embankment                                                                                                                       retaining
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               to safety and should be maintained without alteration
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               unless approval is obtained



                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DN : DN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           iN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                                                          retail’;if .g walls


                                                                                                                                                                                                             OFFICE



                                                                                                                                                                                    DEVELOPMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                    OFFICE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               STANDARD SYMBOLS USED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <CjH Indicates egress routes to be kept unobstructed
                                                                                                                                        SO' IVENIR
                                                                                                                                        SHOP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   □       Indicates a fire protected enclosure of an escape route

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SENIOR C IT I Z E N S AND                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 □       Indicates a fire resisting enclosure of a fire risk

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     JU VE N ILE    TURNSTILES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Indicates a self closing fire resisting door with deep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rebates (Number gives the hours grade)
         ■I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ||jj    Indicates a sign marking an egress route
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         INTERMEDIATE                         LANDING                                   LEVEL                                                                                                  m        Indicates a door fitted with panic bolt(s)with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘ instruction for use sign

\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LO.      Indicates a door or gate to be locked in the open
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘ position when the premises are occupied
    \.
                                                                                                                                                     T U R N S T IL E S    A LLO C A TE D       FOR
         •■■A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AMENDMENTS                                                                                                 L-T**
                                                                                                                                                     SEASON TIC K ET             HOLDERS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A 1     -SisL-v\^ (_£, tE.                              ,

              A.A.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              &                    in           + L A - * * - s \ £ - t tjS   e . s                             .       'hr
                    ■• • •'*> •.


                       •
                           ✓   *\

                            • \
                '          ' “V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LIVERPOOL F.C
                                    *• -
                                     \                                                                                                                                                                                                          LIVERPOOL                                               FOOTBALL                            CLUB                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SPION KOP                                                                     .--'- a   .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LOWER LEVEL                                                           •'■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                • ■ s V. ’ ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              . «niyfojr;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      •




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SPION KOP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                c r r T V               ‘ RTS 0;                                       M     X




                                           -V.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LEVEL

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CITY OF LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR’S DEPARTMENT

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LN.BUSH       F.R.I.C.S. C.Eng. M.I.Struct F.l.A.S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5th floor, Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,


                                                                                                                                    \                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              scale,                 J^6T I                                                                                « V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               'Ai;-                                                               drawn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   date
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MARCH ' 8 6 ^ .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A5 - A / %                              2676H *
                                                                                                                               v' .
                                                                                                                                \                                                                                                                                            A A.         A--:-,                          V ■   v-       I ..    '■ -■■■                         :■ .v/”: •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A:a - T . T T v ^ A A s A :                         A V, A,, iA ^   a TAA:,:                 T T , A A - -'AA-A.   ' !   .   -   - •.    A-.AAv^^-A-A A;^'v.^A.                                           X
                                                            m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        • ; ; nir i i W   i i t i i . V W   ^ :~ W   iliiiiii   : •^   "   ::   T   i   inf imM
                  \



                                                                                                                                       '                               "       0
                          '                 ■   *                 ,                                     I   *'            ■   <.   -       '                       *       ^       j   ,




                                                    Km

           - S.       '




                              J A V A ’-,




REFRESHMENT BAR
   UNDER
                                                                                                                                               n d e r gallery
                                                                                                                                                (see drwg. no.14

      GENERATOR




                                                                                                DN DN            DN DN   DN DN

                                                         REFRESHMENT „          MAtE-                                                                                                                       NOTES ON SAFETY MATTERS
                                                                         -J   LAVATORY   .J /
                                                            ^ 3                                                                                                                                             All the features shown on this drawing especially those noted
                                                                                                                                                                                                            below and by means of standard symbols are important
                                                                                                                                                                                                            to s a fe ty and should be maintained without alteration
                                                                                                                                                                                                            unless approval is obtained




                                                                                                                                                                                                             STANDARD SYMBOLS USED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Indicates egress routes to be kept unobstructed

                                                                                                                                                                                                             □       Indicates a fire protected enclosure of an escape route
                                                                                                                                                                                                             o       Indicates a f ire resisting enclosure o f a f ire risk

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Indicates a self closing fire resisting door with deep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rebates (Number gives the hours grade)

                                                                                                                                                                                                             |Q      Indicates a sign marking an egress route

                                                                                                                                                                                                             PB. Indicates a door       fitted with panic bolt(s)with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ' instruction for use sign
                                                                                                                                                                                                             LO       Indicates a door or gate to be locked in the open
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ' position when the premises are occupied

                                                                                                                                                                                                             AMENDMENTS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LIVERPOOL FC.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SPION KOP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   JJPPER LEVEL
                                                                                                   LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL CLUB
                                                                                                   SPION KOP                                                                                                                         :-ORTS



                                                                                                   T E R R A C IN G -U P P E R LEVEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CITY OF LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DEPARTMENT

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L.N.BUSH      F.R.I.C.S. C.Eng. M.I.Struct  F.l.A.S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5th floor, Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Liverpool L3 2AJ         Telephone 051 *236 9231
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 scale                I   \ ° \ Z


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 drawn        AKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 date         MARCH       86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2676H T




                                                                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                   L . J - ...
                                                                                                                                                                                           IL—■-
      SYMBOLS                    USED GENERALLY ON THESE DRAWINGS
               EXIT SIGNS - L e t t e r s to be a minimum- of 125mm high white block l e t t e r s                            on a
               green or red background ( Number is on side from which sign is read).


    T            EX
    T            EX IT—^
    T            <-EX
    T            <- EX iT->

    S
               This sign as indicated by the .num bers to be suspended in the                                     p o s it io n
               shown, a t a minimum h e i g h t o f 2 4 m e f r e s above f lo o r level.

               Exit Gal'es under ‘ Police Control" s h a l l be kep^ open or closed as directed
    P C .      by the Police, b u t never locked d u r in g the c e r t i f i e d use.

    PQ        Gates to be kept "permanently                     open” during the c e r t if ie d use


I
    S.E.D      Pass Out Door ("Single Exit                  Door) .

    M.E.      Exit door to be permanently manned, unless if is in the                            fully   open position

    HR        Hose Reel


              Fire         Ext inguisher — Carbon Dioxide type

                      11             1             C
                                                   Foam 4.type


    A \               "              !l            Wafer      type


                                                   Dry Powder type

                                                                                                                                     m    m

              Fire         Blanket


     0        Fire Alarm Call              Point

     T        Emergency         Telephone


              Ex it        Gate (Number indicates             location)
                                                                                                                                              LIVERPOOL F.C. ■
    EX (T     Maintained         illuminated           emergency li g h t       fitting                                                       LEGEND-SYMBOLS ON DWGS
              Non maintained              emergency l i g h t , f i t t i n g

    PB.T.O.   Doors fitted with panic bolt and sign reading "PUSH BAR TO OPEN"


     *        Fire Resisting Doors(Half hour,unless shown otherwise)
                                                                                                                                                                              f
              STEWARDS               ( See    C ertificate        f or S f e w a r d i n g   F unctions)

              E x it S t e w a r d        (Number         indicates       lo catio n)
                                                                                                                                         GUY OF LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                                                         CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR’S DEPARTMENT
              Relief        Exit* Steward          (Number        in dica tes       lo cdfion)
                                                                                                                                         J. Bennett, C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                 f                                       City Building Surveyor & Surveyor to the Justices
              S afety        St ew ard         (Number         in dica tes       location)
                                                                                                                                         5th floor, Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,


    ©         Crowd          Stew ard
                                                                                                                                         Liverpool L3 2AJ
                                                                                                                                         scale
                                                                                                                                                                  Telephone 051 -236 9231


                                                                                                                                         drawn
                                                                                                                                         date
                                                                                                                                                     AKS
                                                                                                                                                     MARCH      f87
                                                                                                                                                                           A5-A/16           2676H T
