                   | Sheffield Archives Ref:             \j b\                        MIR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            D a tfi anH t im e raised              f )' S    ^ "   N um ber       D\£l
TitlB W sla M a
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)

Receiver's instructions — urgent action — YeslNo
                                                                                                                         Receiver




                                                                                                                         Indexer
Document registeffed/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                     Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions
                            ions                        /f U      &JULA


                                                                                                                            Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                     O /M
                                                                                                                            ns'   SIO
Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                            Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                                 1
                                                     QJD/AHS


Birmingham
                                                     24 April 1989




Bear Str

I read your tatter concerning the Hillsborough tragedy nith great
interest and found your comments of help.

I share your feelings of distress at the Incident and I aa very grateful
to you for writing.


tours faithfully




Chief Constable
                                                                                  Birmingham
                                                                                   19/4/89
      Mr. G. Dear
      Chief Constable
      West Midlands Police.

      Dear Sir,
                   With reference to the Hillsborough disaster last Saturday.
       I appreciate the delicacy of the situation at present^ but feel compelled to
       express my concern at what I consider to be unfair and distorted attacks on
       the police controlling the semi-final.
                    Firstly, I was not at this match, but as a.seventy-three year
      old formerregular football supporter spanning   a period from the 1930's to
      the end of the 1970's I feel justified in commenting on the situation. These
      comments are not written in any 'holier than you' attitude or to infer that                     j
      our generation were well behaved upright citizens etc. There was,however, I                     j
      feel a sense of responsibility so sadly lacking today..                                         j
                   I make this point, because to judge by the attitude from the
     media,experts, spectators at the match and so on, the police are getting
     the blame for everything at this tragic event. Surely other contributory
     factors were involved, even, and dare I mention it in the present climate,
     perhaps a lack of self control by a section of the crowd impatient to get in
     to the ground at all costs. In the past I have been to many football grounds,
     including semifinals at Hillsborough, sparsely policed by todays standards and
     can not recall any major disturbances. Matches not all ticket naturally meant ;
     long slow queues, in those days orderly queueing was sacrosanct to most fans.
     Latecomers, trying to jump the queue were given short shrift by the crowd,
     and directed in no uncertain terms to the rear.   If a 'bobby got involved the
     matter was soon sorted out with some assistance perhaps from the crowd. Inside
     the ground there never seemed any need to be shepherded to one's place. It was
    just left to peoples common sense» Naturally, there was plenty of pushing and
    shoving and arguments,but once the match started things generally settled down.
                  Perhaps this all souft£s like nostalgia for the'good old days.
      However I do feel it is relevant to the root causes of Saturdays tragic day.
      and why I feel so sljongly about the police being made scapegoats for it.
      Watching the Television pictures the chaps at the sharp end seemed to be in
      an impossible position. When the 'shouting and the tumult    dies' we will all
      start to consider how such a terrible disaster could havehappened.     In my
      opinion it is the hooligan element that has infiltrated soccer and is the
      reason why decent fans have to be caged in and segregated. In some respects
      also, I suppose former supporters like myself who have deserted the game
       should take some of the blame for taking the soft option, becoming armchair
      pundits and leaving it all to the Police.
   Finally, watching on telly the mounted policeman manfully   trying to cope with
   the turmoil around him, I thought back to the first Wembley Cupfina.1 - again
   I wasnt at the match - too young.  I know its well before your time sir but I
   expect it is in the police annals.  I refer to the legendary lone 'bobby on
   his white horse who prevented a huge crowd from getting out of hand. fxHEEtsxxx
   I wonder how he would have fared at Hillsborough last .Saturday
   Best wishes,

                                                                                 Yours sincerly

                                                                                                  3
f\? 0 k 0 C ,Z i   & K   hv   T* * j *   r« _ £ U » W ^   °*T   a f   fW cr.«c
