Other Document Form                     Date and tim e raised                      ^   *">   '
                                                                                                                 Number
                                                                                                                          02%
T itle .          G L tP /tO A itv O             it   ~~                            O ^T fZ jy       2~6 <*■ &
(Include source end eny document number if retevent)


Receivers instructions urgent action Y f« /N o        (Im          QlKr-_-dr_IZI^_
                                                                                                                          ^JkHjver


Docum ent registered /ind exed as indicated                                                                                       le x e r


No(s) of actions raised


S tatem ent readers instructions                                                                                            Statem ent
                                                                                                                            Reader



Indexed as indicated                                                                                                             Indexer


No(s) of actions raised


Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                     0 /M               SIO




Further action no(s)                                                                                                             Indexer



W hen satisfied all actions raised Office M a n ag er to endorse other Docum ent M a star Num ber Form


MIR IS
                                                -   6   -




                                     CLIPBOARD 11 - INSURERS


 1 2 1 ^15 pm   1   BGC pf>oko with Mr Jonco rev the a b ove ,

 He said that Mr Dear is currently with the Judge considering our request whic
 will include everything in which the South Yorkshire Police have property aiw
 certainly include all the items referred to above at (b - 25.4.89) which
 read out in detail.

 Concerning the intention to obtain self-serving statements down to ttfe rank of
 inspector and from all officers involved at the Leppings Lane end a(T the
 ground, he saw no problem with that whatsoever, understands thatJbe need to be
 getting on with this quickly, has no worries over this but thap^ed us for
 informing him of our intended action.

 Forgot to mention liaison officer arrangement - Chief Supj Wain to arrange
 this himself.



1.30 pm - Ch Supt Wain discussed with DCC the extend of the investigation.
Advised that Chief Supt Nesbit had been asked to jd& v iew the major incident
procedures and that there was no need for Chief^Supt Wain's investigation to
go beyond the point when the game was stoppec^r Chief Supt Wain to submit his
report in that form and await any further representation made by Counsel.     It
was hoped that Chief Supt Nesbit's de-briar into major incident procedures
would perhaps serve the post-disaster events.



2.00 pm - ACC(SS), having spoken widi Supts Greenwood and Chapman who were
both on duty at Hillsborough at tjpfe time of the tragedy, advised DCC that both
of these officers feel vulnerable in terms of culpability and would like legal
advise.

Mr Greenwood is         conscious ofi the fact that already press comment is suggesting
that the rescue         operatio^rcould have been handled more effectively and the
overcrowding in         the pen/should have been dealt with perhaps even before the
match started.          He wag ground commander responsible for this area of activity.

Mr Chapman was oryduty at the Nottingham Forest end of the ground - far end
away from Leppings L a n e - and stopped police resources being deployed to
Leppings Lane .Because he was concerned about a problem of serious potential
disorder at Jsfls end of the ground.



5.10 pm/- DCC spoke with Miss Norcliffe.            She agreed Mr Metcalf would see both
these/officers on 26.4.89-          She will arrange for Mr Metcalf to attend at
Police Headquarters at 10.15 am when it may be appropriate for him to see both
officers before seeing the original four at 11.00 am.             ACC(SS) making
afrrangem eritis.-------- ---------------------------------------- -- --- ------------------ -



26.4.89

Proof of Evidence - meeting this date with Counsel.  Persons present -
Mr Woodward QC, Mr Limb (barrister), Mr Metcalf (solicitor), Miss Norcliffe
(solicitor), Deputy Chief Constable, ACC(SS), Chief Supts Wain and Mole, and
Chief Inspector Bettison (took notes).  Meeting lasted between 2.00/7.00pm.
                                 CLIPBOARD 11 - INSURERS



      Chief Supts Wain and Mole outlined in reasonable detail the work completed so
      far in compiling background information on which the eventual proof of
      evidence will be based.

\ Mr Woodward expressed his thanks for that done and said we had achieved more
I in two days than some organisations in similar circumstances had achieved in a
] month.
'■i



I Nevertheless there is much more to do and Mr Woodward outlined what further
j enquiries he needed and also what points of clarification and expansion on the
  information already to hand is required.

      Briefly, the evidence gathering mechanism previously agreed is still relevant,
      namely the collection and urgent collation of self-service statements from all
      ranks down to inspector involved at Hillsborough whether initially on duty in
      relation to the match, summoned there by Operation Support or achieved by
      voluntary attendance.

      Similar statements to be obtained from all ranks known to have been involved
      at the Leppings Lane end who attended in any or all of the three categories
      above.

      Statements to include all relevant information up to the time those officers
      eventually retired their duty on this first day.

       In relation to the after-math (recovery phase) statements to be obtained from
       circa a dozen people so involved and Mr Woodward will then advise if anything
      ‘further in this connection is needed.

      The aim is to complete all actions currently outstanding together with
      additional further instructions likely to be received after the lawyers have
      had time to consider the information supplied to them by Wednesday 10 May.

      Chief Supts Wain and Mole to continue with this and because of the priority to
      use - through DCC or 'in his absence ACC(SS) - whatever resources they require.

      It was agreed that the notes of the meetings taken by Chief Insp Bettison and
      those taken by Miss Norcliffe would be exchanged between the parties as soon
      as possible.
