00d


  OH
Tot CSj.^f Sviperintendent Thompson
                                     ..-v,       *—   *
Fron: Stuart Price Pc 2778    t— ^           ^            ‘

Subject? FA Cup semi-final Liverpool v Nottingham Forest.




I am a Police Con^&ble serving in the South Yorkshire Police Force,

currently stationed at Doncaster.




At 8.30 sa on Saturday I5th April 1989 I case on duty at Doncaster

Police Station where a parade was held in an adjacent car park. ¥e

were then transported in coaches to the Sheffield Wednesday F.G.

ground situated at Hillsbrough, Sheffield.



On arrival at the ground I attended a briefing conducted by senior

officers in the North stand. All the usual points were covered in the

briefing including arrangements for bringing fans to the ground, evacuation

proceedure and crime intelligence reports.



At II.I5 am, along with fellow officers asigned to serial 44, I was on

duty in Qughtibridge where our duties were to stop and search coaches

and mini-b uses’travelling to the match,, with a view to detecting offenders

in relation to the alcohol and designated sporting event aspect.




The serial was supervised by Inspector bardie and Sergeant Hu-jies, who

organised us into groups to deal with traffic flow through the village,

searching of vehicles and the collation of evidence in the fora of

confiscated alcohol.
                           2.
                   *

Significant quantities of alcohol were removed from vehicles containing

supporters. Because of the geographic location of our detail, we only

encountered Liverpool fans, and I noticed that by-and-large we were

only successful in finding alcohol onboard aini-buses. Certainly that

was where we found the larger quantities, on some vehicles seats either

had been removed or they were'nt fitted and the fans were sat on crates

of beer.




Some evidence was found of fans . anticipating our search and consuming

their stocks of alcohol before arriving       inthe county.       On searching one

mini-bus, a large box which at one timecontained cans of lager was found.

Inside the box was a note which said something to the effect," You got

us last year you bastards, this time we've got you." The amount of empty

cans lying on the floor of the van indicated they had already drunk it all.




The serial continued to stop and search vehicles throughout the rooming,

and a number of offenders we're reported on   sunsons for various matters.

As the kick-off time approached the number of vehicles coming through
              ✓

the village began to diminish and at 3.0Cpm that afternoon we arrived

at the Claywheels Lane Traffic Fost for meal break.




A hot meal had been provided and was being served from a mobile catering

unit. Serial 44 and a number of others were qaueuing for meals when we were

redirected to the Leppings Lane end of the ground.
                            5.




We travelled to the ground in the transit that had been assigned to our

detail, on doing so we were under the impression that we were attending a

large fight. On arrival we all left the vehicle and were directed by an

Inspector to form a loose cordon accross the entrance to the ground. We

renaine d as directed for only a short time, perhaps five minutes at the most.

Uurlng that time I was approached by a number of angry fans wanting to gain

entry to the ground they were very agitated and to differing degrees

displaying all the usual signs associated with drunkeness.




About that time i was aware of two middle aged men leaving the ground. They

walked between me and another afficer, both were crying. As they passed me

one said,"You've fucking killed them you bastard," They continued to walk

away from the ground, I then began to think that maybe something other

than a fight had occured.


At that point an ambulance arrived at that location and another Inspector

approached us from inside the ground and told us to get inside and help.

Still I did not know what had happened or what I was to help with.

However on passing through the gate it became obvious, I saw about 4 or 5

people lying on the groung being resuscitated by St. John's staff and

members of the public.


I made my way, against a flood of supporters running towards me, into the

tunnel. Inside the tunnel the scene was of panic and confusion and it

was difficult to fight through the crowd to enter the ground. On emerging

from the tunnel into the stadium there is a metal fence, not many people were

in the left hand side but the right side was a seething mass of people.
I entered the right hand side of that terrace and approached a number

of casualties who were apparently dead. I must have attended five or six

dead males all about twnety years of ageand decided that they should be left

vfere they were and that the best thing to do was to continue to search for

someone who would benefit from first aid the most.




On the steps of the terrace I found a man in his mid to late thirties

who was'nt breathing, he was uncone ious but a pulse could be felt. I

rendered artificial respiration using a force issue protection device.

I was joined after a short time by a supporter who   stated that he was a

nurse and he took over resuscitation while I performed heart massage.

Despite this the man failed to respond and the nurse stopped. We placed the

mans jacket over his head.




By then a large number of officers were engaged in the removal of bodies.

It was apparent that all the"victims who would respond to first aid had been

aroved from that area. I joined them and we formed a chain passing bodies along.

I recall an officer with a loud hailer standing on the perimeter fencing

directing this   operation. I cannot recall how many bodies I assisted in

moving but would estimate ."round ten.



On several occaisions I was aware of fans on the.balcony above us throwing

things at us particularly coins. A torsnt of verbal abuse was continual and

to some extent distressing.




When the terracing had been cleared I rent onto the pitch and was trying
to assist the distressed people wandering around it m   a da
9




    Almost all my efforts in that regard were rejected out'of .hand by fans

    #10   for that moment blamed anyone in a uni fora personally for what had happened*




    After what seemed an eternity an announcement was made over the P.A system

    that the match would be replayed and appeal for calm was made. Soon afterwards

    the members of my serial who had entered the ground (not all did) left and

    returned to the transis van on Lappings Lane,



    We resumed mobile patrol in the immediate area on puolic order duties.

    At 7.00pm we returned to Claywheels Lane and retarned to Doncaster at

    S.^Oprn when I re tiered from duty,

    I submit this report for your information and attention.




    Pe 2778 Price.
