              X
                            Sheffield Archives Ref:                                     M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                   Date and time raised               £j-p       Number


Title    \M       X J J U      " V   C   M
                                                                                                   2>X\h
 (Include source and any document number i f relevant)


 Rereiver's instructions - urgent action — YesnMo          £br.              L- i       TO         CA (
  foL££fu~/                                      ^                                                                  Receiver

                                                                                                                               Oi

Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                            Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Statement reader's instructions                                                                              Statement Reader




Indexed as indicated                                                                                                Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                        O /M         SIO




Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                       3 “MAYIW
                                                         c/o

                                                               South Devon


The Chief Constable                                            April 26 th 1989
Liverpool,


De*r lir


First, like many thousands of others nay I express my deep regret for the great
sad loss of life at Anfield?.
I have never entered or even seen a football stadium, and my knowledge of football
as with my interest, though it is negligable, the protection Of life is naturally
of concern to us all.
On television I have seen a large screen at sports grounds whereby fans can
literally'get the message'flashed immediately...why not at that ground?
Secondly, I saw a mounted Police-Officer attempting the impossible, namely to shout
a point of order...
Why not have built-in tannoys in their helmets? and, or, have tannoys carried by
Police-Officers?, I don't recall seeing one?.
Thirdly, the fences reflect prison, concentration-camps etcswhich is where they
should be left, certainly not on sports grounds as I would see it.
Sadly we WILL have fences, membership cards, turnstiles etc; because this country
always works on ILLOGIC and reflects the ever-adamant attitude of Mrs Thatcher and
her 'entourage'.
My humble suggestion therefore, is to remove all fences over 3 ft high, intrdduce
the large field screen,full-seating, tannoys in use, and allocated to Officers to
assist them in vital work to maintain order, and heavy fines for 'pitch-invasion'.
Possibly a 'neat package' indeed,....call it SAFETY THROUGH DISCIPLINE,blended
with common sense.
Finally Sir, please bear with me, though I bow to experience and remember this lettel*’
is only the feesult ©£ watching the tragedy on television and I could well be wrong,
the country agrees something is radically wrong somewhere and fortunately the
solution to it all does not rest on my shoulders, but on that of many.
Thanking you,                                                                         j




Youca Faithfully.




                                                                                  9
