        Police Constable 300 Hays                                        <$oapa>
        Goldthorpe Police Station                         18 June 1989



                     F. A.   CUP    SEMI - FINAL


             LIVERPOOL               V             NOTTINGHAM FOREST



At 09.00 on Saturday 15 April 1989 , I commenced duty at Ecclesfield Police Station

in connection with the above titled football match at Hillsborough football ground

Sheffield.

I was transported to the ground where at 10.00am there was a large briefing held

in the North Stand of the stadium. In charge of that briefing was Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield. At the briefing details of the 1 working 1 of the match were given, and

this included the reading out of evacuation procedures should there be a cause to

clear the ground.

Upon the conclusion of the briefing I commenced patrol as Serial ^7, in a marked

police transit under the call sign. TANGO 2» The sergeant in charge of my serial

was PS 681 Hill, also present in the van, was PC 8kk Rees, PC 2376 Webster, PC 583

Davies and PC 2628 Churms. Our duties where in connection with the stopping and
                                                                                             r


searching of Buses and vans carrying Liverpool supporters who had travelled over             [

the Woodhead Pass from Greter Manchester   and were taking the A 616         trunk road to

Hillsborough.                                                            |

We had placed dirction signs at the side of the road, informing motorists to

travel along the A616 Stocksbridge BY PASS, mis.ing Stocksbridge Village and then

to follow the A6102 from Deepcar through   Wharncliffe Side   and   Oughtibridge and onto i
                                                                                             i
the football ground. This direction would bring the Liverpool supporters into Hillsborouj
                                                                                             i
at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

Stocksbridge was busy, as it normally is on a Satnrd&y morning and parking was very scar;

- ce, even so from as early as 11.00am Transit vans and cars with red and white scarves •

fastened in the windows could be seen all over the Village, and all the main road

pubs had full car parks, and the premises themselves were full.
     Police Console 300 Hays                                                 -

     Goldthorpe Police Station.




Our serial toured the area continuaslly throughout the morning and several

times persons were reported for summons for the carriage of intoxicants.

At 12.20pm we attended outside the Cock Inn on Bridge Hill, Oughtibridge

where I saw a Transit Van   parked. I spoke to the driver of the vehicle

and eventually reported him for offences of carrying alcohol to a designated

spotting event, after finding alcohol in the van.

We continuaed to patrol and several times entered public houses starting at

the Siver Fox at Stocksbridge and working our way acroos the village, attempting

to move supporters on towards the ground. Each time we found the pubs full of

supporters and found very little co-operation with the supporters.



As the time moved on, nearer to three o'clock. I could feel tension and aticipation    j

building between supporters. At 2.00pm we stationed ourselves outside the Blue         j

Ball public house at Wharncliffe Side. This pub was full of supporters and more vans

were stopping continuaslly to try to drink even with the kick off time approaching.



\^e attempted to stop persons entering the pub \rut found it difficult because of

numbers. I triad to reason with several supporters, tilling them that id they

didn't leave for the ground they wouldn't get in on time. I was met with retorts

 such as ’ We'll get in, '. When told that even with tickets they would be pushed

 to get in on time, one youth told me that ' None of us as tickets, but we'll get

 in '• This was said quite blasft fashion but I had no idea wnat was to happen and

 I simply thought to myself ' Typical, we can do without your sort      Whilst on patro

 I haerd several reports from other units, passed verbally that several pubs had

 been drunk dry, by supporters.

 Several fights had taken place in our area during the build up to the match

 but these seemed to sort themselves out prior to arrival. The one thing that

 really ami eared to stick in my mind was the quantity of numbers still drinking so
      Police Constable 300 Hays

      Goldthorpe Police Station.




Close to 3»00pm. I have worked several football matches involing the Merseyside clubs

and the two Manchester Clubs, when they have visited Sheffield Wednesday in the

football league. Although there is always a few spectators who seem to leave their
arrival at the football ground to the last minute, The number still in the local
pubs at 2»45pm was far more than normal.


At about 3.00pm, we followed a crowd of people along Middlewood Road to its junction
with Leppings Lane and Parkside Road. As we pasted through the junction I looked
to my left at the entrance to the Leppings Lane turnstiles and could see a very large
crowd in the catchment area, the crowd had even spilled onto the road, partially
closing the nearest carriageway on Leppings Lane.


I have worked turnstile duties at these turnstiles on dozens of previous occassions
and from my knowledge of the catchment area, would estimate that there must have been
approaching two thousand peaople still waiting to get in.


Our van travelled on along Catch Bar Lane and onto Penistone Road, we travelled passed
the football ground and up Halifax Road, before turning in the road and travelling
back towrds the football ground. Whilst we were in motion I could hear on my Serial
Sergeants radio, officers complaining of crushing outside the Leppings Lane entrance,
I heard one officer ask for assistance at the turnstiles, and some person I beleive
he was of the rank of Itsf>e6tot*f•shbuted 'tfcat^he had 100 men on standby at Claywheels
Lane. Our serial alos volunteered to attend, but as we reached the roundabout at
<£he bottom of Halifax Road, someone called over the radio. * Its alright the crush
has now been eased *. This was quickly followed by Superintendent Greenwood asking
for someone to stop people pushing at the back of the central pen. There was some
further radio message which I do not remember but then, Superintendent Greenwood
came over the air and said * If you don't stop them pushing there will be a Catastrophe


Immediately there was a repeated radio message from PS Goddard in the control room for
all officers to attend the stadium there was a major incident taking place. As this was
being called our van arrived outside the Spion Kop end of the ground. Along with otner
officers we ran from the van and into the ground, we were pointed along the front of
the North Stand towards the Leppings Lane end. My first sight     was of the vastness
of the crowd. As I walked in single file along the perimeter track, I saw a man,
dressed in jeans and T shirt with a Liverpool scarfe run down the centre of the
     Police Constable 303 Hays



     Goldthorpe Police Station




football pitch from the direction of the Leppings Lane stand, tcwrds the

Nottingham Forest Supporters who were in the Spion Kop. I looked over to the

South Stand and could just remember seeing footballers standing in the tunnel

entrance. I carried on walking towards the Leppings Lane end. And I could see

tens of people climbing over the perimeter fencing and onto the pitch. I could

 see people getting passed Policemen standing on the pitch, and I immediately

reacted to what I thought was a large scale pitch invasion. I was now running

towards the fencing intent on stopping people from getting onto the pitch, but

as I was about 5 meters from the fencing I saw through the fencing a pile of

prostrate bodies lying ontop of one another, the top people were blue and purple

there was a stench of vomit and sweat. I realised now what was happening.

At first I recall just looking at the bodies, I could not accept what was happening

the top most bodies eye was bulging, there were people screanimg, pulling

at the bodies peoples faces were pressed against the fencing, I could see people

dying in front of me.



I went to the small gqte almost directly behini the goal, there were people

almost through the gate but still trapped by the weight of numbers . People

were treading on top of prostrate people, policemen were pulling at one another

to get through the gate. But there was no way in. A sort of conveyor belt was

set up by fans and police alike. As «ne man was passed through I dragged him

onto the grass. He was a large man in as. blue shirt. I placed him in a prone

position and tried to give him mouth to mouth resuscitation, His face was purple

I could not get a pulse and I knew the man was dead. Some Liverpool supporters

were nearby they came and placed the man on a piece of board and carried him
   Police Constable 300 Hays


  Goldthorpe Police Station.




across the pitch.

X ran back to the gate but I cold not get to the front, because there were

so many people there. I saw a police Sergeant Knights climbimg over the

fence and I used some small steps to follow him over the fence.



I remember looking down to where I had to drop, there was nothing I could do

other than fall onto the pile of bodies. I landed and climbed about 8 terrace

steps back, there was a wall of supporters standing at the edge o4 the bodies

some where kneeling down hugging people others screaming at me and others to help

persons.



I moved along lifting people from the pile, at first I was trying to move

everybody, but it then began to get clear that it was no use moving blue

and white bodies and all my efforts were put into moving anyone with the faintest

sign of pink or life in there faces.



It was whilst doing this that the most degrading part of the afternoong occurred.

Whilst I was standing and lifting people off the floor, I was spat upon, several

times, I don’t know by who, but my police anorak was covered in spit, after the

incident. I could hear people shouting * YOU BASTARDS CAUSED THIS, YOU SHOULD

BE DEAD NOT THEM *. There w«re people still pushing and although I was never

frightened for my own safety, I was apprehensive and always thought that at any

time I may be attacked. I heard people continually shouting that ‘The pigs had

caused the disaster* and • Kill the black Bastards *. However I must stress

that the majority of the people rallied around, and helped in every way possible.

After most of the bodies had been moved from the terracing I went onto the pitch

and gave what aid I could. Most people were wondering around in a daze, a lot
   Police Constable 300 Hays


  Goldthorpe Police Station




of people were confused and annoyed that no information had been passed over

the tarrnoy, and that they were unaware of whether there relatives had been

involved. Where they should go, to find out about relatives. I felt quite

useless as I had no idea, nothing to my knowledge had ever been mentioned

at breifings as to where a casualty bureau would be s*t up, and I therefore

directed people to the police room at the rear of the North Stand.



The pitch seemed to take along time to clear, but after probably thirty

minutes I made my way to the rear of the North Stand to assist in running

a huariedly set up casualty liasion table for victims relatives. I worked

on this until approximately 5.l5pa and then attended at Claywheels Lane for

meal.



Apart from carrying on with normal transit patrols after this I took no

further part in the incident.




Police Constable 300 Hays
