ANOTHER DISASTER - WHO CARES?

  Strategic emergency planning within and between
     the caring services and emergency services




        A report on an emergency planning workshop
                  held on 17 November 1993
                              at
           South Yorkshire Fire and Resue Service
                       Training Centre,
               Beaver Hill Road, Handsworth,
                           Sheffield




                      Organised jointly by
       South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority
                    Emergency Planning Unit
                              and
        The Joint Centre for Training and Development
                in the Personal Social Services




                      REPORT ON
                   FOURTH W )RKSHO P
                   ANOTHER DISASTER - WHO CARES?



                                          CONTENTS




Acknowledgements                                                i

Programme
                                                            ii
The Speakers
                                                            iv
Introduction to Workshop
                                                            1
                               - Christopher Domes

The Work of the Joint Centre                                3
                               - Janet Atkinson

Major Incident Reaction - Legal Pitfalls                    7
                             - Mark Scoggins

Effects of Public Inquiries - Clapham Rail    Disaster     24
                               - Tony Clift

Planning a Caring Response to Disaster -Implications for   31
Social Services and Others
                           - Tim Newbum

Report on Workshop Findings           -   Group A          35
                                      -   Group B          39
                                      -   Group C          42
                                      -   Group D          44
                                      -   Media Response   48
Summary of Workshop
                                                           51
Closing Remarks
                                                           52


ANNEX          -      Workshop Groups
                      Attendance List
                                  Acknowledgements


inint         thar?kin9 theusPeakers: Mark Scoggins, Tony Clift and Tim Newbum the
Y n ^ W rT p WISl!eDS       T   Graham Cassidy for chairing the event and South
Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service for the use of their Training Centre and facilities.


S b u t a s t 0.he day: * “   f° ll0W i" 9       ^     in   P 'a n n i" 9   eve"‘ and


                              Janet Atkinson
                               Graham Ashworth
                               Sheila Bryant
                               Stuart Chapman
                              Bryan Craig
                              Mike Boocock
                              Linda Dale
                              Paul Eason
                              Alan Hardwick
                              Keith Hoyland
                              Kath Kendal
                              Kevin Lincoln
                              Jo Mallows
                              John Mills
                              Jane Nicklen
                              Brian Robjohns
                              Bob Rowland
                              Mike Reilly
                              Colin Webster



Not forgetting Elaine Smith who transcribed the text of the proceedings.
                                ANOTHER DISASTER - WHO CARES?




                                          17 NOVEMBER 1993


                         FIRE SERVICE TRAINING CENTRE, BEAVER HILL ROAD
                                     HANDSWORTH, SHEFFIELD




                                             PROGRAMME




9.00 - 9.10 am                 Workshop Introduction
                               Christopher Domes, H.M. Coroner,
                               South Yorkshire (West District)


9.10 - 9.20 am                The Work of the Joint Centre
                               Janet Atkinson, Co-ordinator of Joint Centre


9.20 -1 0.3 5 am              Major Incident Reaction - Legal pitfalls
                              Mark Scoggins from Davies Arnold Cooper,
                              Solicitors (Specialists in disaster litigation)

10.35-10.50                   Questions


1 0 .5 0 -11.10am             Coffee



1 1 .1 0   -   1 1 .45        Effects of Public Inquiries - Clapham Rail Disaster
                              Superintendent A Clift
                              Area Communications, British Transport Police


1 1 .45    -   1 1 .55   am   Questions



11 5 5 -1 2 .3 5 pm           Planning a Caring Response to Disaster - Implications for
                              Social Services and Others
                              Tim Newbum
                              Policy Studies Institute, previously with the Practice and
                              Development Exchange, National Institute of Social Work
12.35- 12.45 pm   Questions


12.45 - 1.45 pm   Lunch


1.45 - 2.00 pm    Introduction to Workshop Themes


2.00 - 3.00 pm    Workshops


3.00 - 3.15 pm    Tea/Coffee


3.15 - 3.45 pm    Workshop


3.45 - 4.30 pm    Report on Workshop Findings


4.30 - 4.45 pm    Summary of Workshop & Close
                      ANOTHER DISASTER - WHO CARES?

                                17 NOVEMBER 1993



                                          SPEAKERS            I


DR T NEWBURN

Dr Tim Newbum is currently a Research Fellow at the Policy Studies Institute in
London. He previously worked at the National Institute for Social Work where he was
responsible for a two year evaluation of the social work response to the Hillsborough
Disaster. He is the author of a number of books including: Making a Difference-
Social Work after Hillsborough (National Institute of Social Work, 1993); Disaster and
After. Social Work in the Aftermath of Disaster (Jessica Kingsley, 1993) and editor of
Working with Disaster. Social Welfare Interventions During and After Traaedv
(Longman, 1993).                                                                 * y



ACC W I McGREGOR

Assistant Chief Constable Ian McGregor has worked for the British Transport Police
for the past 1 0 years. Previous to that he served in the Surrey Constabulary for 25
years. He had direct experience of the Kings Cross fire and played a leading role in
co-ordinating the response to the Clapham rail disaster in December 1988 He has
lectured extensively within Europe and the USA on contingency planning and
management within the tailway environment.



MR M SCOGGINS. MA (CANTAR)

Mark Scoggins is a litigation lawyer recently appointed as a Partner with City
Solicitors, Davies Arnold Cooper, involved for Defendants and Insurers in many of the
UK catastrophe cases of recent years: the Abbeystead pumping station explosion
the Piper Alpha disaster and (acting for the Football League and the Clubs) the
Bradford City and Hillsborough tragedies.
                           WORKSHOP INTRODUCTION BY
                              CHRISTOPHER DORRIES
                     H.M. Coroner. South Yorkshire (West District)


 I looked at the title for this morning 'Another Disaster - Who Cares?' and I wondered
whether it had 'Who Cares' exclamation mark or 'Who Cares' question mark, because
there is of course quite a bit of difference in terms of the English language when you
look at it.     I am quite sure so far as this audience is concerned ifs W io Cares'
question mark, because today, all the speakers are no doubt preaching to the
converted. So far as the outside world is concerned, all too often ifs W io Cares'
exclamation mark - they don't give a damn until such time as something goes wrong,
and then they expect you to fix it. Well, I've gone on record before - I've even found
myself in print unfortunately, as having said that South Yorkshire won't get another
chance to get it right. We've had our disaster, we've had our practice and next time
if it isn't a hundred percent perfect we can expect to be under a very, very powerful
spotlight indeed. That isn't a criticism of anything that happened at Hillsborough, ifs
not meant as such, it's a simple recognition of the fact that the fingers will point and
the tongues will wag if we aren't as near a hundred percent right as human error
could ever allow for.

Well - who cares? Well, the press care for a start. Some of you may have heard
these statistics before, but there are going to be, within 6 hours of a disaster in this
county, something like 400 journalists, 200 TV crew, 60 satellite dishes set up - you're
going to be well under the spotlight there. Who cares? Well, the press do again. I
went down to Heathrow with a senior police officer last week to look at their
temporary mortuary arrangements.          They aren’t so good I have to say, in some
respects, because of the location. The present mortuary, or temporary mortuary, is
very much overlooked by the Heathrow Rameda Hotel. The Press Association we
were told has already paid £2 0 ,0 0 0 for the right to sit on the roof of the hotel and try
and photograph into the mortuary.

  Disaster isn’t just a concept. I was told about a year ago that there are 2,200 flights
over the edge of this county every day in the summer months, and I didn't believe that
until we had a jet aircraft crash on the moors near Deepcar and I went up there on a
very sunny Sunday to see the absolute mayhem that that had caused, and because
there was quite a bit of sitting around that day I was watching the contrails in the sky
and yes, 2,200 I reckon, is just about right. So, there's always the prospect of a
problem there. Heathrow Airport itself only has about 350 flights a day, so we're
getting rather more than Heathrow.

Those of you who know me well, have perhaps been nudging your neighbours and
saying "you know, he's been on his feet at a disaster seminar for 5 or 6 minutes and
he hasn't mentioned temporary mortuaries more than once yet". Ifs a subject thafs
very close to my heart. I’d just like to tell you very briefly where we're up to, because
you will know that we are doing a lot of planning in that regard. We've had more
meetings, we've had visits to various places, and it seems that the only place in our
county that is going to be a good, viable, working temporary mortuary is RAF
Finningley. We've tried very hard to look for sites within the dty, and effectively
there aren't at the present time any suitable sites. We hope that by January/February
we will have a proper written temporary mortuary plan and as far as I'm concerned
everyone can see that and can take what they need from that. We like to think that we
are probably by now leading a lot of counties in the area of planning for temporary
mortuaries, so hopefully at some time in the future we'll be able to have a lecture in
such a seminar as this and tell you exactly what we have planned.

Well my brief today was just to open the proceedings and to say no more than that, so
I'm going to sit down and shut up at that stage. I hope that you've made the most of
today - it's encouraging to see so many people here, from such diverse backgrounds.
I hope that you have an enjoyable day and I shan’t be the least bit embarrassed if you
clap now as I walk away, rather than as I came. Thank you very much.



Graham Cassidy (Workshop Chair)

Thank you Chris. I've seen one or two people making notes - can i just say for those
who aren't aware, that the whole of today's talks is being tape recorded and you will all
be given transcript summaries of the presentations and conversations at a later date
should you wish to leave your notes at that - it’s a matter for yourselves, and that
explains this big box of tricks here.
Moving on now, I'd like to introduce Janet Atkinson who is the Co-ordinator for the Joint
Centre for Training and Development in the Personal Social Services and she'll explain
a little more in detail the structure and role of the Joint Centre to those who aren't
aware of it.




                                          2
          [ANOTHER DISASTER -W H O CARES?                17 NOVEMBER 1993            1


                                    JANET ATKINSON
                              JOINT CENTRE CO-ORDINATOR

                                The Work of the Joint Centre



    already  2 T1a, " e “ about the Joim Centre ,or              who are not
    JSLTZl?     I  rol® and function: something about the background to this
            ? partnership that has developed between the Emergency Planning
    r j ? m J JO'n' 0 f lre: something about the Planning Group and how that has
    come together and what the task and role and functions of that group is          What we
 S E IM S ' Kndh ?ri! " y'. SOme issues abou»
 minutes in which to do that.
                                                          we   «** want to do I Z e         To

 Y o L l S S S E V ! ? l et up 5 1 9 8 6 as a “ " a c t iv e training network in South
 Yortsh're, North Derbyshire and North Nottinghamshire. It was initiated by the two
 and^om lf8, fheSocialServices Departments in those areas, the Probation Service
            voluntary sector organisations, all of whom had an interest in training their
thaHhefrZ " *      P° Si    W6re aware       there were a number of specialist areas
 ookPri tn n !lW e *W°    9 'n Where resources could »>e more effectively used if they
                   3t, WayS in which they could develop some training across
                               The University could offer background information,
access to information about research and the agencies could bring what was best in
current practice. Bnnging together staff from across those agencies to train together
              n ^ 3t Pe° Ple Wh° Were’ very often' a smalf number of people with
tonPth!lr     Tnh '0ns ,n one or9 anisation, could come together and train and leam
    e S d erwflJ ^ WaS ° ne ° f th® firSt reasons for settin9 UP the Joint Centre. The
                      were ?0,ng t0 be ab,e t0 provide training which did not involve
lodllv The^ >enSHS' 'n W*uCh ° ° StS 000,(1 1)6 kept down and couW be delivered
uuov!! h       W0U4d T®an that as we move towards the end of a training event, when
werei beginning to think about how do we apply what we're learning in a training
situation into practice, we would be working here locally with people Z m whmTwe
^ a we^dVL
what        CmPrinffrom
     we d learned  U ,n 9 [e,ati0 n5 h,pS and wou,d be ab,e
                          it, very directly in this region.     t0   aPP'y that training, and


“       t 6 ,th®re have been a growing number of initiatives developed through this
network including some programmes of training which are assessed and carry both
£ 2 5 ? " " I pr0fesosi0nal awards- a"d just one example of those is Z S n g o f
h L ith          f rS in ^ c 1 Serv,ce Departments who have responsibilities for mental
                * pproved Social Workers, and the Government provides resources to
Ainn^w                  and that has heen done through the network of the Joint Centre.
w/onlchnn     I                 been inning a growing number of study days and
for?? thnt       If ,ha! e a very dlfferent focus, and decisions about the appropriate
M an L am l6 * r        •«?   are teken by       core group of the Joint Centre at its
Management Committee, and its Committees.


b     e ^    ' f i t * net^ orkl A is. not an organisation in its own right It only exists
                f T     S W'Sh t0 use rt’ 8 0 that the core of the Joint Centre is very, very
small.    In fact it compnses my post and two part-time support workers. So we are



                                              3
 reliant in the region, if the collaborative network is going to work, for member
 organisations identifying appropriate training needs that they wish to develop with
 other organisations, setting up planning groups and designing and deliverino training
 in a collaborative way.

 So that's something about the background to the Joint Centre. The background to
 this initiative came in 1991 when the role and functions of the Emergency Planning
 Unit were changing very rapidly. I was approached by a member of staff from the
 Emergency Planning Unit to see if there was any way in which we could work
together, in which the resources and skills of the Emergency Planning Unit could be
developed to look at issues related to training for emergency planning. The initial
response from Social Services Departments was very mixed, because it was a
relationship which was going to be new, there needed to be some developing
understanding about both the function and role of the Emergency Planning Unit, but
also there were issues around shared but differing values, and a historical, political
difference which needed to be wrestled with and identified in the very early stages.
But that relationship has gone on to be a very productive one, and we have been
able to use a number of resources of the Emergency Planning Unit - not just the
financial resources they've put into the events which have been developed around
planning for emergencies, but also an enormous number of staff resources, so that
the administration for this event has been managed almost entirely by the unit in
Barnsley, and we are very appreciative of the work that has been put in.

 So, when an area of training is identified the first thing that we have needed to do,
when working collaboratively, is to pull together a planning group, and the groups that
 exist in the region have been meeting now since 1991, and I have been chairing that
 group, but from my, from the position of the chair my experience of working that
group has been that it has been that it has been very representative in that it
comprises representatives from the Emergency Services Liaison Committee, the
Social Services Departments in the four districts, the voluntary sector and the Joint
Centre, myself represented. The attendance is very high. The commitment people
bnng to the group is very considerable, and the reason for that is that I think people
are seeing that the group can actually work for them, in the following ways. It is a
place where information is shared across a number of agency boundaries. It is a
place where people are able to see that they can have some influence in developing
training initiatives and seeing them happen.             My experience of working in
collaborative situations is that if people can be part of a network, but can actually see
they can influence change, they see that they can take something from it that actually
is a benefit to their own organisation. Then collaboration works, and it works
effectively despite the fact that it takes time and that it is important to be able to work
with shared differences, with shared values and to manage the creative tension
between those.       And so the planning group has been strong and energetic and has
resulted in a number of initiatives taking place and also we have seen the
development of a number of initiatives in the districts, because what has happened
as the planning group has developed, is that people have taken away initiatives
which have been discussed across the four districts and have been able to take
information and initiatives back into their own districts.

One of the most interesting developments, I think, which has come about, initially in
Sheffield, is the development of the training for accredited workers.      A team of
people representing Social Services Departments, voluntary organisations and the
churches, have been trained to respond in the first 72 hours of a disaster. That's an
initiative which has been developed by Family & Community Services and Gloria
Soord, who's here today, will be happy to give anyone any information about that. We
now have, in Sheffield, approximately 100 workers who have been trained to be part of
a team which could respond in the event of another disaster.           This initiative has
generated a lot of interest in the other 4 districts, and our planning meetings are
constantly looking at ways in which that initiative in Sheffield can be mirrored and
developed in the other 4 districts, and I’m very confident that we will see that happen.
But what is important is to make sure that each of the districts have sufficient
commitment to the concept before the beginning planning and the launch of the
training takes place.

 The training events that have been run, on the back of the table you will find reports
 which will give you information about the event. The first one was entitled 'Order out of
 Chaos' and that took place in March 1992. We looked at that day, which was held
 here, very specifically at practical initiatives which need to be done in the event of an
 emergency, and how to get the planning right so that when the disaster happens the
 response can be immediate and appropriate.            Very much focusing upon practical
 responses and how to do it.        One of the issues which emerged from that day and the
 recommendations at the end of the workshop was delivered in a workshop in March
 1993 'Staff Care in Disasters'. Do we have strategies in our organisations which can
 respond to the needs of staff who are involved in working in disaster situations.
 During this workshop it was very dear, as we heard about the research that has been
done, that both illness in staff subsequent to disaster and resignations are significantly
decreased when organisations have clear, firm strategies for, which allow for the de­
briefing of staff who are involved in disasters, or staff in organisations who are
involved, but may not be directly involved in disasters. I'm hoping that at the end of
this workshop you will be able to complete your evaluation sheets and suggest ideas
for future initiatives as a result of today.
The third workshop 'Caring in Crisis' which took place in March this year, was very
much beginning to see that we need to be much clearer about the roles and
relationships of all parties who are involved in responding to a disaster. And although
sometimes we think we know what the responsibility of the Police, Fire Service, Social
Services and the voluntary sector are, what became very evident was that we needed
time to actually come together and to have some direct input of information about what
the different plans of organisations were. We also need to know how to respond
together more appropriately, and again to begin to address the different value systems
which each of our organisations are based upon, because we do work differently, we
have different priorities and in many cases different objectives. I think what we need
to be doing; what this day is beginning to address, is to actually learn how to work
constructively and creatively with those differences and those different values.

And so we come to today. This is the fourth day in the series and we are hoping to
build on our relationships and develop an understanding about the ways we work
together, and to look ahead to a situation in which we can begin to have policies which
are represented across the four districts. One of the most interesting developments at
the moment is the discussions taking place between the four Social Services
Departments who are beginning to look at ways in which a more corporate approach
can slowly be developed. Thank you very much




                                           5
Graham Cassidy

Thanks Janet for that. Moving on swiftly now to our first presentation this morning.
We are indeed very fortunate that I am able to introduce to you Mark Scoggins who is a
litigation lawyer; a partner in the City Solicitors, Davies Arnold Cooper. I think it's fair
to say a lawyer who’s earned a formidable reputation within his chosen field.         He's
been involved for defendants and insurers in many of the UK's catastrophe cases of
recent years - the Abbeystead Pumping Station explosion, the Piper Alpha disaster
and acting for the Football League and the Clubs latterly at the Bradford City and the
Hillsborough tragedies. Mark will be talking about the legal pitfalls that can face many
of our organisations in our reactions to major disasters.




                                           6
       | ANOTHER DISASTER - WHO CARES?                17 NOVEMBER 1993           |



                                MARK SCOGGINS
                       SPECIALIST IN DISASTER LITIGATION
                    FROM SOLICITORS DAVIES ARNOLD COOPER

                         Major Incident Reaction - Legal Pitfalls


 Good morning. There are three things that I wantyou to get out of today. One is to
 bring back to your attention some things you know already, some dangers you are
 aware of.      Second is to teach you some new things that you haven't come across,
 and third, the most important, suggest some things that you may want to include in
 your emergency planning. You see, that plan at the moment I'm sure concentrates on
 the first day, two days, maybe the first few weeks after a disaster. My focus is much
 tonger. Five years, ten years. I was interested to hear Chris say he hoped that would
 be the end of Hillsborough. No, two reasons, first of all every 15th of April it's going to
 be dredged up in the press for the foreseeable future. I guarantee that. But second,
 because the claims arising out of Hillsborough are going to be coming in until probably
the end of the decade. If you're injured you normally have three years from the date of
injury to start your claim, but that's assuming you're 18 on the date you're injured. If
you re under 18 you have a much longer period. The three years doesn't start until
you reach your 18th birthday. Graham mentioned that my firm acts for the club; the
football club at Hillsborough. We still get claims, even now. So the idea that it will go
away and go away quickly is just not true.         I'm sure I see Chris nodding.        So
understand that the disaster is with all those involved in it, for years.  No amount of
counselling; even in the immediate aftermath is going to take away the memory. But I
don t want to depress you, I want to make you happy, make you feel more comfortable
more confident. Let's see if I can succeed.

The first thing I always do in events like this is look at the date and see what in history
we can find by way of disaster. Taking just yesterday and today, I've got four. 42BC -
that's Nero's birthday, very appropriate since we're in the Fire Service Headquarters.
1724 - Tyburn was the execution of a famous highwayman called Jack Shepherd. A
crowd of 2 0 0 ,0 0 0 attended his hanging. I mean, they had a few events beforehand, a
few thieves were hanged before they got to the main bout. It was estimated that the
pickpockets, during that execution, stole four times as much from the crowd as
Shepherd had ever thieved during his entire career.          So ifs hardly a cost effective
example of law enforcement. Another argument against hanging, certainly aqainst
public hanging.

1955 at Anglesey.       Anglesey was the first authority - on the 17th of November that
year, to introduce fluoride into the water. Is everybody regretting it now? Maybe.
Let s see if there are any claims from that. "Fluoride makes your teeth fall out.”
1970 in London. Well, that's a bit different because 23 years ago today, for those of
you who may have kept a souvenir copy, was the first Page 3 Sun Girl. A disaster for
some. The Press Complaints Commission is still in force however.
There is one - not all that distant - it's 1993 - 16th of November.       If you saw the
Yorkshire Evening Press yesterday, the Department of Transport has criticised
Yorkshire TV with regard to Emmerdale - used to be called Emmerdale Farm when I
watched it - you see that the producers of Emmerdale are going to stage an episode in
which four or five characters die in a Lockerbie style tragedy?      See that? Very
insensitive isn't it? And worst of all, Yorkshire TV, and this is the real disaster,
Yorkshire TV have been 'unavailable for comment'.     It raises two questions.   One'
who's grassed them up, who has leaked that story?           The scripts are not public
knowledge. Second, why didn't Yorkshire predict that someone might leak it and have
a press statement ready? Not very good efficient management, I have to say.

 Anyway, that's going back in history.         Why should local authorities worry? Why
 should the emergency services worry? Well, you know it's not normally the position
 that you get blamed for causing a disaster. Who would be? You would get blamed
 either for not preventing it or for not having a proper, effective, quick response. Chris
 mentioned the Hillsborough inquest attempts to get the point about the ambulance
services re-opened. You would get hit in the way that Bradford got hit, and this is
 based on the grandstand fire eight years ago. When that fire started, sixty five people
died, roasted alive, virtually on live television. The local authority rushed forward and
said "we told the club this, we warned them, we wrote them letters saying that we know
there’s rubbish under the stand, if you don’t clear it up we’ll dose you down - power to
do that.” They didn't dose the dub down though, the dub didn't clear away the
rubbish, so they sent another letter. ’Do nothing, we'll close you down'. Still nothing
happened. Then came the fire.           You know, because the local authority had on its
files documents which showed that it knew about all this, that it had thought about
doing something, that it had not done anything, and it couldn't actually justify having
done nothing - and that was the key point, Bradford picked up one third of the total
liability for damages and costs arising out of that fire. The local authority paid 3 3 ^/3 % -
could have been more.

Ask yourselves, how many files have you got that have loose ends. Where you’ve
sent a letter, a bit like crying wolf, ’get better or we’ll take action’. Cases where you
haven't taken any action. Cases where that file has lain dormant for days, months,
maybe even years, and one day it may come back and get you.                My first piece of
advice then is don't leave loose ends on files. Always make sure vou have a review
every two or three months, even if only to put on that file 'reviewed the file - doesn't
seem any reason now to take any action, etc. etc.’ Document it. Cover your back.
Chris said, and again I make no apology for adopting his words, that when another
disaster happens you will be under the spotlight, and I don't just mean as authorities, I
mean as individuals. Your names will come out. One of the best ways of achieving a
settlement is to single out an individual and put pressure on that individual so that he or
she turns round to their employer or their authority and says "for God’s sake settle this
case, it’s killing me".

Public sympathy always concentrates on the victims, doesn't it.        It’s always their
families, their stories, their hardships that make a media story. But what about people
on your side of the fence?           How many sympathetic stories did we see about
Duckenfield after Hillsborough? I don’t remember one. You’re in the limelight.

Back to time - you see after any major incident four of those five things is almost
certain. There’ll be a public enquiry and you’ll hear about that from Alan later, today.
You know, at public inquiries the chairman always begins with a statement that no-one
is on trial. We are here to discover the truth and to learn for the future, and everyone
in court nods, sagely, and that attitude lasts a good fifteen minutes in my experience,
and then the knives are out, everybody is covering their backs. You cannot afford not
to be represented at a public enquiry, because if you’re not there the most awful things
 will be said about you and you'll be in no position to reply. "I see Sir, that the Fire and
 Civil Defence Authority have no answer to this case”.             "We//, Mr Scoggins that's
 perhaps because they're not here”       'Well Sir, if they’re not here, what are they afraid


  But even if you’re there, think about the cost. At a public enquiry like the Piper Alpha
 there were 98 days of evidence. You can double that to include preparation time
 And the cost of that per party? £5,000 per day. The costs of the National Union of
 Seamen for being represented at the Herald of Free Enterprise enquiry were £480,000.
 I’m sorry, that was the contribution that P & O made, the actual bill was probably much
 higher.      Where does that come from? Out of your insurance.                  What if your
 insurance has run dry? It comes from your ratepayers, your council tax payers, your
 residents. You cant afford not to be there, and I say it’s not a trial, ifs a rehearsal.

 Then there may be a HSE investigation, indeed almost certainly there will be: There
was after Hillsborough, there was after Bradford. People you know, tend to forget that
the HSE have far greater powers than the police. I know Graham’s sitting next to me,
but if he came up to me and said "Mark, would you like to give me a statement about
this incident" I’d say "No, I don’t have to, but if you thought I’d had something to do
with it you’d have to caution me, wouldn’t you." I mean, not that I would have done, but
the HSE don’t have any little frippery like that, they say "we would like a statement from
you"- I say "I don’t want to give one". "Ah, well if you don’t give one we will prosecute
you”. There is no right of silence in front of the HSE. The only thing you can fry and
do is buy time, to have that person look in his diary, refresh his memory, before giving
a statement. The police are hamstrung, leaving aside the Serious Fraud Office, you
have to speak to them. The only safeguard is that whatever you say to the HSE
cannot be used in a prosecution against you. They dont worry about that, because
what they do is that they interview two people, take a statement from each, and then
use the statement of one to prosecute the other. An easy way round it.

Then there will be an inquest. I’m sure under the chairmanship of someone like Chris
the inquest will be swift, cut, dried and will corifine itself to the issues. But under
coroners who are not quite so firm inquests can turn into circuses. Once again, they
start with the comment ’no-one is on trial’.     I have just finished an inquest into the
death of two construction workers in South London. An inquest which resulted in the
verdict of unlawful killing. I have to say there, that the coroner did not exactly keep a
firm handle on the proceedings. Virtually everybody was allowed to say what they
wanted. As the jurors went into court they were handed posters by an organisation
called the Construction Safety Campaign. Posters that said in terms ’lode up the
murdering construction bastards'.       This was before the verdict.         No point in
challenging it. Not only that, but on the third day of the inquest a dog wandered into
court, and I procured the comment to be made that perhaps the coroner would like to
hear testimony from the dog since he had apparently heard testimony from everybody
else who wandered in! It didn't seem to have much effect!

The inquest can be another rehearsal. The families of the victims will always be there.
They have a legitimate interest. Quite right they should be there. What should not
happen is that they be allowed to ask questions that go outside the function of an
inquest, which is to determine, as far as I have always understood it, who they were,
when and where they died and how they died. Maybe a bit more.
There will inevitably be civil clpims.  Those are the ones that will come back four
years, five years, ten years later. Abbeystead exploded in 1984, I think now we can
just about say it's come to an end. There, the victims; the plaintiffs, had to mortgage
their homes to continue their action against the architects and the water company.
Why, because they were too rich to get legal aid. That's commitment.

Finally, there may well be a criminal prosecution. Despite the Lord Chief Justice’s aim
that we shouldn't lock anybody up any more, for anything, apparently, even Peter
Sutcliffe would get community service these days. There are moves by the HSE to
make more examples of more people, despite the cost and the possible
embarrassment of the trial failing, as it did after Zeebrugge.        The question is not
whether a criminal prosecution succeeds, but whether It is brought, because if it is
brought it is inherently very stressful. Not only for a defendant, but for witnesses.

That's the background. I emphasise again, that stance may be a couple of weeks
after the event, it finishes maybe ten years afterwards. You’re aware of it There’s
nothing you can dfl about it, you can't make things go quicker, you just have to know
it's going to happen, so those who are involved in de-briefing, in counselling, in
preparing people who are going to be in management positions, making decisions,
build this into your programme. Make people aware of it. Make sure it comes as no
surprise.

 Well, where do lawyers come into all this? Shakespeare had a way of dealing with
 lawyers which you may not necessarily disagree with. Lawyers have always been the
 most unpopular class of person. When Wat Tyler's peasants' re.ott reached London
 in 1381 the first thing they did was bum down the Lord Chancellor's house, before they
turned their attention to politicians. Given the attitude of the present Lord Chancellor
 it may not be a bad idea to repeat it. You've probably seen that he's a it back legal
aid. I was at a conference about a month ago where the President of the Law Society
said that Lord Mackay had done for legal aid what King Herod did for babysitting.
 Lawyers have three things to do. One of them; and no apology, is to protect the
 interests of whoever appoints them. Cover your back. That's a very selfish view. I’m
not in the business of weighing the scales impartially and saying "well, I think thafs a
judge’s job”. Claimants and other co-defendants will have equally good advisers. So
it’s acting for you, individually, corporately.

Second is objectivity. I hope that’s what a lawyer brings. Certainly, someone who's
not involved in the front line of disaster management, but to whom you say Tm thinking
of doing this” - you try to say" well are you sure you want to do that, because do you
realise where it may lead, do you want to be in this position in six month's time? Are
you certain you’re aware of the risks?" A bit like, I suppose, a surgeon who's saying
"you’re about to undergo an operation, you’ve decided you want the operation, now be
aware of these dangers". Again, make sure they come as no surprise.

Thirdly, co-ordination. Nearly all your resources will be devoted to the immediate
aftermath. You probably don’t have the people and you almost certainly don't have the
money to deal with the longer term phase to bring in full time people to deal with It. So
that's a lawyer's job.

The most important of those is "number one". You need someone to protect your
interests. But how do I do that? Well, I always bear in mind that anything I do, any
advice I give, any letter I write, any client I represent, may one day come up against




                                          in
this gentleman. He's a creature of one of my colleagues. We call him Mr Justice
Valvetumer. Any resemblance to Lord Mackay is pure coincidence. You see, there
are some judges who, no matter what the circumstances, look at someone who has
been injured, or who's property has been damaged, and look around for someone to
pay. Someone who is perceived to have the money. It's all about redistributing wealth,
isn’t it? The Cecil tax in disguise. He's injured, he needs the money, you've got the
money, you don't need all of it, so give some to him. A communist theory.

Mr Justice Valvetumer, you see, has this theory that if you want more money you just
turn the valve and more of it emerges, from the limitless pool of insurance. Never
heard of Lloyds, even though many of the judges are in fact, Lloyds ‘Names'. The
odds are stacked against me, as a defendant. I started life as a plaintiff lawyer. I
wasn't suited to it, my character isn't sympathetic enough, so I'm told. But when you -
make your own minds up - when you go to court and you find a judge who says to you
"Mr Scoggins, I've read the papers - is liability disputedT "Yes, my Lord, hotly*. "Well,
it doesn’t seem worth it to me" "Well, my Lord?" "Well it's your money, Mr Scoggins, if
you want to waste it, I've not made my mind up". He says "Well, look, he's injured,
give him some money'.          You say "My Lord that’s not the plaintiff, that the Court
Usher". "Well, he doesn’t look very well, your clients are insured - pay him some
cash”. Well, of course I exaggerate, but that kind of attitude, that kind of approach, is
one, unfortunately, we face. People who are injured, people who have lost - victims,
relatives, people who have lost money, start with an advantage.       I do not say that is
wrong. But we live under a law which says that if you cannot prove fault you don't get
any cash. Other companies, other countries, have long since abandoned that theory.
Sweden, 20 years ago, you're injured, you get compensation through a State system.
But here, if you want the big money, there are not the state benefits, you have to prove
someone was careless. And having to prove somebody is careless means having to
prove somebody is to blame. And having to prove somebody is to blame means
attributing a moral fault to them. Thafs where our system breaks down, because thafs
where it puts pressures on human beings; on you.           Because someone will try to
criticise you for having made the decisions you made.        Someone will try and prove
that you got it wrong. Because unless they can jump that hurdle there is no way of
getting money. Understand that. That's why it becomes personalised. The action
and the claim may be brought against an authority, a force, a service, but within that
authority, always, the claimant will have to identify particular individuals who were
positions of seniority. People who got it, allegedly, wrong. That could be you.

But it doesn't matter whether the allegations are unfounded. In fact the unfounded
ones have the greatest impact, because you feel the greatest frustration at having the
mud thrown at you. When it comes to working out who is to blame, if anybody, the
Law, the Law itself, really plays little part. The Law is very clear. Really, it depends
upon those five questions, the five Ws.        If you get the answers to all of those very
early you can decide whether you should pay or defend.

               Who did what?
               When did they do it?
               Where were they when they did it, and classically?
               Why did they do it?

The question 'Why1 is only relevant if the person had two or more alternatives If he
made a choice. To give you an example, let's think about your planning for disaster. I
was interested to hear Janet talking about organising forces locally, so as to reduce
travelling costs.    You see, in the wake of a disaster, the way that you spend your
money will be examined. Did you waste it, did you throw it away, or do you invest it
wisely? One question that will be looked at, for instance, is did you travel by rail a lot -
if you did, did you travel 1st class or standard class?   How many people travel 1st
class? The cost of a 1st class ticket is about twice the standard class. What do you
get for it? Mobile phones ringing all the bloody time. Boring people in suits like this.
I travel standard class. And a bill which you have to submit because no receipt, no
payment.

 Imagine someone in five year's time turning round and saying "You spent X thousand
pounds a year on 1 st class rail travel for your people involved in emergency planning,
don't you think that money could have been spent somewhere else? One of the
arguments given is "I'm entitled to 1st class rail travel" - so what? You're entitled to
do a lot of things, it doesn't take away the point 'did you ever consider giving up the
status of the 1st class and travelling standard’? Another argument put is "Well, I can
work in 1 st class" - really? I don't see many people doing that, and even in standard,
on the trains I’ve travelled on recently, there's been plenty of space for me to work,
plenty of tables free. Maybe with privatisation things will be different, if there are any
trains. You could always go to the museum at York and look at some. But that's just
one aspect that you may not have considered. For those of you who have control, or
know about budgets, see if rail travel is shown as a separate item.       See how many
people exercise their 'inalienable right' to travel 1st class.   See if you can do away
with a bit of that budget. It's only a suggestion.

Now, to get that evidence, who did what, where, when and why, ideally I want to get
my investigation going as early as possible. The vertical access - that black line, is
effectively the moment of the incident. Time goes that way - days and weeks. At the
moment of the incident the evidence is the best it will ever be. You might think thafs
strange, because surely you need time to investigate, to find out what happened, ah,
it’s the best because it is the most honest. People haven't had time to think. To think
about how they should cover their backs. They haven't had received wisdom from
other people, from the press, from the radio. - What they will tell you is what they
honestly believe. They might be wrong, they may be inaccurate, indeed there's a
good chance they are because no one person has seen the whole picture, but they
will give you an honest answer. Now I don't mind if what they tell me turns out to be
incorrect. What I want is what is definitely true and uninfluenced by other factors. If it
turns out to be inaccurate I can always say "look, we'll come back and take a statement
in a couple of weeks, once you've had the chance to refresh your memory". Fine.
The first statement does me no damage. What I don’t want to do is wait six months
before I take a statement, because by then the person wont necessarily tell me what
happened, he will tell me what he thinks happened, influenced by what he's read, by
what he's heard. Anybody who's ever been involved on the police side in identification
cases will know what I mean.       That if you suggest to someone the features that an
assailant may have had, suddenly they start believing it happened.           "Tell me what
height was he?" "Well, ifs difficult to tell". "Well, 6ft?H "Yeh, about 6 ft". Ifs not a lie,
but they're telling you what they think you want to hear and in the process of that
they're actually convincing themselves that they believe it. That sort of evidence is
useless. The other reason why I want statements done at the time is that when it
comes to a trial or an inquiry or an inquest, ifs much more impressive to put in front of
a judge or tribunal original documents complete with crossings out, spelling mistakes.
You give them to the judge with an apology. "My Lord, I do apologise for the state of
this document, but it was written only a few hours after the event. It was written in the




                                            12
 temporary mortuary and we had to clear a couple of the tables of bodies to provide us
 with a writing surface" "Is this, is this blood, Mr Scoggins?* "No, my Lord, coffee".
 "Oh, oh well, well". If you do that you see, the judge sort of does that "Yes, it’s almost
 as if one were there”. You're recreating the scene. Compare that with an A4 size,
carefully laid out, typewritten, edited, paragraphed statement produced six months after
the event. That's worth nothing.           Because the lawyers have been at it by then.
 Everything that might be helpful has gone, long since gone.     But the difficulty is that if
you get the evidence that early, speculation is also at its absolute highest. Because at
the moment of an incident, individual people know the least they ever will. Something
happens, BANG, "Jeez, what the hell was that?" and they begin to wonder. Yes, that
is dangerous. Speculation converted into written documents - and I'll come on to this
later - can do you tremendous damage.

So, I've got a bit of a conflict. I want to know what happened and I want to know what
people were doing and where they were etc. etc. but I don’t want to know what they
think. I only want to know what they know. The trouble is that when you come to
unravelling a disaster it’s so easy to ask the question "tell me what you think
happened", instead of the one "tell me what you know happened".                 You see the
difference? Because you want their ideas on what could have gone wrong DON'T at
that stage let them speculate, leave it till later, you can probably afford the time.

 In finding out what happened, not only during an event but before, you need to retrieve
 and preserve all the documents and evidence you possess. Because you see, if and
when there is an inquest, inquiry, civil claim, most of the documents you possess will
 be disclosable, including the tape that has been made at this moment. This tape
 recording is not a privileged document, I'm not giving you advice as a lawyer, if the
question is ever raised ’how good was your emergency planning training? 1 this is
evidence. As are the notes that you may make today.                 Any of you that do make
notes, be careful. Those notes aren't yours, you're making them in the course of an
employment or an office, they therefore belong to your employer, your authority, and if I
were to look at them, I'd find that you haven't written down everything that I've said,
you’ve only written down certain areas, and which areas will they be - the ones that
worry you most. So by looking at them I can see what you’re concerned about. And
I would take your notes and I'd say 'Tell me Mr Brown, you gave particular emphasis to
this, why was that?" "/ was worried about that "Yes, I see, and when you got back
to your authority, your employer, what did you do about it?" "Well, I had a word with
my boss" "Yes, and then?" ”Er, well, I suppose then he had a think about it" "Yes,
and then?" "Erm, weir. If you think something important enough to make a note, if
you think it important enough to put a star by the side of it, don't be guilty of follow-up
failure. If you decide that it isn’t really all that important, if after discussion you’re told
"No, you're off on the wrong track", then at least have something on your file that you
can justify that decision by in five years' time.

This tape, you see, it will come out, together with a list of people who were present or
should have been present, today.       I feel a bit sorry for those who are absent without
any good reason.       'Tell me, were you supposed to attend an emergency planning
event? Why didn’t you go?" "Oh, I had a cold' "You had a cold? Next witness".

The first thing to do is to suspend destruction.     If you have a system, a policy of
archiving, microfilming, shredding or whatever files, just because you haven't got the
storage space - that must stop the moment a disaster occurs. Build into your plan




                                             13
  something that will stop it, something that will tell your records department or whatever
 title it has, 'keep everything we possess’.          You know, I don’t just say suspend
 destruction of documents that might be relevant. I say suspend destruction, full stop.
  It’s not for you to say whether those documents matter or don’t matter. Notify the duty
 of preservation. Make sure that everyone who’s in a position to keep or have records
 that already exist is aware that they must be preserved, they must be maintained.
 Collate those documents centrally, get them in one place, make sure nothing is
 overlooked so far as you can. Fourthly, retrieve internal copies. You know, when
 memoranda gets sent round, some people have a habit of writing on them, so if you
 produce the original, that won't be good enough, you have to produce all copies that
 exist and account for those that have since disappeared. Some people who write
 comments on memoranda live to regret it. Remember after Zeebrugge, the officers of
 P & O were visited by the police and a certain number of documents seized.             It's
 suggested that if the police had not taken that action the document I’m about to
 describe may have been - overlooked.

  It was a note to the Board of P & O from one of their safety officers saying "Could we
  please have lights on the bridge to tell the Captain whether the bow doors are closed,
  because he can't see from where he is".             But someone had written on that
 memorandum - a senior member of the Board - a rather filthy word beginning with ’B'
 followed by the phrase ’Do they really need lights to tell them whether the bowman is
 awake, ha, ha, ha'. The Director concerned never got as far as entering the witness
 box, but it would have been interesting if he had. T e ll me, have you always taken a
 responsible attitude to safety". "Yes"      "You’ve always put that high on the corporate
 agenda I suppose". "Yes" "Do you remember receiving a memorandum - why did
 you write on it 'bollocks do they need anyone to tell them the bowman " "Oh, it was
just a joke". "A joke”. "A joke"        Not something you should really joke about, is it.
 How many memoranda have you got on your files with phrases like that, instinctive gut
 reactions, reflexes 'Crap, No, UselessV      Go and have a look, don’t destroy them. If
you destroy them and anybody ever saw them with that comment on, it’ll come back
and haunt you and someone will remember. You never cover your trades in time.
Qfioll write stupid comments like that, they're unnecessary.

 That's what you do with the documents that already exist. Keep them, preserve them,
 save them.      Even if they harm you.        Some people are tempted to overlook, to
 destroy, documents that don't assist.      It's very silly, because inevitably, from what
 remains it will be possible to identify that there are other things missing. Anyone
 reading through files can easily see whether they have been proved, whether they’ve
 been the subject of careful surgery to take out the inconvenient. All you do is note
'referring to our meeting last Thursday, thank you for coming to see me'. Where's the
note of the meeting?        "Oh, we must have lost it really*        By reading aB those
documents I want to do it straight away, because I want to know where all those gaps
are.     There are going to be gaps, there are going to be honest gaps, where
documents have been put on the wrong file, under the wrong file number, it happens,
where letters have gone unanswered, so there is no reply to be found, where meetings
have gone unminuted because they may have been so brief or so obvious that no-one
took the time. I don’t worry about that, because I can get a witness to explain that to
me. What I do worry about is when documents have obviously disappeared. I want
to know the reason, I want to establish the reasons for the loss, I want to talk to the
people who had control. I'm not doing that as a plaintiff lawyer, I’m doing that as a
defendant lawyer, because I have got to protect your interests. I have got to be able
to explain, in a way that as far as possible keeps you out of trouble, why those




                                           14
                                                                                t




documents are no more. And what the plaintiffs will do, and they will see the gaps as
well, they will say "My Lords, what those missing papers said, we will never know, we
can only speculate, speculate that they may have harmed the defendant".        And the
judge is quite entitled to say "I agree" and draw that inference. What do I say? I say
"Look, you can’t do that because they weren’t harmful", and the judge says "Ha, but
you don't know what was in them either, so you can’t prove it". The importance of
preservation I cannot stress enough.

 Source coding I won’t cover or bother you with. Continuing obligations - you don't just
 have a quick look round your office and find a couple of boxes and send them off to
 whoever's collating the documents. So long as that event remains in the foreground,
 the enquiries or inquests or civil claim - you've got to go on looking for further
 documents, and sending them in. I finished a trial recently in which my clients had
 said to me that they'd given me everything that they had. Well, on the second day of
the trial, just before we went in, they said "Oh, Mark, we've found this extra box when
 we were clearing out in a cupboard". "Ah, no". We went up to the judge and said "My
 Lord, you know yesterday we told you there weren't any more documents, well we
were wrong, there are some more, about 6 inches high".            Of course, the plaintiffs
throw down their glasses "Well my Lord, yesterday we were told there was nothing,
today there's a big box, I wonder what surprises we'll have tomorrow".        And all the
time, you see I've then got to say "Well, now my Lord, this time we're certain". "Yes,
but you said that yesterday". "But this time we'reabsolutely certain My Lord". You're
sowing the seed of doubt in the judges mind. The papers that are missing may be
completely irrelevant. They may be totally off the point, but the fact is, if they're not
there the other side will make capital out of it. You're giving them an opportunity.

Now I as a lawyer cannot go around all your offices saying right, show me all your
papers, III have that, that and that. This is something you have to do, you have to
organise. If people have got other things to do in the meantime they'll put this in the
bottom of their tray and when you ring them up and ask them they'll get anything
together, bung it into a box and send it off and hope you don't come back to them.
That kind of slipshod preparation, slipshod in the sense that people don't give it priority.


Then on we go. Because what I've dealt with so far are the documents that you
possess, and the time you possess them. What about things that you haven't yet
created? A disaster happens, you're thinking about writing things down, making tape
recordings of conversations - there are four things you need to be aware of. First of
all, the internal witchhunt, otherwise known as the internal inquiry. I notice that there
was an explosion at Reckitt & Colman's yesterday. The HSE are involved and the
Company is also holding its own internal investigation. Oh, woe. Oh dear. Internal
inquiries which run parallel with HSE investigations create three problems.          First,
inconsistency, because both teams should be talking to the same people. But what if
those people tell different stories?      Honestly, but different.   Secondly, an internal
inquiry which is made obviously for the purpose of finding out what happened and
stopping it happening again, is not protected, its not privileged, there's no way you can
keep that back. That principle of fact was set in 1979 in a case involving British
Transport Police. Thirdly, this is the real danger, as soon as you have the word
’inquiry' 'investigation', people start to worry, about their own position, and they start
going in for self-interest. They cover their own back at the expense of others, within
the overall organisation. So you say "Now then, do you know anything about this?".
   dont know nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing, except that I did warn X three months
ago about this and here are my memos warning him, and he did nothing, and it's been
worrying me, but I thought it's his responsibility, it's him". That's the danger that you
face, because you're saying 'We are here to inquire, you can trust us, we are
independent'.     Obviously not me, it's someone with the other company.            It's a
question of trust. The HSE do nothing about it except have a person present while
they're taking a statement and allow the person time to refresh his memory so he
doesn't drop himself in it. But with an internal company investigation there are all
those dangers. So my advice is - if you don't need to have an internal inquiry, don't
have one straight away.

I think, obviously I don't know the circumstances, but I would have been very reluctant
to give Reckitt & Colman the advice that they seem to have received. I would have
said if the HSE are involved, let them get on with it. They’ve got greater powers than
you have, they're going to cover the same ground for the same purpose, so since
you've got to co-operate with them anyway, let them go ahead.        Avoid duplication,
avoid inconsistency, avoid the fear. Oh well. People go in for speculation, because if
you approach a person and say "Now look, we're wondering what happened, haw you
got any ideas?" People always have ideas. Some of them are complete rubbish.
Some of them are so ill informed that those who come out with them, you wonder
whether they really have any future. After Abbeystead, that kind of question was
asked of people within North West Water.        "Got any ideas?     Why is it that the
methane seeped into the tunnel, came out in the public chamber, blew up and killed 16
people".     "Ah” said one of the Lab Technicians of North West Water, "It's really all
very simple, methane explodes so you shouldnt have had people smoking. Here is a
page from my fourteen year old son's O-level Physics book" Ifs all that simple.

You know, if it were all that simple North West Water were on a hiding to nothing,
because as experts they should have foreseen the risk, they should have told the
people visiting that pumping station "When you get underground, NO NAKED
LIGHTS".      In fact the question was far more complex than that. It was about the
porosity of concrete in certain types of soil and certain types of methane. Even noted
learned scientists couldn't really explain why it happened. But that document created
by that person who was trying to help, also trying to advance his own career by
showing how smart he was, in the judges mind ... the judge said "Well, look at this,
written by one of your own people, methane explodes, everybody knows that, why did
you let 'em smoke”? "Well my Lord, ifs not that simple" "Well, is it that simple, look
here's O-level Physics”. "Yes my Lord, we know that methane explodes" "Well, then
what?” "My Lord, ifs not that simple"         "Well, but your own man said....." "Yes, I
know our own man           , our own former employee "           That document need never
have been written, it did not help anybody. Now, be aware, that no matter how much
you try to stop people speculating, you can't stop them. No matter how much you tell
them 'don't speculate on paper* because thafs the real danger, somebody will do so.
Be ready for it, it will happen. Ifs not a possibility, it's a certainty. And be aware that it
might do you a bit of damage and that it may take a lot of effort and time and money to
dig yourself out of that problem.

People go in for heroics as well - instead of covering their own back they do precisely
the opposite, throw themselves on the bayonets. "Dear Chairman, do you remember
that pile of papers we had that could have harmed us, well we had a bonfire party last
night and all your worries are over and I’ve saved the organisation." No, they’ve just
put the organisation down the tubes because that pile of papers may actually have
helped, may not have harmed at all. You don't know until all the issues are unfurled,
at an inquiry or an inquest, exactly what matters and what doesn't. Things that on day
 r    , «      ' have th0U9ht cause you terrib,e problems, at that inqu.ry they could be
 the things that save you, so don't pre-judge.                                y

 Insurance prejudice, you know if you go around with people who create documents
 that could put you in problems when it comes to renewing your insurance the brokers
 and the underwriters are not going to be too happy. They’re going to ask you what
 I T    T   ?      y° U haV® 'n PlaCe' As part of 900d risk management you should
   „    y s    for preventing unhelpful and unnecessary speculation.   One of my
 colleagues A an Fisher, who was the lead partner on Abbeystead has a theory that
 you should therefore, in the wake of a disaster, confiscate all pens, paper
                   Pen° llS’ you should nail peoptes' hands to the desk to prevent them
 feet in ^ n S 9 ’ E ?          wiret their jaws to9 ether, and for the ingenious, set their
 feet in concrete. This will guarantee that no harmful documents are produced.
 I agree with that. It is however a little extreme since it does stop you coping with the
 IZ ffh      emerg®ncy' But, it's to make a point. The problems arise bemuse people
 write things, say things on tape, that they don't need to say. That word need You
S fJ in n fhy?U r6ed t° J l 0 rt because today’s ex<gencies demand it.      Think about
        9     'n f Y      S t,me' The trouble is of course- if V°u think too much about
what say you end up with what the American’s call ’analysis paralysis’. You analyse
things so deeply you don’t get anything done. It’s certainly not my aim to put you in
In 1 if k     y0U* muSt make decisions- lf each decision takes another two minutes
to make because of what I’ve said I don’t think that those two minutes, in most cases
out of a tot of trouble dlfferenCe   t0   V0U’ in terms of reac«on time. They may keep you


Let me turn away from documents then, to people. I’ve mentioned already that ideally -
 want statements from people very, very early. Not perhaps so early as when they're
nn^»hJUrei    i° re the ambu,ance comes             saying "Get out of the way, fm alawyer,
now then lets have a statement from you             don’t peg out on me now look sign it
      »JUSm " CaS.6' 1Ve 90t 3 pre' printed one here, just point to what matters it was
             ; Wf / e 9 a bad enough name alreadv- But certainly within the first few
 days the first few weeks. Leave it longer than two or three weeks - you’ve oot a
 probem. Two weeks is possibly the best for a full, detailed statement. I'd lite a n
initial one earlier because the initial one will tell me whether that person is worth
interviewing again because he’s got something useful to say. In Hillsborough you start
off with perhaps a pool of 150 stewards, but only maybe a dozen of them were actually
in a position to see or know anything that was important. So you need to focus down
on that dozen. You have to get all of them first, if only briefly, and then discount them
or at least put them in order of priority. Rights of silence, in front of me, I can't force
anybody to give me a statement. I have to go by co-operation. I have say to people
 I would like you to tell me what you know, I would like you to answer my questions". I
dont actually have to tell them they don’t, but they may have been advised not to
speak to me. There’s nothing I can do about that, except try persuasion. I want their
statements to be informed.           If | ask someone now "W here were you last
Wednesday? .they s a y l think I was at a meeting in Sheffield'. You say "ah ah - are
you sure?".      "No".    "Then took in your diary". People will try and be helpful by
remembenng and recollecting as best they can, but if there are ways of confirming that
recollection before they put their names to a statement and sign it, then make sure you
do that. Otherwise they will make mistakes and two years, five years later they will be
he'4 up as liars. "You say you were in Sheffield, in fact you were in London weren't
you. Why the difference?" "Oh, I got it wrong'. "You got it wrong, what else have
you got wrong? Have you got your name right? Are you sure you live there?"
Cross checks on accuracy. You’ve got to have a fairly small team of people either
taking statements or reviewing them. Two, two people, no more than that. Three,
and apart from being an unlawful assembly, things start to go wrong, lines of
communication get too long.            Two people to whom all the statements are coming,
even if they’re not taking them themselves.           That way, you can pick up common
themes, you can see where witnesses are giving different views, different pictures,
being inconsistent and you go back and interview again to clear up the problems. If
you swamp an investigation with lots of people taking statements it's completely
useless. Because nobody knows what the others are finding, and it's only maybe
weeks later when someone comes to digest that, that you then say "Oh, go back to see
Mr X, make another appointment".              You want a team of two people reviewing
statements as they are taken, instantly.          But keep track - from my point of view,
having seen my witness, having got a statement from him that hopefully helps me,
because of the pressures of work my temptation often is to say "OK, see you at trial".
And then you ring up about two weeks before the trial to make sure he's
coming...."Hello, can I speak to Mr Brown please". "No". "Ah, who's that?" "The
widow Brown".        "Ah....he's died then?" "Yes". "So he won't be coming to testify?"
“A/o” "Thank you".           I will then have to go back to my insurers and say "Do you
remember that unloseable case, well things have changed". I tend to keep track of
witnesses about every three months.            For three reasons. One, tells me whether
they're still alive.     Two, tells me whether they've moved - because witnesses
don't you know when you're moving house they notify the Gas Board, the Electric,
they don't think "I'd better write to Mark Scoggins at Davies Arnold Cooper and tell him
as well, and leave a forwarding address". But thirdly, by keeping in touch with them I
find out whether they've been approached by the other side. I can't stop that. The
other side don't have to tell me they're going to do it, they can go and interview
wherever they wish. Even one of my client's employees. So I tend to ring them up
and say "How's everything?". "Oh fine, fine. We had a visit from that Roger Pannone
last week'. "Did you indeed, oh. Just drop in did he? Passing, was he?" And I can
get some idea of who he's been to see and I can think about what his tactics are.
That's why I'd rather do it by phone. Not by letter, letters never get answered. Pick
up the phone. For the core witnesses, the ones I know I'm going to need.

You see, it's all about people. If you've detected it already, well done. If you haven't,
every single thing I have said is about how people react. How they react depends on
how well they are briefed. How much they know before the event happens. What is
going to happen to them, after it. That way they don't spend time wondering "Why the
hell's this happening?". They go "Oh yes, I knew this would happen. It's not very
nice, but at least I knew.”

We mentioned a few words about the media. Again, Chris delightfully led me into that.
I didn't know you were going to do that. Media spotlight. You know, in the wake of
disasters media coverage classically follows those three stages.      On the first day
they're describing the rescue operation and the terrible tragedy and the dead and the
injured and the carnage. By Day Two they're into 'someone has got to pay for all this'.
By Day Three, no-one having offered any money, they're pointing the finger at
particular people. You just think back at disasters of recent years. That pattern is
normally followed. Day One 'How awful, how terrible, the emergency services are at
the scene'.    Day Two 'This is dreadful, it must never happen again, what about the
 injured, who is going to p<_y for them?'.    Day Three 'Police not yet admit liability
 scandal'. 'Employer says no money'. And from then on they narrow down and crucify




                                           18
  companies or individuals. That means that you have got to react very quickly to get
 the press on your side, otherwise you will be the object of Day Three. I’m pretty sure
 you do this already, but do you have as part of your emergency manual a set of
 standard form press releases, for the types of incidents that you think could happen?
 No? Well, you can predict them, can't you. We've heard about 2,000 flights a day - a
 Lockerbie style disaster. You've got CIMAH sites in the county, you've got possible
 dams, I think. Transport disasters, rail, road, and your manual, I dare say, provides
 response procedures for each of them. Why don't you write a press release to be
 issued within 30 minutes of that incident happening.         Saying 'There has been an
explosion, crash, whatever, at blank place, on blank date, at blank time, and then
describe what you should be doing at that moment in the rescue operation.              The
emergency services have been alerted, the Fire Brigade is already there, so and so is
in command.' You can write it now, you can predict what you're going to say, and then
all you do on the day is fill in the blanks, maybe make a couple of amendments, re-type
it on the wordprocessor and Fax it to the Yorkshire Evening News and all the
Nationals. Because, journalists .... one thing they're really terrified about is a blank
piece of paper - you start with that at the end of the day and someone says "That is
tomorrow's front page - fill it". Aaagh!      Short of going out and killing people yourself
to provide news stories you are dependent on people coming to you. Don't wait for
the press to ring you up, because the Plaintiffs lawyers will already have rung them.
On the following day you will find pictures of the deceased, or at least some of the
deceased, probably the most sentimentally attached of the deceased, published in the
papers. You know, it's never a studio type photograph, carefully posed, it's always
one that’s been cut out of a large group taken at a wedding. So it's all grainy, you
know the style I mean, it could be your own mother and you wouldn't recognise it. "Mr
So and So had three kids, etc. etc."           No mention of you.         Have those press
statements in your manual now, one for each of the classic types of incident you can
predict.

Second.     Make sure whoever's going to appear on telly has been media trained.
Make sure they know what to say and what tricks are going to be pulled against them.
About two years ago, a year and a half ago, a gentlemen called George Henning
decided that he wanted a MacDonald's hamburger.          He decided to go to a drive
through MacDonalds, except that there wasn't one, in a place called Killeen in Texas,
so he drove his pick-up truck through the plate-glass window, got out and shot 23
people dead He’d had a bad day. I was watching CNN news that night and they had
on the Moyer and Chief of Police of Killeen, which was a small town in Texas, and
CNN wen. sayinc "Are you aware that Henning was discharged from the Army for
csing a psychopathic killer?" "No, this is something we will have to look into”. This
was 24 hours afterwards. "Were you aware that he was on mind-influendng drugs?"
"No, these are serious allegations, we will of course be investigating thenf. "How
con,e he got a gun licence?" ”He had a gun licence? Oh, we'll be looking into that
one". They looked complete and utter fools. They knew nothing, they had not been
briefed on how to deal with the media. I felt very sorry for them. I’m pretty sure that
come election time they're going to be finding new^careers.

" a -i ‘y-four hour availability. Never have a closed door. Again, my view is that you
t no’ ! have iss1c of press statements every hour after the first one. Even if all it says
r The operation is continuing'. And again, you can plan that from your manual. You
knew what you re supposed to be doing 4 hours afterwards. It's in the book. Of
course whether it does work out this way is another matter. But send those out on a
regular basis. The press will love you. Ready made copy. All they do is add in
 words like Superintendent X said, inverted commas, and then cut and paste. And do
  have what you're going to say checked by someone else. Even if from within your
 own department, just someone who says "I don’t think you should put it that way". Be
 very careful, because those words can be taken out of context. Do you remember in
 Glasgow about a month ago, they demolished some flats and flying debris
 unfortunately hit one old lady on the head and killed her. The two companies involved
 in that made statements to the press. One of them said "Well, we followed what the
 HSE said. Clearly something went wrong. We're now investigating to make sure it
can't happen again." That was a brilliant comment. It gave nothing away, it was no
admission of liability, he was co-operating with the HSE, got no choice. The other one
said "Well, I think it was quite a success really". He added the words 'speaking from a
technical point of view1 but somehow, somehow, in the Telegraph the following day
those words had got lost, it just came over as 'It was a tremendous success' - you
know - we killed somebody. Context, context, context.

 Media tracking is simply to say that you are concerned with giving information to
journalists, get something back. If you build up a good relationship they will actually tell
you things before they happen, which can give you the time to respond. If they are
thinking of printing a story based on what someone else has told them, they might
actually ring you up and say 'This may well go to press tomorrow. Do you have a
comments Not in an aggressive way, but saying "Someone wants to say this about
you". Are they right. Be prepared for it, it's got to come out". If you haven't built up
good relations with the press the first you'll know about it is when it hits the news­
stands. Too late. Then you'll be like Yorkshire TV - unavailable.

You mentioned a few words about lawyers. Lawyers you get on the other side. The
best ones will deal with me like that, they'll have early contact with me, they'll tell me
who they are and who they act for, and name their clients. They'll be very openwith
their evidence. They'll say "We've got a good case, we've got the following witnesses,
here's the expert evidence, please pay us some money". They'll be mutual, I will give
them evidence they will give me evidence. They won't keep it tight. Under any claim
they make they will justify. They'll say "We want a hundred grand because        here are
his needs, here are his damages, here's our authorities".         Fine, I'll go back and
recommend a settlement. It's easy to negotiate with someone like that.

What you get, I'm afraid, from all but people like the Roger Pannone’s and the Michael
Napier's of this world, (Michael Napier, based here with Irwin Mitchell, is one of the
best I've ever come across), is this kind of stupid behaviour. "The letter, if you don't
admit liability within 7 days we will sue". Ever have one of those? Yes? Stupid. Ifs
stupid for two reasons. First, when my clients receive it they have just been given the
excuse to make all their subsequent investigations privileged because there's been a
threat of litigation. If there was no privilege beforehand, there will be afterwards. And
the second is, people who do that get their bluff called by me. I wait 1 0 days and then I
ring them up and say "Where's the writ? I waited in all day yesterday for it. It didn't
come. I cancelled the plumber". And they say "Well, you know we were just trying to
get negotiations going'. You don't do it with one of those. It's a stupid letter to write.
Unfortunately it's one that's written by probably 75% of all lawyers who daim that they
know anything about personal injury. It tells me a lot about the person who's
conducting that claim. You never make a threat unless you intend to carry it out.
Someone who sends a letter saying "If you don't admit liability we will sue - fine. For
people to state a time limit - ridiculous. They'll withhold their evidence, they'll tell me
that they've got a good case. I say "Fine, tell me about it". "No, our evidence is




                                           ?0
protected". Until trial. Fine, we’ve got to go to trial, I'm happy to wait. 'Please make
us an offer1 . 'No. Why should I offer you anything on the basis of you not telling me
what you’ve got. If you think you've got a good case - tell me about it. Put up or shut
up'. But they think that by holding it back, you know, they've got some sort of
negotiating advantage. Cobblers. All they're doing is frustrating their own client.
They're simply delaying a settlement.

Third, suspicion. They have this idea that my job is to deprive people of money. It is
not. My job is to make sure that people who should not get compensation don't get
compensation and that those who should don't get more than the system permits, or
can be agreed. I'm not in the business of not paying claims, I'm in the business of
saying to insurers and defendants there comes a point, an economic point of
settlement, to which you say we fight or we pay. It may come on the first day after the
event, it may come five years later. It's not for me to say on an emotional level "Don't
pay the bugger, I don't like him. He's got a good case". If he's got a good case - tell
me. If they won't reveal their evidence I must assume that they've got nothing. But
think how this works, when I go back to my insurer and say "I think you should pay this
one" and the insurer says "Well, what's the plaintiff's evidence". "Well, actually he
won’t give me any". "Well, how can you advise us to pay it7‘ "Well, I think probably
he's got a good hand there, he's probably got five aces. I don't know " Pathetic.

And position. We want £100,000’. To which I say "Why?" They say "Not for you to
wonder why, what are you going to offerT               "Nothing".   "All right, well take 99'.
"Nothing". "98?" "No". It's a primitive, proved system. There are 60,000 solicitors in
practice in this country. You could probably double that to get the real size of the legal
profession, by including people who are not qualified, legal clerks, managing clerks,
legal execs, probably over 120,000. The Law Society did a survey two years ago.
75% of all solicitors said they were expert in personal injury cases. 75%, including the
50% who've never done anything but property and conveyancing. The Law Society
were so stunned by that survey that they said "Well, when you say you're experts,
please tell us how many cases you've handled in the last year". The average was six.
Six per specialist. Most of them were people tripping up on flagstones and blaming the
Council for not repairing the highway. Real mega-litigation that. Anybody who's an
expert should handle a running total of between 1 0 0 and 2 0 0 cases at any one time.
Six, pathetic. But that's the kind of lawyer that I'm going to have to deal with for years.
They cause three problems. One, they prolong the case. Two, they run up the costs
unnecessarily by failing to respond and give evidence. Three, they just prolong the
suffering for the client and all the time they're tellings/m "I'm taking a tough stance with
the defendents”. What they should be saying is "I'm completely cocking it up”. O.K.?
That's going to continue for a few years. That is one element of the response to
disasters that has not been well addressed.

About a year ago I had a stand-up argument on the radio with a guy who represented
the victims of the Kegworth disaster, and he was moaning that it had taken three years
to settle, and I reminded him that if he hadn't advised his clients to try and sue in the
US for millions of pounds in jury damages on a claim on which the US courts were
bound to have no jurisdiction, and had no jurisdiction, his clients would have got their
money a lot earlier. People conveniently forget what they did to prolong the claim.
They blame the defendant all the time.

Since I've mentioned insurance, I just want you to be aware, in the wake of any major
disaster, I'm going to take for instance a transport disaster with chemical explosion and




                                            21
environmental consequences, all of these kinds of insurers will be involved, and it may
be more than one insurer for each kind. Public liability. Members of the public walking
by .... boom .... get blown up. Road traffic - vehicles are damaged, highway property is
damaged. Employer's liability - the guy driving the tanker is also incinerated, his
employers .... Professional indemnity - maybe the person who designed the tanker or
a civil engineer - made a flaw in the design. He may be called on to pay. Directors
and officers maybe .... Directors who've turned a blind eye to safety, start getting sued
by their own company for indemnities. Environmental impairment if oil and things have
leaked into the water table. Material damage if buildings have been destroyed.
Business interruption if people have lost profits because roads have been blocked and
shops are inaccessible.

Personal accident, the thing that pays up if you die - £5,000 - have you seen it? I'm
sure you've got an adjunct to your household contents policy as well. Thafs the one
thing you get where you don't have to prove fault It pays up on the basis of 'you have
a contract that if you're killed, they'll pay your relatives five grand, it doesn't matter
whose fault it is". Legal expenses insurance - people may call on that to enable them
to bring in claims and finally Legal Aid, because Legal Aid really is insurance. It is
insurance against the costs of losing an action. The State - you pay a premium as
your contribution and the State pays the rest if you lose.         Be aware that all that
background is there.

And I'll finish by saying that, you know, maybe it is all about money. Maybe ifs all
about economic points of settlement for you. Weighing up the stresses, the strains, the
long time that an event is going to be with you. The cost of investigation, the cost of
defending, the cost of paying damages. Three years ago we did a survey - which
we've just updated, of damages throughout the European Community. We took a
number of fact situations, and this was one of them. An unmarried lady aged 20 who
was a student doctor, no dependants, not living with anybody, no children, and we said
"if she was killed instantly, in a disaster, how much damages would her estate get?
Where England stands it's about £1,500. Because someone in that position is worth
almost nothing. That £1,500 represents the cost of interment and a modest headstone
expected to last 20 years through the elements. Also the cost of any testamentary
expenses. That's it. That's the damages.

Denmark is even worse, about £400. But look at Italy. There are two figures for Italy -
one of them is £72,000, the other is £210,000 based on the same facts. We asked two
Italian lawyers which of these figures is right? They said "Both of them". It is no
wonder that the Itaiians have political problems, they cant even agree on what the
level of damages should be. So long as you have that disparity, with massive awards
being made in some EC countries and virtually nothing in others, there is no way ever
of harmonising European laws of compensation. We hear a lot about harmonising
laws, don't we? In the emergency planning field, CIMAH and SEVESO directives and
so on, they're never going to do it for money. A lot of those differences occur because
of distinctions in the Social Security systems of the various countries. But my advice
to you is, if you fit those facts and you're in Copenhagen on holiday and you don't feel
very well, immediately board a plane to Milan, but make sure that at Milan you not only
get off the plane but you get out of the terminal, because otherwise you will be bound
by the Warsaw convention limits which only give you about 10 grand. So you've got to
time it quite carefully. Just thinking about it in the interests of you know, your family,
give your parents a bit of a windfall, stagger through.
What ' started with this morning was to say there were three things I wanted to do.
Also I apologise for my voice, I've got a bit of a cold and I've got more painkillers inside
me than Michael Jackson. But to do three things - one is to remind you of things you
may already know, and there’ve been a few of those from the nods I’ve seen. Second,
to introduce you to new things, which are going to happen, which are certain. They’re
not just 'might happen', they will. Speculation, unhelpful documents, press intrusion.
And to give you some suggestions for things you can put in your plan. You don't have
to take my advice. That’s up to you. What I urge you however to do is, don’t just think
about it, discuss it with other people and see whether you think there is any value in
the things I have said. What I have told you is a compilation of my own experiences
and the experiences of those of my firm. It's not the whole story. We learn with every
disaster we get involved in. It's a continuous process. By holding events like this,you
are helping protect yourselves as well as educate yourselves, ifs no bad thing. Keep
up with it. I wish you success. Thank you for the invitation today and i'm open to
questions at Graham's discretion.




GRAHAM CASSIDY

Thanks very much Mark. Could I ask delegates just to identify themselves and their
organisation, and I’ll open up questions from the floor.

[Unfortunately the quality of the question and answer recording was too poor to
reproduce.]


Before we continue with the presentations - there have been a number of changes in
personnel who are attending from different organisations today which means that we
have had to revise some of the lists you have already been given for who is in which
seminar working groups this afternoon,. The revised list will be displayed outside so
please check that you know where you are for the afternoon session.

Moving on then, to our second speaker who is Superintendent Tony Clift from the
British Transport Police who is going to speak on the effects of public inquiries
generally upon organisations.    Tony has got 26 years police service in the British
Transport Police, mainly served in the C.I.D. He is currently the Area Commander for
the Midland area of the Transport Police which rovers a staggering 13 police force
areas, and he was the senior investigating officer of the King's Cross fire tragedy.




                                            23
      | ANOTHER DISASTER - WHO CARES?                17 NOVEMBER 1993
                                                                                 J
                       SUPERINTENDENT A CLIET
             AREA COMMUNICATIONS. BRITISH TRANSPORT POLICE

                          •THE IMPACT OF PUBLIC INQUIRY*


The holding of a Public Judicial inquiry following a disaster is not a common
occurrence in England and Wales.

The only Judicial Inquiries which readily come to mind that have had an impact upon
policing and the emergency services, during the past 25 years, have been:-

1)     The Bradford Football Stadium Fire - May 1985 Chaired by Mr Justice
       POPPLEWELL.
2)     The Zeebrugge Ferry Disaster - March 1987 Chaired by Mr Justice SHEEN.
3)     The Kings Cross Fire - November 1987 Chaired by Mr Justice FENNELL.
4)     The Clapham Train Crash - December 1988 Chaired by Mr Justice HIDDEN.
5)     The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster - April 1989 Chaired by The Right Hon.
       Lord Justice TAYLOR.

In the railway environment, serious accidents, especially where accompanied by loss
of life, are normally followed by Public Inquiries held by an Inspecting Officer of the
Railway Inspectorate of the Department of Transport, but there is an additional
provision in the 1871 Regulation of Railways Act, for the holding of a more formal
Judicial Inquiry.

Such an Inquiry had only been held twice prior to Kings Cross, following the Tay Bridge
collapse in 1879 and the Hixson Level Crossing Disaster in 1968, when an express
train struck a police escorted abnormal load on a level crossing. Cn the latter occasion
the Inquiry being chaired by Mr Edward Gibbens, QC.

In each of these cases the Railway Inspectorate had previous involvement, having
passed the Tay Bridge as fit for use, and in liaison with British Rail, had a responsibility
for the installation of automatic level crossing half barriers.

It was therefore necessary to appoint an independent person to hold the Inquiries. It
was also appropriate to do so following the Kings Cross Fire because it was expedient
to consider the actions, responsibilities and organisation of the emergency services
and obtain answers to the many questions to be asked about materials used in the
construction of the station, which involved calling non railway staff as witnesses.

Between November 1987 and October 1989,1was personally involved in a command
and investigative role at the Kings Cross Fire and the Clapham and Purley Train
Crashes. Having responsibility for the police involvement and leading the police
evidence at the subsequent Fennell, Hidden and Department of Transport Public
Inquiries.
The Fennell and Taylor Inquiries in particular, left their mark on every individual and
organisation who had an involvement with them The lessons that were learned and
the recommendations made have changed personal attitudes and, even more
importantly, the culture of organisations, certainly the railway industry,          local
Government and the emergency services, in respect of>

       1)             preparedness
       2)             pre incident risk management
       3)             standards of emergency procedures
       4)             regular safety auditing
       5)             crisis management planning
       6)             accountability

I am going to present a very personal overview of what I consider to be the impact of
and lessons learnt from my own involvement in The Kings Cross Public Inquiry.

I believe this is reflected in the opening paragraphs of a paper I recently submitted to
the British Railways Board Safety Panel, which read:-

       'The British Transport Police involvement in the Kings Cross Fire led to
       a fundamental culture change within the Force, safety being identified
       as a priority core function with the realisation that policing had to
       broaden its parameters from those traditionally held, and develop as
       an essential integral ingredient in railway safety and security. This is
       reflected in the current Force Statement.

       Later, involvement in the Clapham and Purley Train Crashes and the
       Hillsborough Footban Disaster, re-enforced the requirement for
       change, which was clearty indicated by the recommendations in the
       Fennell, Hidden and Taylor Inquiry Reports,

       Preparedness and the requirement to identify all foreseen safety
       related issues was recognised as a priority. A nation-wide review was
       carried out involving British Rail, London Underground and the
       emergency services, to identify the training, equipment, and manpower
       resources required to achieve and maintain agreed standards of safety
       and security throughout the Force area.'

The Kings Cross Inquiry, unlike that chaired by Mr Justice Taylor in respect of
Hillsborough, was different in that it was serviced by the police force who were involved
in the policing prior to and during the disaster, carrying out the subsequent
investigations. Whereas at Hillsborough, the investigations were carried out, not by the
police force involved in the event, the South Yorkshire Police, but an independent
force, the West Midlands Police.

The British Transport Police Investigation Team, already had the traditional duty of
carrying out a criminal investigation with the submission of a report to the Director of
Public Prosecutions and the making of the necessary enquiries of behalf of Her
Majesty's Coroner. This in itself placed great strain on the force having both resource
and budgetary implications, there being no extra funding to cover the cost of the
investigation.

It was necessary to draw up an integrated schedule, into which was incorporated the
response times and recorded actions of London Underground Limited and the
emergency services.
 This necessitated visiting all the emergency service controls that were involved, both
 on and off site, obtaining copies of all tapes and logs, computerised and manual.
 Before the master log was produced it was necessary to have all the clocks within the
 control rooms calibrated, as there were discrepancies, some as wide as two minutes
 against Greenwich Meantime.

The police carried out investigations on both their own behalf, and at the behest of
Treasury Solicitors, against a background where not only the general police
involvement and conduct was contained in the terms of reference of the Inquiry, but
later, that the quality of the police criminal investigatk>n itself was to be called into
account. Indeed it became the subject of one full appendix in the final Fennell report.

When the announcement was made that Mr Justice Fennell was to conduct a Public
Inquiry, neither I or my officers, had any idea of the commitment this would entail.

Our learning curve was to be a very steep one, greatly helped by the establishment of
an excellent working relationship with the Treasury Solicitors Department, who were to
be responsible for the servicing and administration of the Inquiry.

The investigation posed three questions:-

       1)     How did the fire start ?
       2)     Why was there a flashover ?
       3)     Why did 31 people die ?

On the face of it a straightforward task. The first indication that this was not to be the
case was when it became apparent that a total of 15 organisations were to be legally
represented at the Inquiry. Eleven by a total of 23 Counsel including 7 Queens
Counsel, four by Solicitors and the London Regional Passengers Committee by a
Layman, Mr John Cartledge.

It was made dear from the outset that the Inquiry was to be an investigation and not
litigation. It was not to be a lawsuit in which one party wins and another loses. It was
to be quite different from the ordinary criminal process in England and Wales, which is
accusatorial in character. The Inquiry was to be inquisitorial, designed to establish the
cause of the disaster and to make recommendations which would make a recurrence
less likely.

Despite this intention, you need have no doubt that every individual and organisation
who faced the faintest possibility of being a defendant in either a Civil or Criminal
Court, was acutely aware that every word given in evidence and the answer to every
question posed, was being carefully scrutinised. The concern being that the hearing
was to be used as a ’fishing expedition', and pre-trial review by the representatives of
parties who might be contemplating future civil adion. — •

Six British Transport Policemen were deployed within Kings Cross Station prior to the
outbreak of fire. Although they all subsequently received gallantry awards from Her
Majesty The Queen, their adions and condud were to become central during the
Inquiry's deliberations, as was the professional competence and preparedness of the
Force.




                                            OR
 Mr Barry Pain, C.B.E., Q.P.M., a recently retired Inspector of Constabulary and former
 Chief Constable of Kent, was appointed as a specialist consultant, to report firstly on
 the police action on the night of the incident and secondly on the proof of evidence
 tendered by the police and ambulance service to Part 2 of the Inquiry, which dealt with
 preparedness, training and professional competence.

In view of this development a decision was made to appoint Counsel to give advice
and represent the Force at the Inquiry. We were most fortunate in our choice of
lawyer, Mr Anthony Seys-Llewellyn, whose quiet competence and strategy of leading
our own shortcomings and not adopting a defensive stance, served us well.

The Emergency Services Conduct will always become the subject of immediate
attention. David Macintosh, a Solicitor who specialises in this particular field, described^
this as the two day syndrome'. On day one the media chorus is to the effect 'Aren’t our
fire-fighters, police officers, ambulance teams wonderful?' On day two the angle can
and will change and questions of the following type, were certainly raised at Kings
Cross: Why weren't there enough ambulances?', Why did the Fire Brigade take so
long? Why did the police officers direct the victims the wrong way ?

It is my experience that Public Inquiries can be influenced by media and public
reaction, prior to, and during their progress. Sir Desmond Fennell conducted his
Inquiry with scrupulous fairness throughout, but at the same time, ’Trial by media, with
dramatic headlines and exclusive revelations, often engineered by interested parties
were published.

The depth and scope of the Inquiry was, to me, quite staggering. Many hundreds, if
not thousands, of witness statements were taken, either by police or Treasury
Solicitors, although only 140 witnesses were called at the Inquiry. Numerous scientific
tests were carried out and 31 experts submitted over 100 detailed reports for
consideration. Fifteen videos were produced and viewed during the Inquiry, which
lasted a total of 91 days

Each organisation under scrutiny was required to research and disclose all documents
in their possession which were of material relevance, including policy files, adion
plans, training manuals, records of training, internal and external correspondence and
even personal notes passed between colleagues, which had a bearing on the
investigation this included all incident logs and debrief notes. London Underground
alone, submitted over 80,000 pages of documentation, each of which was dosely
scrutinised.

I later had the responsibility for the preparation of the British Transport Police evidence
to the Taylor Inquiry, held following the Hillsborough Football Disaster. I was not
required to give oral evidence, but the impad Fennell had made in resped of
accountability can be highlighted by the fad that both the Diredor of Operations, British
Railways Board and a Senior Department of Transport offidal, contaded me at home,
on the day following the event to ask what time the football trains had arrived at
Sheffield and could this issue, in hind sight, be seen as an adverse contributory fador.

So what advice can I give from the lessons I have learned, which is of equal relevance
to any organisation which might have the misfortune to become involved in a Public
Inquiry. Simply this....




                                           27
  n appropriate cases it is important that you retain as quickly as possible, competent
 legal advisers, both Solicitors and through them Barristers, and such other experts as
 may be appropriate, including engineers, fire or explosives technicians and the like.
 You must build up an immediate and trusting rapport with both your legal
 representatives and the experts you have retained.

 Legal guidance will often be necessary to protect long term best interests and to
 respond positively to the media and other enquiries in ways which the immediate
 pressure suggests to them might be appropriate. Negative responses to media
 enquiries are likely to prove extremely damaging.

Treasury Solicitors and police will, and you should also identify your key witnesses,
and obtain from them signed statements, but not before, in appropriate cases, legal
advice has been sought. Statements ought always to be taken under supervision
once your witnesses have been identified, you should look after them giving them
support and re-assurance, as they will be embarking upon the commencement of what
might be a long and harrowing ordeal.

A store of key documents must be built, all relevant documents being carefully
preserved, as they may be made subject of discovery and required for scrutiny by the
investigation. Failure in this respect can lead to embarrassment or even to adverse
comments if potentially helpful documents have gone astray. Less than frank
discovery can also lead to professional criticism and even the disciplining of, or in
extreme cases, criminal proceedings being taken against individuate or your
organisation.

It is essential that accurate logs are maintained during and post incident, all staff must
be made aware of the importance of accuracy of timing and detail in respect of
contents.

Be open, be honest, don't try to hide the truth, because the professionalism and depth
of the investigation will always find it out. 'Smoking Guns' will always exist in even the
most competent of professional organisations, the sooner they are disclosed to your
Counsel the better, as he will know best how to handle them.

Lastly remember the morale of your staff is going to be adversely affected, but your
organisation must continue to function. It is essential that you should separate your
involvement in and preparation for the Inquiry from your daily business and duties.

This was particularly necessary in the case of the South Yorkshire Police following
Hillsborough, where the then Deputy Chief Constable Peter Hayes, who had no direct
involvement in respect of the incident, took responsibility for the routine running of the
Force, as well as for the welfare and counselling of officers, together with issues of
litigation, which arose.

Thus taking those problems away from the investigators, and those officers who had a
direct involvement in the incident and whose actions were to be scrutinised at the
Inquiry - Peter lectures on this approach, which he calls the 'Anchor Man' Syndrome.

Organisations must in their contingency plans and crisis management action plans,
include provisions for staff counselling and support. You should work on the premise




                                           28
that if you and your team do not support each other during times of stress, no-one else
will.

The Inquiry will put individuals who are required to give evidence under great stress.
Witness statements are provided to all parties, including the media, prior to the
evidence being tendered, with typed copies of the transcripts of the proceedings
available after each session. Witnesses are usually released by the Inquiry, once they
have completed giving evidence, and available to the Press for interview immediately.
They must be given protection at this stage.

Each Inquiry has produced its own victims. Many of the witnesses who gave evidence
before Sir Desmond Fennell had following the fire, received stress counselling. When
Counsel questioned them quite properly but rigorously, during the investigation, this in
a number of instances caused further stress, the signs of which had to be identified
and dealt with tactfully.

Press headlines and comments during the investigation had a damaging effect on a
number of individuals. One fireman, who performed heroically below ground and at
one time was believed to be dead, told the Inquiry, how after he thought the fire was
under control, he, together with police officers, took a well earned breather and smoked
a cigarette. He left the Court to see a billboard and headlines in the papers
proclaiming 'Firemen smoked while tube burnt'. You can imagine the affect that this
had upon him.

A Senior Police Officer who was commended by the Chief Constable was so severely
affected by his experience in the witness box, that three years later, he wrote an article
on the subject for the Police Review Magazine, whose editorial described him as 'yet
another victim of Kings Cross'.

Sir Desmond Fennell stated in his final report 'I am conscious that during the
investigation, a number of people felt bruised by the searching questions which they
were invited to answer1. Regrettably, some of this bruising took a tremendously long
time to heal, indeed the effects of some of it will remain with the witnesses concerned
forever.
In the heat of the Public Inquiry, even the Police Investigation Team became the
subject of investigation. London Underground had indicated at the start of the
investigation that they remained concerned about the possibility of arson. Their
Chairman, Sir Keith Bright, took a close personal interest in the arson theory and
complained about the quality of the police inquiry and the evidence gathered.

Sir Desmond instructed that all relevant evidence should be called before the Court, so
that he could consider the matter. Mr Barry Pain, the former Deputy Chief Constable of
Kent was again appointed to provide a specialist report expressing his opinion as to
the quality of the investigation. He expressed total satisfaction and the Inquiry Report
states that the totality of the evidence failed to demonstrate any basis for an allegation
of arson.

Interestingly the officer in charge of the criminal investigation, Detective Superintendent
Tony Clift, was later awarded substantial damages against a Sunday newspaper who
had published detrimental comments regarding th^ police investigation of the arson
theory.




                                           29
 In conclusion, I leave you with these comments. Public Inquiries are necessary to
ensure that major disasters are fully and openly investigated, to enable lessons to be
learnt and recommendations to be made to prevent recurrence. We have to accept
that no stone will be left un-tumed, and individuals will be put under great pressure in
the witness box.

I sincerely hope that neither you or I ever have the occasion to again become involved
in a Public Inquiry, such as that which took place after Kings Cross. I am sure that if
we all pay particular attention to the subjects which I have already stressed, and again
highlight on my parting slide, that our chances of doing so will be considerably
reduced.

       1)      preparedness
       2)      pre incident risk assessment
       3)      standards of emergency procedures
       4)      regular safety auditing
       5)      crisis management planning
       6)      accountability.

Thank you. Are there any questions?


[Unfortunately the quality of the question and answer recording was too poor to
reproduce.]


Graham Cassidy

OK, thank you. We've heard this morning from two speakers about the emergency
service perspective and that of the legal profession with regard to disaster. Moving on
now to our next speaker Dr Tim Newbum who's currently a Research Fellow at the
Policy Studies Institute in London, and the Social Services is the perspective that he
brings to our subject this morning. He's previously worked at the National Institute for
Social Work, and it was there that he was responsible for a two-year evaluation of the
Social Work response to the Hillsborough disaster, in our area. He's the author of a
number of books including 'Making a Difference: Social Work after Hillsborough',
’Disaster and After: Social Work in the Aftermath of Disasters' and he's the editor of
’Working with Disaster. Social welfare interventions during and after tragedy'. His
theme this morning is 'Planning a Caring Response to Disaster and Implications for the
Social Services and Others'.




                                          30
      j ANOTHER DISASTER - WHO CARES?               17 NOVEMBER 1993            I



                      PRESENTATION BY DR TIM NEWBURN
                            POLICY STUDIES INSTITUTE
              Previously with the Practice and Development Exchange.
                          National Institute of Social Work


               Planning a Caring Response to Disaster - Implications
                          for Social Services and Others

                         Some lessons from Hillsborough

                                  bv Tim Newbum


In this session I would like to report some of the findings of a two-year study of the
social work response to the Hillsborough disaster which focused on the 'needs' of
those affected by Hillsborough, evaluated the services they were offered, looked at
the nature of the work undertaken, the impact this had on the staff, and the nature
and effectiveness of the supervision and support offered to them.


The impact of Hillsborough

The disaster was found to have impacted on people's lives in five main ways:
practically, emotionally, on behaviour, on relationships and on work. Although it is
the emotional consequences of disaster that are most usually discussed, the
catalogue of practical, psychological and emotional problems facing those affected
by disaster meant that considerable strain was often placed upon relationships and
the ability to continue working.

Family and personal relationships in particular frequently came under stress after
Hillsborough. There were many that were quite radically changed and some that
simply didn't survive. For the bereaved in particular this represented a 'double loss'.
Negative or problematic consequences were reported both between partners and
between parents and children.

Many of those affected by the disaster found that their working lives were disrupted
Whilst employers were generally sympathetic to the need for compassionate leave
in the immediate aftermath of the disaster, memories were short, and request for
leave at later dates did not necessarily receive a similar response.

There is an important lesson here which runs throughout the study ~anchwhlch
cannot be repeated too often: disasters are not simply isolated or one-off events
which recede into the background as the years pass.

Disasters are followed by a series of events - official inquiries, inquests and so on -
which are not only a vivid reminder of the tragedy but which, because they are not
geared to the ’needs' of those affected by disasters, may exacerbate rather than
mitigate suffering. Hillsborough - like other disasters - is an ongoing tragedy for
many of its 'victims’.


The nature of the disaster service

The key aspect of the job undertaken by social workers in the aftermath of the
disaster was listening to relatives' and survivors' painfully explicit accounts. It was
the fact that this work was so intensive and yet repetitive that many workers singled
out as being the key to separating disaster work from the mainstream jobs they had
done before (and since).

Of course, not everyone sought out or accepted professional help. The research
identified five major barriers to accepting or requesting help - recognition,
acceptance, worthiness, information, stigma - and each of these have important
implications for the organisation and running of a post-disaster service. Most
importantly, services need to reach out to those affected by the disaster. The
majority will not seek help without being prompted.

Services need to be provided by staff who feel confident about what rt is they are
offering, Services need to be available over an extended period of time - at least two
years - and it needs to be clear at the outset to all concerned - staff and potential
users - that this will be the case.


Relationship

Two factors were identified as having been crucial in determining whether the first
approach made by a social worker would be likely to lead to further contact and to
some form of relationship being established.

They were, firstly, the extent to which and the manner inwhich workers made dear
what their purpose in calling was and, secondly, the time and the way in which the
first contacts were made. The ability of workers to present a straightforward and
positive reason for calling was central in overcoming widely-held resistances to the
social work profession.

Practical support tended to dominate the work in the early stages, together with or
followed by a strong element of personal support: accompanying people to a wide
variety of public and private events and adopting a befriending role - essentially
'being there* for people, not just in early days, but later on, when other sources of
support have disappeared or when particularly stressful occasions arise

Early on, practical help tended to be not only the most useful avenue, but the most
likely to lead to acceptance. The offer of practical support and help was much less
threatening - not only for the user but also for the social worker - than any
counselling. It represented something concrete that the worker could do.

It showed that they were prepared to help and that they would respond to what the
individual person wanted. As was suggested above, such tasks are not only
important in themselves, but they are also valuable because they help facilitate the
trust that is important if other work is to be undertaken.




                                          32
It is ironic therefore that these aspects of the work are often accorded relatively little
importance in analyses of the social work task after d-doter. Both worker and users
confirmed that 'listening skills’, 'empathy' and 'flexibility’ wer„ the keys to building up
a successful working relationship. Users made direct reference to the importance of
services taking account of what they wanted, and what they felt they would benefit
from.
Comparisons of different practices between teams suggested that workers who
presented themselves as experts or who insisted on a highly structured approach to
the work were, as far a the users were concerned, likely to be less successful.
Thus, one of the most novel areas of work undertaken by Hillsborough social
workers was the use of video and other photographic material with survivors and
others affected by the disaster.

There never appeared to be a set pattern to when and how this would take place,
but rather it tended to be geared to what the user, in collaboration with the worker
determined was appropriate.

Watching the video material, although frequently harrowing and extremely
distressing, was almost universally agreed to have been a positive thing to have
undertaken.


Carina for the carers

Involvement in disaster work frequently had a profound impact on the carers. Three
factors were found to be particularly significant. Firstly the nature of the work. The
highly intensive and repetitive nature of the 'counselling' role left workers feeling
preoccupied with aspects of disaster, or triggered memories of earlier incidents in
their lives.

Secondly, and relatedly, there were the emotional and behavioural consequences of
the work.     Workers reported sleep loss, nightmares, weight loss, loss of
concentration, increased alcohol consumption

Finally, there were the organisational problems and role stresses experienced by
social workers. Some of the emotional, psychological and personal difficulties that
workers experienced were exacerbated by organisational problems that they
encountered.

Thus, for example, many workers felt poorly supported in their disaster work, there
were problems in relation to the supervision of staff, many of which were related to
difficulties staff experienced in talking to line-managers about problems either with
work or personally.

Because of the highly stressful nature of the work, staff need to be closely and
sympathetically managed, as well, I would argue, as having access to support
outside their organisation. Social workers appeared to be just as reluctant as
anyone else to admit that they need help, especially if their employers are involved.
Consequently, services for staff need, firstly, to be proactive - the 'helpline' model is
not one that is appropriate for a staff care system.




                                             33
 The outreach model that is employed by social workers for use with their ‘clients' is
 the one that needs to be utilised by those attempting to care for professional staff.
 Secondly, staff care services need to be extra-departmental - social workers do not
 trust counselling services that are linked to their own organisation or line-
 management structures.

 Looking for support is associated with the idea of having ’failed’ in some way, and
 there is an assumption that if it were known within their organisation that they had
 sought help, this would be likely to affect their future career prospects.


 Training and s kills

There was a widespread feeling amongst the disaster workers that the professional
training that they had received had not prepared them for what they had
encountered in the aftermath of the disaster.

Consequently, the social workers felt they had benefited from the ‘orientation’
training that they received immediately after the Hillsborough disaster - training
which gave them some idea of what to expect, and which carried the message that
their basic social work skills were the ones they should rely on.

Nevertheless, the majority of workers felt that further training would have been
valuable, and there was agreement that it was counselling skills that should form the
focus of this.


Social work and disasters

Despite the slightly negative sounding tone of some of this report, it is important not
to lose sight of the fact that disaster work is, despite the stresses involved, widely
experienced as exhilarating, satisfying and a source of fulfilment and growth.
As one of the workers commented in interview, "It'll never be the same challenge,
Never be the same high as it was after that. Professionally, nothing will ever meet,
I'm sure. . . . the work after the disaster. . . Nobody else will understand that either,
except for people that had experienced it."

Furthermore, it provides an opportunity to challenge some of the widely-held
negative views of the profession. As one of the social services managers
commented not long after the disaster:

   "The effort, commitment and skill shown are quite exceptional. Social workers
have hours of their time. No one has refused to do anything. It has shown social
work in its true light, a positive light."


[Unfortunately the quality of the question and answer recording was too poor to
reproduce.]

Graham Cassidy

Thanks, Tim Newbum.




                                            34
Feedback 1

     [ANOTHER DISASTER - WHO CARES?               17 NOVEMBER 1993



                       FINDINGS OF GROUP A - THE SCENE


Brian Robjohns (South Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service)

I was one of the facilitators in the group looking at the scene. Very much as a group
we decided to answer the question by actually setting our own agenda for the
afternoon session to try and examine responsibilities at the scene. Out of that
discussion came some useful points.

Before the actual subject matter of the task was discussed it became obvious that it
was necessary to define for the purpose of the various bodies present what is a major
disaster! Whilst the statutory agencies might have their own definition, certainly
some of the voluntary agencies felt it meant incidents that resulted in "a lot of
casualties" whilst others interpreted it as a "catastrophe". It therefore identified the
need to circulate an agreed definition as to what the term major disaster applies.

The process of the afternoon identified a number of areas as to which the term scene
could be examined:

       Identification of Role

       Plans and Response

       Training to meet the Plans

       Availability of Personnel

       Communication - Internal
                     - External

       Understanding each others' Role

       Objectives

       Finance

It would be therefore appropriate to discuss the findings of the workshop group under
each of the headings.


IDENTIFICATION OF ROLE

Whilst some in the voluntary sector felt that the statutory organisations would be able
to rapidly identify and perform their role in a major disaster they were soon to be
made aware that even those with defined roles find themselves acting in a state of
chaos and confusion initially. The management by "seat of your pants" which tends



                                          35
to identify itself with the initial activity of the scene, moves towards more orderly
activity, as people start to drop into their defined roles.

This transition as matters start to settle down can be minutes or hours depending on
the size of the disaster.
There was also identified, particularly again from the voluntary organisations, a need
to understand the respective roles and responsibilities of the other organisations, with
whom they would find themselves on the scene of a disaster. There then followed
useful discussion as the agencies present explained their role in the initial and
continued atmosphere of the scene.


PLANS AND RESPONSE

It very rapidly became obvious that the voluntary sector cannot make the same type
of arrangements as can the full-time emergency services. The most obvious example
is that they don't have the opportunity to plan practical tactical incident training.

An interesting aspect was that some voluntary sector agencies have to plan for
different responses albeit to the same incident, e.g. Salvation Army would offer

       (a)    support in the form of refreshments
       (b)    as Ministers of the Church and
       (c)    as Counsellors to assist with moral andmental care.

The responses of the voluntary sector will also be slower as they need time to assess
the level of resources they can provide and respond.

The voluntary bodies also identified the need to identify a central co-ordinating
body for the voluntary agencies who are likely to be involved at major incidents. It
was pointed out by the doctor present from Barnsley District General Hospital that
they have a co-ordinator to look after their voluntary sector agencies.


TRAINING TO MEET THE PLANS

Perhaps a bit of an "old chestnut" but it was realised that not all statutory agencies
have been involved in large scale incident training. It was recognised that such
training would quicken responses to call-outs etc. and obviously would be useful for
voluntary agencies to be involved.

It was recognised that possibly the only way it would be effective to carry out such
plans would be to test in separate blocks rather than full-blown major incidents.

Although covered in later paragraphs it was accepted that finance plays a major role
in dictating the amount of training that can be done to met the needs. Perhaps on a
lesser level the Social Services representative thought that training might be
appropriate to show staff who and when persons will be called out to incidents. The
Police representative had the understanding that contingency plans had been
produced jointly by the Emergency Service Planning Teams but identified the
problem was that practice tends to be in isolation. The question was raised as to
whether there was a need to practice altogether.




                                           36
AVAILABILITY OF PERSONNEL

This very much again linked into the training aspects and questioned whether it was
practical to run a major incident exercise because of the time factor (i.e. getting
everybody out from home or from places of work to perform at the incident).

It was also recognised that the frequency of major disasters possibly mitigates
against holding such practices in a macro setting.

Again to redress this it was thought better that, rather than calling upon large
numbers of personnel, it would be better to carry out notification exercises i.e. paper
feed or table tops.

In the real world the statutory agencies present stated that they had to respond to a
real incident irrespective of the personnel available at the time. The voluntary
agencies indicated that they would rest on the numbers of persons who they had on
lists of volunteers, but generally the response was quite good. Social Services
indicated that their initial response would be by an emergency duty team that would
be followed up by the call out of other teams. The hospital representative suggested
that their experience was over-responsed when their plans had been put into
practice.


COMMUNICATION

Internal

The Salvation Army representative suggested that the internal communications could
create difficulties in contacting the teams for shift cover. But generally there were no
major difficulties seen for internal communications.

External

The main area of concern was where co-operation was sought onsite for the major
incident with agencies trying to communicate with each other. One of the areas
identified in this was identifying who was in charge. There then followed discussion
on how emergency services indicate their personnel as Officer-in-Charge and how
the command vehicles for each service can be identified, e.g., should be only vehicle
with blue light on. The representative from Barnsley Hospital indicated that they
would use an Ambulance Officer as their liaison before a Liaison Doctor was
established on site, i.e. the Medical Incident Officer.

There then followed discussion on the actual technology of communications. Some
of those present asked how access could be gained to the "user overload system".
Then discussion took place about the use of helicopters, telephone systems, BT
systems and availability of radios for back-up.


UNDERSTANDING EACH OTHERS* ROLE

It was felt that the discussions already held on the other headings had identified that
there was a brief understanding of each others’ role but that there was a general lack
of understanding of how that was actually used at the incidents. It was felt that such



                                          37
days as today were useful in identifying the problems each party had in their role at a
major incident.


OBJECTIVES

Again no active discussion took place under that heading due to lack of time.


FINANCE

Finance had already been mentioned in previous areas of discussion, in particular, it
impinged on:


Communication

The ability to purchase or access best technology on the market.


Equipment

Again as above, the ability to obtain best equipment for the task.


Training

Again, as already rehearsed above, the fact that effective training in the main
requires substantial resources which are not readily available. This is especially true
for voluntary agencies who have very limited funds and certainly generally do not
have finance available to take part in practice incidents. It was then discussed as to
whether the voluntary agency representatives would be able to obtain grants for such
work. It was recognised that this was probably very unlikely. It was seen that the
Church of England do have funds that can be called upon to replenish certain stocks
and that certain trusts will make grants to some voluntary agencies.

It was also identified that hospital trusts want to be seen buying the best equipment
but reluctant where this involves high value expenditure when it may be very unlikely
that the equipment would be used nor would they necessarily wish to involve finances
in long term training commitments.




                                          38
Feedback 2

     | ANOTHER DISASTER - WHO CARES?             17 NOVEMBER 1993           |

                          GOLD COMMAND WORKSHOP

             FINDINGS OF GROUP B - A DEFINITION OF DISASTER


Kevin Lincoln, Chief Inspector. South Yorkshire Police

In introducing the results of the Gold Command Workshop, I should mention that only
two members of the team would be actual Gold Commanders in a real disaster, this
influenced the depth of discussion.

The facilitators, in deciding upon the discussion areas selected key areas from the
five core statements to generate as much relevant information as possible.


1      DEFINITION OF DISASTER AND ARRANGEMENTS TO DEAL WITH IT

      A brief exchange of views came up with the following definition of a disaster,
      "something that requires extra resources/special arrangements to deal with
      casualties from an incident". It was dear that statutory emergency services
      have defined criteria for what amounts to a disaster but voluntary and other
      support services react to what the key services regard as a disaster.

      CRUSE for example react when others require their services.

      Common ground was reached in acknowledging that numbers of casualties
      are a major factor in any disaster, there are occasions when casualties are not
      necessarily involved, for example, the recent floods which resulted in few
      casualties but brought about massive destruction, shock to a community and
      hundreds of homeless people.

      In discussing arrangements for dealing with disasters, the police and fire
      service have inter-regional contingency plans to utilise staff and resources
      above and beyond what they have available locally. Support agendes are
      less clear about much broader co-ordination required between the major
      conurbations. Emergency planning, for example, was evident within Sodal
      Services in the Sheffield area, but these did not indude Rotherham, Barnsley
      or Doncaster.

      Training was viewed as crucial in terms of the emergency services actina
      quickly and giving ample warning to support services to allow suffident time to
      react. The police acknowledged their co-ordinating role and the excellent
      communication between central points acting for the three emergency
      services. Statutory manuals exist to guide these services. It was agreed that
      other agencies required a "trigger mechanism" to acknowledge that a disaster
      had occurred and that their services were needed.




                                        39
2   DISRUPTION TO DAY TO DAY ACTIVITIES AND DEMANDS ON THE
    RESOURCES OF THE ORGANISATION

    The mobilisation of staff is the key feature with the three emergency services,
    in particular having a need to maintain their day to day response to the public
    at large, not affected by the disaster.         This highlighted a priority to
    communicate to ALL staff of ALL services involved to be aware of the demand
    on resources so that everyone knows what is happening. This one factor will
    enable a more sympathetic approach to criticism by the public to late
    responses due to overstretched staff. (Clearly the media have a role here
    also).

    Long term resource commitments over several days/weeks create the most
    pressures with Mind, Victim Support, CRUSE, Church for example, accepting
    that counselling and family support are the main long term factors. It was
    acknowledged that the "stay and play" policy of paramedics has provided a
    much needed medical presence at the early stages of any disaster with
    excellent back up facilities provided by Acute Hospital status and Case
    Hospital status.


3   HOW DO WE COMBINE TO PROVIDE THE FACILITIES. SERVICES AND
    RESOURCES

    This particular subject prompted the notion that services should prioritise from
    stage to stage and identify what is the next objective and what resources are
    needed to achieve this. Whilst the three emergency services roles are well
    defined, command functions differ from the police as co-ordinators to the fire
    service as more reactive. The general maxim is to "bring in every interested
    party in the first instance". This prompted the bold statement that "We train
    the managers but practitioners are those at the sharp end who combine
    resources who need more opportunity to interact with colleagues from other
    agencies''.

    Examples from the Hillsborough Disaster were highlighted where a police
    sergeant was unaware of his role, where support agencies had no idea or
    misunderstood each others roles. There needs to be a closing of gaps in lines
    of communication, particularly in relation to forms and language.


4   ACTION CONFLICT

    This title introduced areas of concern; again drawing from Hillsborough, with
    lack of inter-agency liaison and misunderstanding roles bringing about a drive
    towards client ownership. The mortuary in particular was identified where the
    public expect a sympathetic and professional service, not staff infighting.
    Greater co-ordination of support services arriving to assist is required,
    particularly when prolonged over a number of days.
    Everyone is accountable, requiring a structured information system.
    particularly in the early moments of a disaster when coroner's evidence can be
    lost by well meaning, but untrained people. The solution lies in a culture
    change, with scene practitioners of different agencies talking to each other.




                                       4f<
5      LONG TERM IMPLICATIONS - "CARING FOR THE CARERS"
       There is a feeling that the approach of "get a grip lad, you are a professional,
       you can cope” has now gone following a greater understanding of how and
       why staff working for agencies need a release. It was acknowledged that
       factual debriefs immediately after the incident reduced the likelihood of post
       traumatic stress.

       There then followed a brief discussion about the "macho" approach of the
       emergency services who expected their staff to cope, in particular the fire
       service. Occupational Therapy Units have grown in all three services,
       although some senior executives in other support agencies have yet to be
       convinced that such Units are money well spent Senior managers should be
       targeted who are in a position to look inward in an organisation and NOT
       upwards.


CONCLUSION

There was disappointment that Senior Executives from all agencies did not attend,
which may prompt the wrong decisions by such senior key players when a disaster
occurs, through lack of training. Also there is still a local approach to emergency
planning, in some instances, even within South Yorkshire, with Barnsley, Doncaster,
Rotherham and Sheffield "doing their own thing". When agencies come together at a
live disaster, lack of joint planning may repeat mistakes made at Hillsborough. In the
light of training expenditure and achievement likely to receive scrutiny, following any
future disorder much more needs to be done!




                                          41
Feedback 3,

     | ANOTHER DISASTER - WHO CARES?                17 NOVEMBER 1993

               FINDINGS FROM GROUP C - RECEIVING HOSPITAL




John Mills (SYMAPS)

As a group we tried to address the problems that would be experienced at a receiving
hospital in the event of a major incident. The first point that we identified was that as
a group we all had an understanding of our own individual roles, but there was an
area where we thought that we needed to liaise, that we needed to gain an
understanding of the other voluntary services, that we weren't perhaps aware of the
facilities that they could provide us with in the event of such an incident W e also
accepted that, at a major incident, communications is a problem, particularly when an
incident is first of all identified, how that's confirmed, how the information is passed
on to the hospital and how that information is acted upon, how the cascade system
would work and how we could call upon the other voluntary services, or other
professional bodies should the need arise.

W e also acknowledged that no one particular group or no one particular body was
aware of the capabilities of the others, that we needed to liaise far. far more to gain
an understanding and that there was a big advantage to know who was capable of or
who is actually supposed to perform a particular function.

Moving on, we felt that there was a need to emphasise the dovetailing of
requirements between disciplines, that particular people within different organisations
do accept the responsibility for their organisation and for the level of responsibility for
action in their part of the plan, and that there must be a co-ordination of procedures
and terminology which is common to us all, that we try and eliminate a certain degree
of jargon which our own individual organisations use in our day-to-day working
environment       We accepted that in actual fact our staff performance may not
necessarily always meet the total requirements of a major incident, and that we do
need to seriously address the aftercare of the people who do attend an incident.
That we do need to become aware that people are involved, that people do have
feelings and that we need to seriously address that Not only for the people who are
involved in the incident, but for the people who are actually working and providing the
support to the patients or the casualties themselves.

Two further points were that we felt there was a need to test that if we were to
introduce a co-ordinated approach, that we needed to actually to test the
communication system and establish its effectiveness. In other words, if we are
going to call upon and build into emergency plans the ability to call upon voluntary
organisations then we do need to test the communication system to see how effective
it can be in a practical sense.

Lastly, that if we are going to run exercises, or in an incident itself, that we do need to
hold debriefing sessions, not only for our own organisations but also that we need to
involve all the parties that have been involved because they may have vital
information or information that would benefit the overall co-ordination of the incident
or correct mistakes that we have perhaps made during the incident.



                                            42
I think that gives an overview of the topics that were discussed in our group. If there
are any other points that I have perhaps overlooked, if any of our group would like to
comment further.


Graham

Thank you John.      Moving on now to our fourth working party - evacuation and
reception centres.




                                         43
Feedback 4

     \ ANOTHER DISASTER - WHO CARES?              17 NOVEMBER 1993



         FINDINGS OF GROUP D - EVACUATION/RECEPTION CENTRES


Alan Hardwick (Sheffield F&CSl

In an attempt to make the learning more real we had chosen to use a scenario to
explore some of the difficulties of setting up and staffing evacuation and rest centres
(copy attached). This had mixed results, the group at times found it difficult to think
themselves into the roles. However, it did stimulate strong debate across the range
of officers present.

There were representatives of various voluntary agencies, emergency services and
local authorities present. All were concerned about the lack of a co-ordinated plan,
unsure of how they would be contacted in the event of an emergency and even what
roles they would be asked to play. These points soon became apparent as the role
play unfolded, as a great deal of the initial debate focused on how people would be
contacted and what the difference was between an evacuation centre and a rest
centre, and perhaps most critically for the people present where they would be
deployed. We quickly established that one may not be able to influence the choice of
either site at the time of the emergency, but if we were dear about what we required
as volunteers in terms of organisation and fadlities, we could influence the planning
processes through meetings like todays.

As we worked through the scenario a number of important learning points began to
emerge.

1)    Preplanning is essential - good, simple, workable instructions need to be
      available for major inddent personnel - we cannot appear to be in chaos.

2)    Structure - people need to understand their role and where and how they fit in.
      You do not want fights for supremacy between organisations.

3)    Training is vital - people need to know how to complete their tasks only
      accredited volunteers allowed to help - too much unintelligent help can be
      worse than too little.

       NB it is important to retain some flexibility; to use local volunteers who offer
       help at the time, e.g. sleeping accommodation, transport etc.

4)    Joint working between local authorities, sodal services, emergency services
       and voluntary organisations is vital.

5)    voluntary organisations - don't be afraid to use them - they are not gifted
       amateurs but a highly professional group who have probably far more
       experience of dealing with emergendes than we have.

6)    You may need to move people to a second more appropriate rest centre than
       the one originally chosen.



                                         44
7)    Food/Drink            )
      Pets                  )
      Administration ) Basic needs -                 facilities need to be available at
      Communications        )                        the rest centres
      Sign posting          )

8)    Gathering information - preferably once - casualty bureau - be careful how
      information is shared and who with.

9)    Stress administrative procedures, e.g. reception and registration. However,
       be careful not to lose the caring aspects of the work for the processing
       aspects.

10)   Special facilities for disabled._______

11)   Communication links with emergency services and hospitals.

12)   Vehicle access and parking.

13)   Role of churches - dovetail the churches Plan into the Emergency Planning
       Process.




                      Feedback 4 - FACILITATORS1NOTES


Vehicles Involved

94     Private cars with between 1 and 4 occupants

1     52 seater coach, full

1     12 seater mini-bus, people with disabilities

1     12 seater mini-bus, ethnic group

1     Petrol tanker

1     Articulated Lorry, load - sheet metal

1     Articulated lorry, load - liquid oxygen


Small number of cars an fire, no threat of spread to whole of incident.

Petrol tanker intact, not threatened by fire.

Liquid oxygen tanker damaged, small but constant leak of contents, possibly
threatened by fire.

 Coach severely damaged, majority of passengers trapped and require release.




                                              45
Both mini-buses damaged, but few passengers require release.

Load of sheet metal has fallen from articulated lorry and has buried a number of cars.


Fatalities

100   including 20 dismembered.


Casualties

50     slightly injured, able to release themselves and walk away from incident.

50     injured but not trapped, injuries include bums.

50     injured and trapped.

50     severely injured, prolonged extrication required.




                       Feedback 4 - DISASTER SCENARIO


At approximately 1300 hours on Saturday 6 March, a high explosive device was
detonated on the Tinsley viaduct, Sheffield.

The explosion caused major structural damage to the upper deck and resuited in a
100 metre section of the Ml Northbound carriageway falling onto the lower deck.

30 vehicles were buried directly under the debris or fell from the top deck and a
further 70 became involved as they collided with the wreckage and debris.


                        INTRODUCTION TO GROUP WORK


Please concentrate on the issues affecting the establishing and organisation of
reception centre(s).


                              EVACUATION CENTRES


Some areas the Group might wish to concentrate on given the attached disaster
scenario when planning an evacuation centre:-

1)     How much of the attached information would you expect to receive initially at
       the start of the disaster? Where would you expect to receive the information
       from? What steps would you take to establish a rest centre?



                                          46
2)     ,W h®re wou'd you site a rest centre, what sort of pre-requisites in terms of
       facilities would you be looking for in this situation?

3)     How would you identify the roles of the different specialist workers arriving at
       the scene? How would you organise the centre to avoid chaos and further
       distress to the victims?

4)     Can you identify any special needs the survivors may have and how would
       you cope with them?

5)     Do relatives or press present any difficulties in this scenario - if so what steps
       can you take to minimise disruption?

6)     Communication and information sharing - what special difficulties could this
       bring?                               - _■__________




The time in the workshop passed quickly and we drew the discussion to a close.
There seemed to be a general feeling that the workshop had proved very useful but
all members clearly felt there was a lot of work to be undertaken to make existing
plans work. The group felt under-prepared for an emergency if it happened in the
near future. The workshop closed by the facilitators handing out 5 documents that
highlighted the work done in Norfolk and Sheffield to upgrade their emergency
procedures. It was hoped that these would be used to aid planning in the different
South Yorkshire districts.




                                          47
     1 ANOTHER DISASTER - WHO CARES?                17 NOVEMBER 1993           1

                        FEEDBACK FROM THE WORKSHOP

                                  MEDIA RESPONSE


BRYAN CRAIG

The feedback from the media group is going to be an illustration of that well known
saying by Marshall McLuhan “the medium is the message”.

(Ed note: A simulated press conference follows):


So, ladies and gentlemen, ladies and gentlemen of the local and national press -
welcome to this press conference where we have some very important and exciting
news to convey to you. This is our press release and copies will be available to you
later. The important and exciting news that we have to convey to you is that South
Yorkshire Emergency and Personal Services have worked hard at developing their
own media management plan and I'm very glad to say that there is a core group of
professionals who have banded together and worked very hard to produce this plan.
They are public relations professionals and I'm very glad to be able to introduce them
to you in this room today. One of them is Phil Dent, an ex-Sheffield City Council
Public Relations Officer from the Press Unit. We have Sgt. Keith Hoyland from South
Yorkshire Police, thank you gentlemen, and we have Tim Rowland from the Fire
Service. Thank you Tim. Now these three gentlemen plus other colleagues have
produced the plan which contains mainly the following items as you can see.

One of the most important points is that the individual organisations which contribute
and co-operate in the overall emergency plan will have their own media plan,
because each organisation has its own professional expertise, ifs own area of
responsibility which only they can relevantly tafx about, so each organisation will have
to have its own plan. Therefore, one person from that organisation will need to be
appointed to be the spokesperson for that organisation, and because of the wiles, the
deceptions, the manipulations of the media, they will need to be trained in media
interviews. We see this as a key part of the programme. Of particular importance
also is the fact that these individual media plans of each organisation will dovetail into
an overall media strategy which the press gang is developing. Obviously, as our
speakers earlier today have indicated it is very important to positively go out to use
the media because we can use them to get messages across to the public in such an
economic and speedy way which no alternative can better. So we really have to have
a positive media plan which will facilitate the responsible handling of a major disaster.
It's very clear that this media plan, this overall and individual media plan is going to
need to be flexible because you won't treat Radio Sheffield the same way as you
treat the Sun, as you treat the Guardian. We have to be aware of each individual
animal in the press menagerie in order to duck, defend, dive and weave but also be
 constructive. We have to treat each one on their merits, or demerits as the case may
be. But in our presentation of information and requests we, in the plan, are going to
 be positive and outgoing. Be positive about outcomes and about the skills of the
 people who are involved and about the best outcome possible for whatever the
 disaster is. Part of the way in which the media will be managed is to set up a media



                                           48
centre which will be a communication flow both in and out of information and requests
for information to and from the press, to and from the PROs.           That is a very
important facility which enables us to control the media. And a blinding glimpse of
the obvious, but nevertheless worth saying, the media strategy will very much need to
fit into, to dovetail in with, the overall emergency strategy developed by the co­
ordinated organisations. As I say, a blinding glimpse of the obvious.        And any
queries that you might have about the work of the press gang and subsequent
developments can be gained from Gillian Radcliffe, who isn’t here today, but she is
the contact person for the press gang at South Yorkshire Police.

Now, that is all I want to say in introduction, but we have the three people that I've
mentioned as part of the press gang and we have some expert operational officers
here and if the ladies and gentlemen of the press have any questions we will be only
too glad to respond.

Oh, by the way, needless to say, like in every good organisation there's been a leak,
and somebody’s got hold of the story, some of the media people have got hold of the
story and that's what they’ve made of it. You probably can’t read that! ’Shock,
horror, South Yorks mangle media.           Local and national media hacks reeled
incredulously at the news today that South Yorkshire public servants have the
audacity to shackle tire well-intentioned public press to bring all their news the public
is dying to hear about in major tragedies, etc. etc.'

Thank you.




                                          49
                                 MANAGING THE MEDIA

Since the "MEDIUM IS THE MESSAGE" the feedback was given in the form of a
Press Release given at a Press Conference by Bryan Craig.


PRESS RELEASE

South Yorkshire adopts its own Media Strategy for Major Disasters!

Spearheaded by the "Press Gang" - a unique team of Press/Public Relations
Officers from the Police, Fire and Ambulance Services, and the four local Councils -
South Yorkshire has adopted a combined media strategy which will spring into action
in the event of a major disaster.

The main points of the plan are:

- Co-ordination
        The Media Plan will dovetail in with the Combined South Yorkshire Major
        Emergency Plan

        Each constituent organisation will have its own Media Plan which dovetails in
        to the overall Media Plan.

- Skill and Specialisation
        Each organisation will have its own nominated and trained Press Officer.

- A Positive and Constructive approach
        to the media in order to get important information quickly and accurately to the
        public.

- Flexibility
        Recognition of the widely differing attitudes and behaviour of different organs
        of the nation's media, and the need to respond to them accordingly.

- A Media Centre
        to be set up as a focus for contact with the media.

- Monitoring the Media
        to test the success of the strategy.


Press Gang members present are:        Keith Hoyland          South Yorkshire Police
                                      Phil Dent               Freelance PRO
                                      Tim Rowland             Fire and Rescue Service

Enquiries to the Press Gang contact person: Gillian Radcliffe, South Yorkshire
Police on Sheffield 769522




                                               50
                      ANOTHER DISASTER - WHO CARES?

                                17 NOVEMBER 1993


                            SUMMARY OF KEY POINTS


1      Roles of all organisations responding to an emergency need to be clearly
       defined and understood, updated and communicated so that respective
       plans dovetail.

2     Regular consultation should take place between agencies. Practitioners “at
       the sharp end” where resources are likely to be combined need the
       opportunity to interact with colleagues from other organisations.

3     Joint training should be encouraged although staff/personnel availability and
       financial constraints are acknowledged

4     Alerting procedures for organisations other than the emergency services need
       to be clearly established and tested.

5     Reliable call-out availability would enhance the role of voluntary organisations.

6     Broad co-ordination of welfare operations of statutory and voluntary agency
      services is required particularly a structured information system and improved
      communication. This would enhance mutual aid arrangements.

7     Resource implications of disaster response need to be ackncv -'edged in terms
      of the possible knock-on effect on day-to-day services.

8     Senior managers within organisations should be targeted on the need to
      address staff care issues.

9     Constructive and co-ordinated press and media plans are also an important
      element of “managing” the disaster response.

10    A more widespread, inter-agency, inter-District approach to emergency
      planning should be positively addressed.


It is encouraging to see that many of these points are currently being tackled so
positively across the organisations with an emergency planning role in South
Yorkshire. However, we can never afford to be complacent or rest on our laurels.
Disaster can strike anywhere at any time. We must continue to share and
communicate knowledge, appraise our preparedness and fine-tune and test our
plans. The foundations are there; let’s build on them.




                                          51
I




                                      CLOSING REMARKS




    GRAHAM CASSIDY (Chair of the Workshop)

    It falls to me, briefly, the gargantuan task of drawing all that together. The common
    themes that emerged to me, and you may well share them, is the need for
    communication, the need for understanding of the roles of others in the emergency
    services and the voluntary sector, as somebody has already said we have a good
    understanding of our own individual roles, how well do we understand what others
    do, and more importantly what others can do to manage the disaster. Who cares for
    the caring and emergency services personnel? Another common theme to come out
    of each of the workshops. Call-out procedures, the need for training. Again we don't
    do enough of it.

    All themes, I would suggest which are echoed in the publication, the Home Office
    publication ’Dealing with Disaster', copies of which are available at the back, and for
    those who haven’t read it, as Home Office documents go it's one of the best ones
    that I've read. W e’ve summarised I think many of the things that are given more
    weight in there, this afternoon in our individual groups.    I get the impression that
    there’s a lot of good discussion that's come out of those groups. And lastly I think,
    Bryan (Craig) makes a very very valid point, and the way he does it, if I read him right,
    in that presentation, an image is so important.            Knowledge is one thing,
    preparedness, plans, but when .Js happened it’s how you present your individual
    organisation's response that can win or lose the public relations back up and I think
    he showed that in the way that he presented his feedback from his group.

    I'll round off now because the night’s drawing in and some of us have a got quite a
    way to go. Quickly with some thanks. Thanks first of all to the Commandant for
    allowing us to use the Fire and Rescue Services Training School today and the
    facilities he has which are excellent for this type, of event. I've been, on your behalf,
    to see the canteen staff and thanked them for what was an excellent buffet

    Thank you please to all of those who worked behind the scenes to organise today. A
    lot of effort and planning goes into things like this. I’d like to particularly mention
    briefly Linda Dale and Janet Atkinson, Keith Hoyland, Jane Nicklen who sadly cant
    be here today, but I think she certainly would have enjoyed it if she could. To Jo
    Mallows for her efforts in administering today's events, and to Graham for his help
    adjusting things with the overheads.

    Again, a vjuick thank you to our facilitators. First of all for avoiding violence in the
    workshops and presenting the feedback so well.

    On the feedback, just a quick request really before you disperse, there are sheets
    provided on your package for feedback from you on today's event and I would ask
    you to give a little of your time to that and to fill it in honestly because what you say to
    us will give shape to future events that hopefully will flow out of todays. In that
    context I'll wish you now all a safe journey home and look forward to the next seminar
    and workshop which we hope will take place some time in the New Year. Thanks,
    above all to your own efforts ,%iis afternoon to make it the success it was.




                                                52
                  ANOTHER DISASTER ■ WHO CARES?

                           WORKSHOP GROUPS


GROUP A - SCENE

Facilitators:            Stuart Chapman (BYP)
                         Brian Robjohns (SYFS)

K BOSTWICK               (BMBC Social Services)
D CARTLEDGE              (Barnsley District General Hospital)
G PEARSON                (South Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service)
S PONT                   (South Yorkshire Police)
J SAMPSON                (South Yorkshire Police)
MAJOR A SMITH            (Salvation Army)
A TIMMS                  (South Yorkshire Police)



GROUP B - Gold Command

Facilitators:            Kevin Lincoln (SYP)
                         Colin Webster (SYFS)

J ADAMS                  (Northern General Hospital)
M BOOCOCK                (Trent Regional Health Authority)
R COOPER                 (South Yorkshire EPU)
T GLADWIN                (South Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service)
A HOPKINS                (SYMAPS)
D C HUDSON               (Rotherham MBC Social Services)
SLOW E                   (South Yorkshire Ch irches)
G SOORD                  (Sheffield F & CS)
R WARING                 (South Yorkshire Police)



GROUP C - RECEIVING HOSPITAL

Facilitators:            John Mills and Paul Eason (SYMAPS)

3 ASHWORTH               (Doncaster Royal Infirmary)
J BERESFORD              (South Yorkshire Police)
B CRANWELL               (South Yorkshire Churches)
CAPT DIAPER *            (Salvation Army)
L- L' j NKLEY            (WRVS)
' >c LiSQN               (SYMAPS)
   HERRING               (Sheffield Childrens Hospital)
F HE"-. ES               (Rotherham District General Hospital)
J WALKER                 (Rotherham Samaritans)
P WHITHAM                (Barnsley Social Services)
GROUP D - EVACUATION / RELATIVES RECEPTION CENTRE

Facilitators:         Alan Hardwick (Sheffield F & CS)
                      Sheila Bryant (WRVS)

J BAGGOT              (Rotherham Samaritans)
I BURNETT            (BRCS)
J CLARKSON           (St John Ambulance)
P CRAIG-WILD         (South Yorkshire Churches)
J GRIFFITHS          (South Yorkshire Police)
B KING               (British Red Cross)
D LOGAN              (Victim Support)
J MALLOWS            (South Yorkshire EPU)
J ROWENTREE          (Doncaster MBC Social Services)
MRSMAJOR D ROWNEY    (Salvation Army)
A STOKES             (WRVS)



GROUP E - MEDIA RESPONSE

Facilitators:        Bryan Craig
                     Phil Dent

L CAMPELL            (SYMAPS)
G DIMOND             (South Yorkshire EPU)
K HOYLAND            (South Yorkshire Police)
C MANBY              (WRVS)
D MORGAN             (Rotherham MBC Social Services)
R NEWELL             (South Yorkshire Churches)
T ROWLAND            (South Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service)
MRS MAJOR D ROWNEY   (Salvation Army)
                      ANOTHER DISASTER - WHO CARFS?

                              17 November 1993


                               Attendance List


Adams       Mr J          Northern General Hospital NHS Trust
Ashworth    Mr G           Doncaster Royal Infirmary, Medical Social Work
                           Manager
Atkinson    Ms J          Joint Centre Co-ordinator
Baggott     Ms J          Rotherham Samaritans
Boocock     M rM          Trent Regional Health Authority
Bostwick    Mrs K         Barnsley MBC, Social Services Department
Bryant      Mrs S         WRVS, Doncaster
Burnett     Mr I          British Red Cross
Campbell    Ms L          South Yorkshire Met. Ambulance & Paramedic Service
Cartlidge   Mr D          Barnsley District General Hospital
Cassidy     Insp. G       South Yorkshire Police
Chapman     Mr S          South Yorkshire Police
Clarkson    Mr J          St John Ambulance
Clift       Supt. A       British Transport Police
Cooper      Mr R          SYFCDA. Emergency Planning Unit
Craig       Mr B          Sheffield Area Bereavement Forum
Cranwell    Rev. B        South Yorkshire Churches
Dale        Ms L          Medico-Legal Centre, Sheffield
Dent        Mr P          PR Consultant
Diaper      Capt. D       Salvation Army
Dimond      Mr G          SYFCDA Emergency Planning Unit
Domes       Mr C          HM Coroner, South Yorkshire (West District)
Dunkley     Mrs S         WRVS. Doncaster
Eason       Mr P          South Yorkshire Met. Ambulance & Paramedic
                          Service
Ellison     Mr D          South Yorkshire Met. Ambulance & Paramedic
                          Service
Gladwin     Mr T          South Yorkshire Fire & Rescue Service
Griffiths   Mr J          South Yorkshire Police Training Centre
Hardwick    Mr A          Sheffield CC, Family A Community Services
                          Department
Hardy       Mr E          St John's Ambulance
Herring     Mr D          Sheffield Children's Hospital
Heyes       Mr F          Rotherham District General Hospital
Hopkins     Mr A          South Yorkshire Met. Ambulance & Paramedic
                          Service
Hoyland     Sgt K         South Yorkshire Police
King        Mrs B         British Red Cross
Lincoln     Mr K          South Yorkshire Police
Logan       Ms D          Victim Support, Rotherham
Manby       Mrs C         WRVS (Sheffield)
Mallows     Ms J          SYFCDA Emergency Planning Unit
McGuire     Ms S          SYFCDA Emergency Planning Unit
Mills       Mr J          South Yorkshire Met. Ambulance & Paramedic
                          Service
Morgan      Mr DT         Rotherham MBC
Newbum      Mr T          Policy Studies institute
Newell      Rev. R        South Yorkshire Churches
Pearson     Mr J          South Yorkshire Fire & Rescue Service
Pilley      Mr M J        South Yorkshire Fire & Rescue Service
Pont        P.C. S        South Yorkshire Police
Prew        Mr J          Rotherham MBC
Reilly      D.O. M        South Yorkshire Fire & Rescue Service
Robjohns    MrB           South Yorkshire Fire & Rescue Service
Rowentree   Mr J          Doncaster MBC, Social Services Department
Rowland     M rT          South Yorkshire Fire & Rescue Service
Rowney      Major G       Salvation Army
Rowney      Mrs Major D   Salvation Army
Sampson     Supt. J       South Yorkshire Police
Scoggins    MrM           Davies Arnold Cooper, Solicitors
Sheridan    M rK          Barnsley MBC, Social Services Department
Smith       Major R       Salvation Army
Soord       MsG           Sheffield CC, Family & Community Services
                          Department
Stokes      Mrs A         WRVS, Metropolitan Organiser
Timms       DC. A         South Yorkshire Police
Tumey       M rS          SYFCDA. Emergency Planning Unit
Walker      Ms J          Rotherham Samaritans
Waring      Supt. R       South Yorkshire Police
Webster     Mr C          South Yorkshire Fire & Rescue Service
Whittlam    Mrs P         BMBC, Social Services Department
