                R164   The fairly recent Bradford fire disaster, a West

                Yorkshire tragedy, was also prominent in the Standing

                Instructions with its emphasis on crowd safety

                evacuation procedures.




                R165   That some thought was given to crowd problems is

                indicated by the lengths that Chief Superintendent

                DUCKENFIELD went to in order to keep non-ticket

Part IV         holders away and to get the fans into the ground as

Document 185    early as possible.   But even in this respect there is

Pace 929        no indication that it was an 'overcrowding problem

Document 186    which was envisaged.*

Paces 930-931

                R166   Having got the job as officer in command no more

                than sixteen to nineteen days before the event, it is

                reasonable that Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD had

                to take the ground with its various configurations, as

                he found it; and the advice of experienced officers,

                as given.



                R167   Consequently, it is understandable that his

                planning made no specific provision to deal with

                overcrowding.   In any event, he knew he had a

                considerable number of officers held in reserve so as

                to provide flexibility on the day.
supporters through Gate C, and to that extent Mr
                                                         A
JONES'S and Mr HICKS’s complaints are correct.




R159   The following disciplinary offence arises for

consideration:-




Neglect of Duty.




Without good and sufficient cause neglects or omits to

attend to or carry out with due promptitude and

diligence anything which it is his duty as a member of

a police force to attend to or carry out, viz he

failed to control the movement of supporters

subsequent to the opening of Gate C at Hillsborough on

15 April 1989.




Contrary to The Police (Discipline) Regulations. 1985

Schedule 1. Regulation 4(1) paragraph 4(a).




R160   It can be proved that Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD did fail to control the movement of

supporters once he had authorised the opening of Gate

C, in fact he did not even consider deploying any of

his very large work-force to steer the supporters away

from pens 3 and 4.   He could have achieved this quite

8imply by directing a small ntn     __ ________     __

even stewards or a mixture of police and stewards, to
4



Part IV            ground there were no stewards                            or police officers

Statement Paces    checking or                          directing them so the ma          t-y of them

1863-1869         made for the tunnel leading to pens 3 and 4 . either

1870-1878          following those in front, or making for the only sign

1879-1883         clearly visible to them, above the tunnel.                                  Once

1884-1889         inside the ill-fated pens the crowd pressure was such

1890-1897         that lateral movement through the gates in the radial

Part II           fences into other less crowded pens was not possible.

Statement Pages

941-949           R143          In his unsworn testimony to the Lord Justice

                  TAYLOR Inquiry, Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                  stated that he had not considered where the fans would

                  go once Gate C was opened.                          It did not cross his mind

                  to^deploy police officers to block the concourse end

                  of the tunnel leading to pens 3 and 4, and he had no
                   ......................... ...... .                   .   .   .   .         'V-   V. -V —



                  knowledge to                          suggest that this had beendone in 1988.




                  R144         That he had time to consider such action seems

                  clear because from 1447 hours when Superintendent

                  MARSHALL made his first request, until 1452 hours when

                  the Gate C was opened, five minutes elapsed.                                During

                  that period, however, he was concerned with other

                  matters.               It must also be said that the five minute

                  period embraces within it the time taken for the

                  request to be received by the radio operator and

Part V            conveyed to Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.                                His

Statement Pages   decision has then to be conveyed to his radio operator

2457-2469         and on to Superintendent MARSHALL.                                Once the decision
                       policy and his opinion that to postpone a kick-off

                       whenever a proportion of the fans choose to arrive

                       late at the turnstiles, would set a precedent and

                       develop into a practice which would make kick-off

                       times meaningless.     That he had the opportunity to

                       delay the kick-off is clear.     That he should have done

                  jj   so is also clear, but that is not to say that if he

                       had done so it would have solved the problem at the

Part V                 Leppings Lane turnstiles.    Indeed, there is some

Statement Pages        suggestion that the crowd outside the Leppings Lane

2821-2829              turnstiles were misinformed that the kick-off would be

2633-2647              delayed, but that message had no effect.




                       R136   Because Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, for

                       whatever reason, chose not to delay the kick-off, we

                       shall never know what the effect on the crowd would

                       have been.   What we do know is that having lost

                       control of the overcrowding outside Leppings Lane and

                       having rejected the option of delaying the_kick-off,

                       Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD had no option but to

                       open the exit gates.




                       R137   That the possible effects of such an action

                       required steps to have been taken is considered

                       elsewhere in this report, but this particular

                       complaint is unsubstantiated.



6.                     R138   He failed to control the movement of supporters

                       subsequent to the opening of Gate C .
     R133   It seems likely that Chief Superintendent

     DUCKENFIELD did consider the option of delaying the

     kick-off at the time he was consulting Superintendent

     HURRAY about the policy.   He looked out of the window

     of the Police Control Box and saw either the players

     having an early kickabout at: 1438 nours, or the ring

     of photographers around the players tunnel.   From this

     he wrongly concluded that the players had come out to

     start the match, or their arrival on the pitch was

     imminent.   He therefore decided that he had lost the

     option of delaying the kick-off.




     R134   That may have been so in respect of Police

     Constable BUXTON’S request because the timing of his

     request is uncertain.   However, it seems likely that

     he would have made it before the opening of Gate C at

     1452 hours, otherwise it would have lost its point.

     That the request was received in the Control Box, and

     refused, seems to be beyond doubt.




     R135   Although Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD has

     refused to answer any questions on this or any other

     matter, it seems ljjcelv that his failure to delay the

     kick-off stemmed not from the inflexibility of his

     policy which he had discussed with Superintendent

^ MURRAY, but because he had mistimed and misread the j|
I9   situation when he was considering delaying the kick 1
                                                            f
     off.   That he was reluctant so to do is clear from his
                        R128     The only indication that Chief Superintendent

                        DUCKENFIELD ever considered d elaying the start of the

                        match arise first, somewhere between 1417 and 1435.

Part V                  hours, when Superintendent MARSHALL requested the

Statement Pages         closure of Leppings Lane.     Chief Superintendent

2527-2547               DUCKENFIELD then sought the advice of Superintendent

                        MURRAY as to whether the crowd of supporters still

                        outside Leppings Lane turnstiles would get into the

                        ground by kick-off time, and was assured that they

                        would.     He then asked Superintendent MURRAY to remind

                        him of the agreed policy for delaying the kick-off.

             A
                        R129     Second, there is no doubt that at about 1452

Part V                  hours, that Police Constable BUXTON a sked for the

Statement Pages         kick-off to be delayed.     That message was received in

2830-2835               the Control Box and the request was refused.     That

                        time is much closer to the arrival of the teams onto

                        the pitch.




Lord Justice TAYLOR'S   R130     In his unsworn testimony to the Lord Justice

Public Inquiry          Taylor Public Inquiry, Chief Superintendent

24.25 & 26 May 1989     DUCKENFIELD refused to accept_that he was considering

Page No 113-143         delaying the kick-off.     At various stages of his

            1-130       evidence he gave three reasons as to why he

            1-52        thought it was too late to delay the kick-off:-




                        (i)      One of the teams had already come out onto the

                                 pitch.
                                                73

                                 EIGHTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS
                                 Thursday,           25th May,   1989
                             v       (Afternoon S e s s i o n )
                            Cross-examined by MR. H Y T N E R ;

 Q. Mr. Duckinfield, I appear for the bereaved and the
    injured, and as you can appreciate they are anxious to
    Know where responsibility lies for the tragedy.   You have
    now had quite a long time to think about this incidenc.
    You have also had the uncomfortable experience of being
    asked a lot of pertinent and detailed questions by
    ~ir. Collins.  Loosing back on it now, with the benefit of
    hindsight if you will, do you consider that you mace anv
    errors of judgment during the course of this semi-final?
        A. Sir, I am not in the situation of hindsight.  On the
    day in question I can only deal with the facts as they
    appeared before me, and on the day in question, with the
    facts as they appeared before me, I made the righc
    decision.

 Q. So you made no errors.                  -        A. On the day in question.

 Q'. Well that is all we are concerned with, whether you made
     the right or wrong decisions on the day in question.  Iz
     is your considered view that you did not make any wrong
     decisions on that day?  -  A.  Based on the information
     available, no sir.

 Q. Now that you have had again the benefit of seeing what
    other people did, is it your considered view that any.      ...
    errors were made by any o f ,the Police Officers under.your
    command? . -. A. Ic. is my view^.sir, that I am not in the
    position of hindsight.    Wi t h hindsight anyone can have a
    different view.   My view is that on the day in question
    looking at the situation as I did, that I and the other
    Officers made the correct decisions.

• Q.- I -asJc .you - a b o u t it h e o t h e r . O ff i c e r s because._I -j*ant.;.juo_..g.iv.e
  * -you .ah-:op-por.fcunity.of reconsidering thati.answ.er.;jbecause,.-:
    from.-time-to. time when you .were being questioned about
    your o wn actions by Mr. Collins you referred to the
    failure of other Officers to pass on information to you,
    and you referred to other Officers who ought to have taken
    initiatives.      Now again, so that you are under no m i s ­
    apprehension, are you saying that having considered all
    the information that is n ow in your possession, that no
    Police Officers under your command, so far as you are
    aware, made any wrong decisions?        - A. Yes sir.

 Q. So that so far as the policing of the semi-final is
    concerned, as the Officer in change and who was there on
    the day, it is your position today is it that nothing went
    wrong with the policing at all?  - A. As I said sir, on
    the day in question, with the information available, it is
    my view the correct decisions were made.
                               78

                                               D. G. DUCKENFIELD


. Stewards, of course, wear distinctive bibs or tabards.
  A.   Yes , s i r .

. Next, you appreciated, I think, at all times that there
  is a tendency among fans to pick the spot behind the
  goal?   A.   Yes, sir.

 Did it occur to you therefore that there might well
 come a time when the two central pens would be full?
 A.   Yes, sir.

 Did you ask yourself at all how the Sheffield Wednesday
 Club would then prevent people - more people - going
 into the pens?   A.   I would anticipate they would take
 action around the tunnel.

 So you would have anticipated stewards st the tunnel?
 A.   Yes, sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry, whereabouts at the
 tunnel?   A.   At the far end, in the concourse.

      MR. HYTNER:        The entrance, where there are qates?
 A.   Yes.

So if, in fact, there were no stewards at the              front of
of the tunnel and no stewards anywhere on the              terrace
you would lay that responsibility at the door              of the
Sheffield Wednesday Club?   A. It is my view               they should
provide them there.

There should have been somebody at the entrance to the
tunnel even before an emergency arose to ensure that once
the pens were u n comfortably crowded no further spectators
got in through the tunnej.?    A.   Yes, sir..

And by "uncomfortably crowded" does' not mean,■* does it:,.?:
Mr. Duckenfie.lxJ, in 'reality and p r a c t i c e , that ■e v e r y sinole
spot is filled?       A. No, sir.         ‘               ‘             b

Because it is well known on terraces that you can get the
odd pocket whereas everywhere else there is overcrowding
and discomfort.   That is right, is it not?   A. Yes
sir.                                              ’

Can I go back.    I am sorry I came on to the pens because
of your answer about responsibility.    Can I now come
right back to the beginning.    Before you get to the ground
itself, you either have to ccme down_Leppings Lane or
you have to come over the bridge. ^ A .    Yes, sir.

You knew Hillsborough before you vere put in charge of this
Semi-Final?   A.    Yes, sir.

It does not require a Police Officer of any experience;
it would require, really, an averagely intelligent child
to see that the Sheffield Wednesday turnstiles are a bottle-
                                               D. G. DUCKENFIELD


°*              yo u Jsai<i t0 me before you looked at the photographs
      that that road was not blocked.      A. The word "blocked"
      sir, I would take issue with.      If there is a s i t u a t i o n ,’then
      that barrier can be removed and people can move down that
      road.

Q. So long as the barrier is in place, there is a potential
   danger from the bot t l e - n e c k of people crushing into that
   restricted area.    A.        The restricted area is forward of
   that, sir, and the fans could spread into Leppings Lane.

Q. They could not spread forward.    You understand what I mean
   by a potential danger?   A.    I agree that that situation
   is narrow but previous history has not indicated that there
   is any trouble at that point.

Q . Mr. Duckenfield, I have not got to thatyet.   I am looking
    at the potential.   Once you have a bottle-neck and you
    block up the only safety valve, if crowds come down
    Leppings Lane and over the bridge there is a potential for
    danger because there is no escape forward. A.    If fans
    come down Leppings Lane and approach that situation where -
    it is crowded, they can flow along Leppings Lane to Penistone
     Koad .


     There are people coming over the bridge in the opposite
     direction, all trying to get into Sheffield Wednesday's
     turnstile area.   If that happens, there is a potential
     for danger, is there not?    A.   There is a potential  -
     for danger in that small area, sir.

     There is.    I think perhaps you ought to let Mr. Collins
     have his photographs back, otherwise he may be at a
     disadvantage.

          MR.COLLINS:      Thankyou.

          tIRv HY;TNER : It is therefore elssential j' is "it n o t , in
     forward planning ta -ensure that too many fans'do not
     reach that area at the same time?     A. Yes, sir.

     Furthermore, once they have reached the railings and aone
     between the railings and the turnstiles, it is going to be
     too late for Police Officers to indulge in sophisticated
     crowd control, because there will not be any room for the
     Police Officers to manoeuvre.   A.   There is little room
     to manoeuvre in that area, sir.

 Well, you agree with me that it would then be too late
 for Police Officers to control the-crowd?   Once th± area
 is full of people, the Police are helpless, are they not?
 A.   They can control the crowd outside to prevent them
 moving in.

 Correct.   So the essential thing is to prevent too many
 people getting to the conc o u r s e in front of the railings?
 A.   Yes, sir.
                                    D. G. DUCKENFIELD


that you saw for the first time this afternoon, which is
at Section 15 of'Volume 1.   A.   Yes, sir.

There was liaison between the Police Force, the Ambulance
and Fire Services?   A.   Yes, sir.

You know that the Ambulance Services have no statutory
rights tobe involved in plans or ground safety, do you
not?    A. I was not aware of that specifically, sir.
I am sorry, are you talking about the Safety Certificate?
Yes.      A. I accept that, sir.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR;     You say you accept that?
A.     Yes, sir.

     MR. KALLIPETIS:   Did you know that it was at their
insistence that this meeting was called to include them?
A.   No, sir.

Your attention was drawn to the last paragraph of that
memorandum from Inspector Sewell which refers to the
fact that tickets were made available for the Ambulance
Officers who came along in their own time to be present
at the match in the North Stand — I am sorry, in the
South Stand.   A.   Yes, sir, I have seen that paragraph.

Were you aware, Mr. Duckenfield, that that privilege wa-s
withdrawn for Cup Semi-Finals because the Club wished to
maximize revenue- and it is only through the courtesy of
your Officers- that the Ambulance Officers in their own
time gained access to the ground at all?    A.   I didn't
know that, sir.

Did you know that their station then was at the level of
the pitch between the K.op and the North Stand?
A.   I did not know that, sir.

You wo.uld .agr.ee, would you not, that the view from, that .
position is poorer than a view situated half way up one
of the Stands either side of the centre line?      A.    Yes,
sir.




                              /LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can I
