O T H E R D O C U M E N T FORM                   Date and time raised                                  Number

Title _                              fh s ib ^ V       fy o fe c f                                                    N JIgQ ^
(Include source and any document number if relevant)

Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Ypi,
       hodklajLc/?          f-ftc tn u ,                    Xvi#            ^ fik f*   x ^ fr -   tL                  Receiver



Document registered/indexed as indicated                                A

No(s) of actions raised   C$SJL       ^ ^        Q b ^ u U T X -A                                                                      ■ '


Statement reader's instructions              °                                                                  Statement Reader


                                                                                                                                             H
Indexed as indicated                                                                                                  Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                            o/M        SIO




Further action No(s)
                                                                                       FStE                     f -
                                                                                                                fS3|
                                                                                                                      Indexer
                                                                                                                                   :




When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
              DOCKLANDS HISTORY PROJECT   HILLSBOROUGH TESTIMONY


I    Your name?



I    Your address?


     Liverpool

I    Are you employed?

     Yes.   I work at the


     Did you have a ticket for the match?

     I did.

I   Where was this for?

     It was for the B enclosure in the Leppings    Lane end.

I   How did you go down to Sheffield?

     One of   my friends drove down. There was four of us  in the
car, one of   them was a Notts. Forest supporter and we all had
tickets.One   of my friends had a ticket for Leppings   Lane and
another had   a ticket for the North Stand.

I   What time did you leave Liverpool?

     We left Liverpool at quarter past eleven.

I   What route did you take?

     We went down the M62 to Manchester and then got onto the
Snake Pass which took us straight to the ground, more or less.
I don t know the A roads.

I    Why had they decided on that route? Had there been any
discussion before?

     Well, I ve been to Sheffield Wednesday Ground quite a
couple of times and that's the route we've always taken either
when I ve gone by coach or by car.

I   What sort of journey did you have?
     Pretty uneventful. Road works on the M62 as usual, a
pretty uneventful journey. We found a parking space quite
easily, nothing to report really, just having a good time.

I    Did you stop at all on the way?

     We stopped once to go to the toilet and that was it.

I    How long for?

     Two minutes at a pub. We went straight in the pub and came
straight back out again.

I    Apart from the road works, you weren't delayed in any
other way?

     Not really. No, no     we weren't.


I    Where in Sheffield did your journey end?

     I wouldn't have a clue where abouts in Sheffield but all I
knew was it's 'Football'  'Liverpool supporters'. Once you got
near to Sheffield, the ground, there were signs for
Hillsborough and Liverpool End, so we just followed those
directions and eventually found a car parking space.

I    What time did you actually park?

     It must have been about half past one, with the traffic
and what have you coming near to the ground. But other than
that there were no bad delays or anything like that.

I    How far from the ground was it?

     We were quite lucky. We must have been, oh, half a mile
from the ground, five or ten minute walking. So we were lucky
in that respect because we got there that little bit earlier.

I    Did you go straight to the ground?

     We stopped off to get some chips and then we met some
people there. To my knowledge there was no pubs open to go to
so the only places open were chip shops. We had some chips, met
some lads and we were talking for about h a l f - a n - h o u r , three-
quarters of an hour and then made our way to the ground.

I    The other people you were talking to, were they football
supporters?

     Yes.

I    Were they Liverpool blokes.




                              2_
     Well, as I say, one of the people in our car was a Notts.
Forest fan. Previously, I d been to Blackpool on a scheme with
the Union and he was from Nottingham, and he had a ticket for
the Nottingham Forest end but he came with us.

I    What was the atmosphere like at that time?

     It was like a carnival atmosphere, all looking forward to
the game, willing our team to go to Wembley, more or less
prematurely saying that we would be going to Wembley, and
having a really good time.

I    Other supporters around, did you notice them?

 ^   Yes, the supporters around where we were, I knew a couple
of them and we started talking. They were, well everyone, was
in a happy mood. No trouble or anything like that, iust having
a good time.                                                &

I    Did you see any police officers on your way to the ground
or when you were standing talking?

     There was quite a big police presence as soon as you got
off the Snake Pass, diverting traffic, I presume. Also, about
two miles before we hit the ground there was like an army of
police who were stopping coaches, looking for alcohol I presume
  well, I know they would be because I've been on coaches the
previous time. But they didn't stop us, they just let us go
straight through, we just overtook the coaches and carried on
towards our destination.

I    When you were standing talking, before you actually
started to make your way towards the ground, were there any
police officers around then?

     Yes,  but as I say, going to football matches you get
totally oblivious about seeing police. They must have been
around but I they didn't make any kind of trouble or anything
at that point, anyway.

I    Were you able easily to find the entrance to that part of
the ground that you had a ticket for?

     I d been to Leppings  Lane before, I knew the way it works
and I found it quite easily. Most of the Liverpool fans were
going towards the ground by that time anyway.

I   So they'd moved off together?

JI  Well, not so much together.   People drifted slowly towards
the ground.

I   What time did you arrive at the ground?
     At the ground. We were about two minutes away from the
ground at the chip shop. We must have, I'd say, got to the
ground about twenty past two.

I    What was happening when you got there? What was      the
situation like then?

     The situation was three turnstiles with B section on them
for Liverpool supporters. When you go down towards it,
Hillsborough's like in a valley, so you're walking down a hill
and you can see the Liverpool supporters queuing up to get in.
There was no kind of organised line to get into the turnstiles,
it was just like a big mass, there was no organisation as such.
You just had to push, well, you got in and you were being
pushed towards the turnstile. Nearer to when you got to the
turnstile they actually made some kind of queue, nothing much,
only because the gate was so narrow. I mean, I missed the
actual once, trying to get my way back into the crowd to get
back into the turnstile.

I    How do you mean?

     The queue was so great and there was no organised lines,
people were pushing either way. The turnstile is only about one
man s width, with the push I just got pushed to one side and
then you couldn't get back in.

I    How many police officers did you see around the
turnstiles ?

     I saw two and they were standing between three turnstiles.
There was one mounted policeman who said he came from Liverpool
because people were saying to him, "What's going on here?" and
they were calling him a woollyback  or something, nothing
outrageous or anything like that. And he said, "Eh, I'm from
Liverpool." So I felt a bit strange to start off with, whether
he was or not I don't know but he was the only policeman on
horseback at that time.

I    The other police officers, man or woman?

     Two men, two male. There were three entrances and two bits
of the wall and they were just there. Because I actually got
pushed on to one of the policemen who just like, roughly pushed
me back towards the crowd.

I    Did he speak to you?

     He just said get back into the queue.

I    Did you notice if either   of them carried radios?

     No I didn't notice if they carried radios.
• #



              W ere you still with your friends at this point?

           One of my fr iends had a ticket for the North Stand so he
      just walked in, well I presume he walked in because we were
      early as such. We l e ft him a s we were going down towards our
      turnstiles. My
                   J f -----------------------
                           r i e n d | s - turnstiles were
                                                       w J. w Uto
                                                                V Uthe
                                                                    U C Oside
                                                                          l U C Oso
                                                                                  U l he
                                                                                      it

      walked into his turnstile there was no queue at that time, and
      we just started to queue up then in a big mass,

      I    Did you become separated from them at any time while at
      that time outside or were you more or less, always together.

              Me and my friend            were more or less together at that
      time.

      I       What were your feelings at that time.

       .   My feelings were, as I've always said,  that it's
      ridiculous that there s only three turnstiles and say, ten or
      eleven thousand supporters supposed to get into this end. It
      was the usual, you mumble and complain about getting into the
      ground, I think it's more the excitement of getting into the
      ground to have a little mumble and a complain before you
      actually get in. It was just like a normal away match at that
      time, really, maybe because I got there a bit early. The only
      thing I didn t understand was just so few turnstiles to actuall
      get into the ground and the police presence, there was hardly
      any. That was just, like, at the back of my mind, you didn't
      really think about that.

      I    Was it clear from the outset where the entrance to that
      part of the ground you had a ticket for was?

              Again,   I wouldn't know because I knew where I was going.

      I       What was the atmosphere like then?

           Jovial, happy, everyone getting, cracking jokes, some of
      them trying to eat their pies and that and getting squashed and
      that. Just normal football banter.

      I       What were the police doing at that time?

           They were just standing there. The policeman on the horse
      was occasionally moving his horse in and out the crowd but
      there wasn't any sort of organised queue until you got about
      six yards away from the turnstile, because then you had to.

      I       How many people were there?

              When I got there,    one-and-a- half to two thousand maybe.

      I       How long were you there before you entered the ground?



                                       5  "
      With all the pushing and shoving and everything,        about
half-an-rhour to forty minutes.

I     Would that be normal? Would expect that?

      Yes,   I would expect that.

I     How did you get in?

      I got in through the turnstiles.

I     Which one?

      The one on the right;    the furthest right one I got in to.

I     This would be then about quarter-to-three?

      About quarter-to-three,   yes.

I     Were all the turnstiles open at that time.

      Yes,   to my knowledge they were,   yes.

I     Were you searched?

      No.

I     Was your ticket taken?

     It was ripped, but I expected that.         I think that's what
you mean?

I     Yes. Were there any police inside the ground when you got
in?

     Yes, there was about two on each turnstile when we
actually got in plus a couple of steward hanging around,         you
know. That was about it.

I     Did any of them speak to you?

      No.

I     Did you hear them speak to anyone else?

      No.

I     How were you directed to the section you were in?

     We weren't. There was no signpost. As you walked in
- all I can say is - there's like a big pen and there's a
tunnel straight opposite you, that's the tunnel you'll head for
because you can't really see the other... As soon as you walk
into the ground you can actually see the terracing and a bit of
the green of the grass so, automatically, you just head for the
centre one. There was nobody telling directions to go to left
or right, you just went where you thought.

I    What was happening inside the ground when you got there?

     Jovial, singing, chanting, we were just generally having a
good time. People were saying how it was ridiculous how they
could get the big end and we get the small end because we had
far more supporters plus far more average gate than Notts.
Forest do. We were all singing away. The atmosphere was great.
At that time, any way.

I    Did you go directly to the section.

     I stopped off to go to the toilet. My friend waited for me
outside the toilet and then we both strolled in.

I    Where exactly were you standing?

     We were standing in just left of the goal. When we got to
the ground it was crowded, it was just like a normal home game
really, it wasn't that bad so you could push and move where you
wanted, to get a good spec. We moved nearer to the front and
then we decided to move a little bit to the side because if
they scored there'd be a big crush. So we moved to the left
side of the goal post.

I    What time would you estimate that you reached the place
that you ended up in at the beginning of the match?

     Ten-to,   five-to,   just before the teams came out.

I    You were still with your friend at that time?

     Yes.

I    How did you feel at that time - when you had taken up your
position?

     Excitement and looking forward to the game. Touch wood, it
would be a good game of football. Just generally bantering,
talking to people around, offering sweets, cigarettes, the
usual. But I started getting a little bit concerned just before
the teams started to come out. It was gettting much fuller and
there was, like, a surge when a few lads come in, it surged to
one side or forward or what-have-you. It was getting a bit of
that. But if you stand up, you expect that so I wasn't that
bothered at that time.

I    Were you aware of any police officers in the ground
itself?
     The only police I saw were patrolling the perimeter of the
pitch. ,

I    When the teams came out then, you're saying that the area
around you was full but not to the extent that..?

     When the actual teams came out there was a massive surge
and people moving around but, as I say, I expected that from a
football game, everyone wants to have a look at the team and
that. I didn't think anything 'unordinary' about that.

I    At the kick-off what was   happening?

     The kick-off was a totally different kettle of fish. First
of all kick-off came and suddenly we got more and more crushed
and my friend,      , he was by a barrier and he was trying to
move himself oirt using his hands against the barrier. I stood
back, I had a fellow standing in front of me, I was standing
back a little bit. Just after the kick-off, that's when it all
spilled over. At first, I saw a couple of lads down the front
climbing over. At first, people didn't know what was going on,
they were confused, people were saying "Get off, I can't see."
And then, suddenly, it dawned on me that it was something much
more serious than that. And, at the same time, we were getting
pushed sideways to railings about six foot, just a little bit
taller than me, plus with spikes on. And I was getting more and
more close to these railings, which means that I was like,
trapped, I couldn't move. Luckily, when that surge came, I got
pushed onto the side, if I went forward, I don't think I would
be here today.

I    In the beginning, what did you think was happening?

     I knew for a fact that it wasn't any kind   of football
trouble because normally at football, if there's going to be
trouble, the chants start before actual fists fly I suppose.
So, I knew it wasn't that, I just thought these people were
getting out because some must have fainted or it was getting
hot. I knew for a fact that it wasn't a pitch invasion or a
hooligan element or anything like that. I just knew... because
you get that at the Kop, people get carried out.

I    How soon before you realised that something was really
wrong?

     As soon as I saw two or three lads go over at the same
time and literally get onto the pitch on the sidline, I knew
something was wrong because the police started getting hold of
them, dragging them, I presume to drag them out of the ground
or to throw them back in, I just don't know. But the police
quickly came over to these three or four lads who got out first
but that was before the whole thing really took off.

I   What did you feel at that time?


                           €
     At that time, I was more concerned with watching the
match, really. I saw a few lads go over and it was getting more
and more crushed and I was constantly thinking, 'I'm getting
nearer and nearer this railing, I'm going to have to somehow
wait until the crowd dies down a n d . . . ' because that's what you
expect, to wait for the crowd to, like, settle and then move
your way around. But it wasn't to be, I was just getting more
and more squashed.

I       What were the people around you doing?

   j I didn't take much notice of what people were doing, I was
trying to watch the match. But I couldn t see anything anyway
because these lads were climbing over and as soon as the last
few dropped, then I realised that something was terrible, was
totally wrong.

I       What happened next?

     I got more and more crushed up against the barrier. And
then I realised... I could hear screams, there was no chanting
like you're used to, it was more screams, people swearing and
saying, 'How are we going to get out of here?^ I was crushed up
against the barrier...

I       A barrier in front of you?

    JNo, no to the side, the railings, I should say, the
railings. I was trapped up against one of those but still... I
was squashed but I had full sense of what I was doing. There
was a couple of lads who, somehow got over these railings
first, there was no way I could have got   out without those lads
help. God knows how they got over... or they might have got
over the other side of the railings.   Because
there was these two railings and then there was like a
passageway where there was a gate, and then there were other
railings again, all in the same terraces. These lads got into
the middle bit and were trying to help people up by closing
their hands and sticking  them through the railings so you
could get a leg up over them, because they were slippery. At
that time there was pandemonium, people screamingj clambering
over to try to get out. There was no way   you could get out at
the front and there was no way you could get out at the back,
the side was really the only alternative. The more people were
coming, the more crushed it was getting. I saw an old man, oh.,
he must have been about seventy, flat cap, all I can remember
was the look in his eyes, it was horrible, all welling up , he
just looked dazed, he was glazed, the whole of his body was
sagging and I honestly think that he just wanted to stay there
and just get and just like get carried away, he wasn't bothered
with the pandemonium. We managed to grab hold of him and
literally throw him, about six or seven of us, throw him out
into the gangway. Then there were lads, eleven, twelve, you
were trying to grab hold of those and then you realised that
somehow you had to get yourself out. My friend,      I went
first and got over and fell. I got pushed up., the lad said,
 Put your foot..' into his hands to give me a lift up. He
lifted up, I got to the top and I looked over towards were the
people were by the stand and all you could see was like a
massive big crush. You just saw heads, bodies, bodies moving
and swaying and not going anywhere just staying. And then the
fella said, 'Just jump. Fall. I'll catch you.' which he did,
those lads were real martyrs, they saved my life. You could see
they were still trying. Again, I was trying to help others but
there was so many people lined up there, you just couldn't. You
wish you could do more but you just couldn't. And then there
was just one policeman, by the gate, who was just casually...
I 11 never forget, he was just like casually opening it, like
 Oh another one.' go past. And then we got onto the pitch and
that s w h e n . ..

     Out of the gate? Which gate was this?

  j This was the gate inbetween two railings. The side
railings. If you got over there's a passageway where there's a
gate and then there's other railings. So, to get to any kind of
gate, you had to climb over these railings.

I.   And the gate   led onto the pitch?

     The gate led onto the pitch. There was one police officer
at that time, there. I dashed on the pitch not thinking
anything... I just thought it was a mad crush, I couldn't
believe that anyone would have died. I ran on the pitch and all
you could see was people lying there. At first, you think,      'Oh,
what are they doing? Maybe   t h e y ’re trying to... maybe I'm
wrong, maybe this isn't bad. And then I realised, I saw some
fella s leg and he must have broken his tib. and fib., just
hanging loosely. And then, you saw people giving mouth to mouth
resuscitations tp people but also you just saw people lying
there, blue in the face. I'll never forget... a kid, he seemed
to me to be about seven or eight just lying there and he had a
pullover accross his head and then I realised the full extent
of the carnage. And there was just mayhem going on. The
police.. I didn't see any police... the police were like
running around at the half-way line, they were more concerned
about Liverpool fans g o ing to have a go at the Notts. Forest
fans. Me and my friend,         just looked around in total
disbelief, there was just carnage going on. I also saw a person
of the press taking pictures of this body, one of those things
that I find totally obscene and how could anyone do., take
pictures of people who are dead, bodies, especially soon after.
It was just disgusting. I., we were all shaken up, we ran back
towards the terracing again where we saw a fella trying to be
arrested by a policeman for ripping down the advertising
hoardings to make into stretchers. We stood there by the
terracing just looking over the terracing. The North Stand,
where my friend was, we were looking there, naturally we were


                           lO
concerned, maybe something could have happened there. And also
anguish, we knew there were dead bodies, we didn't know the
count or anything like that, we just saw, oh, about seven or
eight strewn about the ground by the six yard box and a bit
further out. And then St. John's Ambulance, who were really
totally inexperienced in situations like that, were doing their
best. We were talking to people, seeing if they were alright,
if they could wal k or anything... and then the more it got on,
the more people getting onto the pitch, the more we could
find... Maybe if we stand on the terraces, on the side. So
we... this was about twenty, twenty-five minutes, I can
remember the time it was fifteen twenty-seven when that
happened because I can remember looking up at the electronic
scoreboard and seeing the time. There was a gate on the side
where a policeman was where we got through. On the side there
was no pushing and shoving it was totally and utterly empty,
there was so much room, I mean you could dance. We climbed over
that and we just stood and watched it and you jsut felt so
helpless, you wanted to do more but you know you couldn't, it
was awful.... Also, you were worried about your friends who had
gone. We knew we had to stay put, because we knew my friend
would be worried stiff about us, who came down with us. He was
in the North Stand. The police went to the half-way line, they
just stood on the half-way line probably assessing the
situation. People were screaming for them to come and help but
they just stood there. Then sudenly, you swaw reinforcements
coming down the side. All they did was stop fans from the North
Stand, it looked like, anyway, not let them get on the pitch.
They were more concerned with trying to keep order when there
were people dying. These newspaper reports that I've seen the
last few days, just make me want to be sick. How can anyone say
stuff like that? I was on that pitch for a good twenty-five
minutes and I didn't see anything like that. All there was, was
anguish, crying, hysteria really. I don't think anyone could
have thought of stealing anything. A couple of policemen, they
were great, the firemen were superb. I c a n ’t remember what time
the firemen came in but by that time, it hadn't sunk in
anything. It was just like watching the telly. I mean, you see
 these disasters on telly and you just can't comprehend that it
would ever happen to you and you can just see it in front of
you. I can see it now, it was awful like ants,and the police
were just standing there. I was disgusted in them. I found out
 that later that their training involves basic first aid - why
didn't they do it? They were more concerned to stop crowd
 trouble. How could there be any crowd trouble when there are
 people lying there injured, dying. The couldn't be any tiype of
 crowd trouble at all.

I    You say a couple of the police were quite helpful?

      Only the ones who were on the scene straight away. I think
may'De if they had orders they could have been brought back. I
saw a couple give mouth to mouth rescusitation - very few. But
there must have been over two or three hundred police there.



                         l\
I    The policeman who was trying to arrest the bloke who was
trying to take down hoardings, what actually happened in that
incident?

      Well, we had just got out and we hadn't seen any kind of
bodies at that stage. All we saw was people being dragged out,
a lot of screaming, a lot of shouting, that's all I can think
about, the shouting and everything going on at once, it was too
much for my brain to really cope with. I saw this lad run over
to the advertising boards and just literally got his hands and
ripped it from there. A policeman ran over, grabbed hold of him
and then the fella shrugged away and said something, there was
so much shouting going on and everything and next thing, the
policeman ran off in a towards the front of the goal, the
conversation must have gone on for about for about fifteen to
twenty seconds. The policeman grabbed hold of the fella and the
fella came as to say, he like pulled his shoulders back to ,
like, say 'What are you doing?   when he grabbed hold of him and
then the conversation stopped. The policeman, I think, did have
his hand on him as they were speaking and the policeman dashed
off, like semi-jogged towards behind the goal. The fella
proceeded to, and a few other people came along and helped him
with the hoardings to make as stretchers. It was such
pandemonium, we got back onto the terracing and we knew we had
to stay put. All we wanted to do was get out of the ground and
wish it had never happened, like this nightmare would end. But
we knew we had to wait for my f r i e n d ^  who was up in the
stand. We were just sitting there watcning it. I mean, I
couldn't watch any more, I just sat down on the terraces. Where
we were when we came off the pitch, there was so much room, we
could sit down and you could look at the sky. you could see the
sky and you had loads of room around you. It was just like
sitting in the pub or like me and you are now, there was that
much room in this bit. We'd sit there, occasionally you'd look
up and then, all of a sudden, we saw... somehow, my friend
       had got down from the stands and was looking on the pitch
tor us and then looking on the terraces. We managed to catch
his attention and he then climbed over the actual fence to get
with us. It was quite emotional actually, he broke down because
he thought he'd seen me brought out on a stretcher, someone
with the same jeans and trainees as I had on. All we then
 decided to do was walk out the ground. This was... I know it
was past half-time, this must have been about four o'clock, we
 left the ground. I know there was no police on the gates or
 anything, the gates that were supposedly opened were open and
 we walked through there. There was streams of Liverpool
 supporters walking out, crying, just looking down, shoulders
 slumped. The police were just looking. A lot of Liverpool fans
 vented their anger out at the police. When we got outside the
 ground there was about two or three policemen and one lad said,
  What are you doing out here? You should be back in there
 saving lives, or words to that effect. These policemen were
 just looked at him and said, 'Listen, we'll decide our job,
 we're staying here.' As we were walking back to the car, I must
say this, a fella was shouting at a policeman saying, 'How
would you like it if your eight year old kid was in there now
and you're standing out here? What are you doing? You're not
doing any purpose. Just look at us, we're all distraught.' The
policeman then threatened to arrest him if he didn't shut up. I
saw that with my own eyes because I had to drag the person away
because I really thought he'd be arrested. This policeman, he
was just like arrogant, I can describe him, the policeman, a
black moustache and cold brown eyes, just looking at you. Maybe
he was shook up, maybe he didn't know what to do, but there was
no need to put someone under arrest. The fella was saying, 'Go
on hten, arrest me if it solves anything.'

I.   The man himself was upset?

     He was distraught, the fella. I mean, the policemen must
see this every day so why pick on someone who's distraught?
Maybe they should just say, 'Get on your way.' there was no
need to threaten to.arrest him, he was upset. His friends were
there and I came over and just tried to... you know, 'Just walk
away. They're not worth it. I said that, I said, 'They're not
worth it. We can get them some other way but not now. Come on.'
We got back to the car, we were absolutely distraught. There
were people leaning on the car. Normally, you'd say, 'Hey, what
you doing?' But they were upset and crying. I was upset and
then you were worried about people back home worrying about you
and the people who'd lsot people and your friends. It was
horrible. We got the car and we turned round and all the way
along all you could see were people walking with their heads
slumped to the pavement. People just sitting there on grass
verges,  on people's lawns, the front lawns, you know, there's
a pavement and then there's a lawn, just sitting there, just
couldn't believe it. Everyone was... it was just numb. We got
back, we realised we had to phone, I had to phone my mum. The
phone boxes were either ripped out or the queues were
absolutely unbelievable for telephone boxes. So we decided to
get over the Pennines and get to some villages just before
Manchester to use a pub or anything like that. We went into one
pub, I think it's the Gamebird, that was just off the Snake
Pass. We went into this pub to use the  phone, we found out
that the pub had closed at five o'clock because it was a
children's pub or something and they weren't serving and they
couldn't allow us to use the phone. So we walked out, pretty
annoyed at that. We travelled on looking at pubs, almost all
the pubs doors were shut, this was about five to five, all the
pubs doors were shut, may have been waiting to open again, no
all day drinking, I don't know. Eventually, we found a pub, we
got in, we phoned back home but then it was hitting us hard
then, we were really upset and to make matters worse we broke
down at Manchester. But, I must say, that all the people we saw
in Manchester and in this village, I couldn't even remember
the village, they were really good and they were really
sympathetic. And people from Sheffield as well, were calling
out, 'Are you O.K.? Do you want to come in for a cup of tea?'
By   that time we were just distraught, all we wanted to do was
get back home and hopefully wake up from the nightmare. But on
the way back we broke down, what must h a v e been 'S o d ’s Law '
really, in Manchester. I got back home in             at twenty-
past- eleven to find out - all I heard was that there was
seventy-four dead - to find out then that there was ninety-
four, it was just too much for me. I just cried and cried.
Nothing in this world could comprehend what I saw. Working in
                          just doesn t bear thinking about what T
saw that die.
             wha t aoesn-t neip is seeing people not helping such as
Lae p o n c e . Just standing there. All they were concerned about
was,     As long as there's no trouble and we do our job, keeping
the fans apart, who cares?' That was the impresssion I got of
the police there. And then when I found out, yesterday about
the gutter press, the tabloids, saying stuff like urinating on
policemen and pickpocketing and all that sort of stuff. What I
saw was tota; and utter nonsense. The police were hardly there,
in force anyway to do anything like that anyway. Literally,
they just stood and watched.

I    Did you see antone drunk, before, during or after the
match or did you see anyone who appeared to be drunk?

     It's hard to define being drunk at a football match
because people are singing and joking. They might have been for
s few drinks, I don t know. I didn't see anyone totally and
utterly legless, making a fool out of themselves. Anyone could
have had a drink, I didn't really notice. The lads where we
were had a couple of cans. We didn't take any drink with us,
which I must admit is unusual, because we like a can in the
car, we were just sharing out. They had about four cans and we
were just taking sips out ot there cans. But to say about
anyone being legless and not Knowing what they were doing, no.
People were in very jovial spirits and happy.

I  ^ Apart from thos two incidents that you mentioned, when the
police were threatening arrest, Did you actually see anybody
being arrested by the police at any time during the day.

     1 can't say I saw anyone get arrested. The police, with
fans, people having goes at fans, I didn't see anyone. They
were in close proximity to   each other, shouting at each
other, but to actually see someone being dragged away, no, only
those two isolated incidents.

I   Did you, at any time after arriving at Sheffield, witness
any violence; within groups of Liverpool supporters?

     No.

I   Between groups of rival supporters?

     No.
I    Against any individuals of any sort?

     No ’

I    Against police officers?

     No.

     Against any members of the press or media?

     Is this before the game?

I    At any time during the day.

     I saw the pressman taking a picture of the dead body and I
saw a Liverpool fan run over and hit him. And then the police
intervened. The police didn't arrest him, they just intervened
and got the pressman out. That was the only isolated incident I
saw of any kind of violence. But I'm sorry, if I was there I
would I would have done the same thing.

I    Is there anything you wish to add to what you've said?

     Not really. What I saw at that game is with me for the
rest of my life. I just wish that I could have done, maybe a
bit more to help people. I just feel so sorry for the people
who died. After all this, I just thank God I'm still here.




End of Interview
