                                                                                        M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and tim e raised   !2o3>    volo\\°v©              Number



T itle   L e-frg g -               CC~                 'To   c A fr -   'Tfr-1            fo ffe -g .
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/N o   ____
                                                                                                                     Receiver




                                                                                                                         Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                 S tatem ent Reader
Statement reader's instructions

                                                                                                                   /     Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                           4%'
Examined      furth er action to be taken                                                                         O /M         sio

                                                                                      ! -f®
                                                                                         eOJ-X
                                                                                                                         Indexer
 Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Number Form
     CC/B MT




Captain E N Taylor
Police Complaints Authority
10 Great George Street
LONDON
SW1P 3AE

                                                           3 September 1990




Dear Captain Taylor

HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

Further to my letter of 30 August 1990 which concerns certain objections
made by HM Coroner, I have now received a letter from the Coroner and I
enclose a copy for yourinformation. He makes the following points

1.   The Inquests have been commenced and     stand adjourned and are   sub-
     judice until they are concluded.

2.   No date is available, as yet, for the reconvened Inquests and although
     it is hoped that they will recommence in the near future, the
     intervention of Christmas and winter will present problems for the
     Coroner.  This seems to indicate the Coroner anticipates the Inquests
     will run into 1991.

3.   Whilst it is acknowledged that the Inquests are not adversarial in the
     sense that there are no parties to them, the Coroner feels that
     certain persons have various rights under the Coroner’s Rules.     The
     Coroner believes that individual police officers and probably the
     South Yorkshire Police as an entity, fall within the terms of those
     rules. This seems to include the South Yorkshire Police Authority.

4.The Coroner objects, therefore, to the disclosure of the    Investigating
     Officer’s reports and supporting evidence, to the Chief Constable of
      South Yorkshire Police, and presumably to the South Yorkshire Police
     Authority.    He bases his objection on the principle that those
      documents would form the basis of the evidence for the Coroners
      Inquests and to release them to "one party" (?) would give that party
     a potential advantage; does not appear to be fair; and appears to be
     against the rules of Natural Justice.

5.   The Coroner is in possession of all statements and documentary
     evidence, including video-tapes, which were gathered during the
     Hillsborough  investigation.     He  acknowledges that   there are
     restrictions on his powers     to release police   statements, and
     presumably the associated documents, which have not been given in
     evidence, but he feels he would have to agree to the West Midlands
     Police Hillsborough Investigation Team releasing the documents to
     interested parties if they were already in the possession of South
     Yorkshire Police. He seems to be saying that he accepts that the
     matter is not one for him to decide.

6.   The Coroner makes the point that the Inquest jury verdict may be such
     that both criminal matters and disciplinary issues would have to be
     examined afresh by the DPP and the PCA. For that reason he feels that
     the South Yorkshire Police, and presumably the South Yorkshire Police
     Authority, to examine any disciplinary questions now, would be
     premature and perhaps unfair to the individual officers concerned

The Coroner is quite correct in his assertion that any decisions in respect
of the Hillsborugh disaster are made in a highly charged and tense
atmosphere, but I am of the view that is not a valid reason to withhold my
reports, statements and documentary evidence from South Yorkshire Police or
from the South Yorkshire Police Authority.      TheCoroner makes passing
reference to the outstanding civil actions but the point he is making is
not clear and from my telephone conversation with him, it remains unclear.
He seems to confuse the passing of the reports       and evidence to South
Yorkshire Police, with the decision as to disciplinary action.

The current position is that the South Yorkshire Police Authority is in
possession of my report which concerns the complaints made against Mr
Walter JACKSON, the Assistant Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police,
and the statements, documents and videos to which I have made specific
reference in my report.  I   have informed theClerk to the Police Authority
as to the objection raised   by the Coroner.

In so far as the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police is concerned, he
is aware that I am withholding from him all reports, statements, documents
and video recordings untilI have consulted Captain          Noel Taylor, my
supervising member of the Police Complaints Authority.    That consultation
cannot take place before week commencing 10 September 1990.

Whilst I am aware of the difficulties which are being faced, and will
continue to be faced, by the South Yorkshire Police, its Police Authority,
and by HMCoroner, because      of the intense Merseyside    interest in the
criminal matters, disciplinary considerations and civil actions, I can find
no legal reasons for my reports and supporting evidence to be withheld any
longer from South Yorkshire Police.

The complainants have recorded their complaints and have co-operated fully
in the investigation of those complaints. Although there are civil actions
running in parallel to those complaints there has been no reason thus far
for the normal procedures not to be followed, including   submission to DPP
and PCA.    Both DPP and PCA are aware of the existence of the civil
proceedings, including the adjourned inquests, and, of course, so are the
South Yorkshire Police Authority and the Chief Constable.

It seems to me that the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has to
decide whether any disciplinary action that seems appropriate should be
delayed until proceedings in the civil courts, including the Coroner’s
Inquests, have been concluded.     It is my advice that any disciplinary
action should be so delayed, certainly in respect of the Coroner’s
Inquests, but it is perhaps pertinent that in respect of the civil actions,
or at least some of them, South Yorkshire Police have made some admissions
of liability for compensation.   In making his decision as to whether, or
not, to defer disciplinary action, the Chief Constable, and his Police
Authority, will wish to have regard to the effect of deferment on the
maintenance of the force discipline, the morale   of the force, and the
welfare and other interests of the officers concerned.  One officer has
been suspended from duty for well over one year.

I am of the view that all reports, statements, documents, and video
recordings, should now be passed to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
Police and I would advise the Chief Constable, and his Police Authority to
give very careful consideration as to the deferment of any decisions about
disciplinary action until after the completion of the Coroner’s Inquests.
Although points 4, 5 and 6 made by the Coroner and set out above in my
letter, do not seem to support the case for delay, the objections as a
whole do call for very careful consideration.

I shall telephone Captain Noel Taylor, my supervising member, at about 9 am
on Monday 10 September 1990 to discuss the matter further.

Vnnrg   s inpprelv




Ctiiet Constaoie
Investigating Officer
                             OFFICE O F H.M. CO RONER FOR
                                                               MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                               WATERY STREET,
                                            (W est District)   SHEFFIELD
                                                               S3 7ET
STEFAN L. POPPER, LLB., B.MED. Sci., B.M., B.S., M. R.C G P
                                              CORONER


                       Telephone: SHEFFIELD   (07421 73872)          ............................. 19 . . . .
                                                                      31st Aug. 1990


  Your lef: CC/BMT


  Mr. L. Sharp Q.P.M. LL.B., F.B.l.M.
  Chief Constable,
  Cumbria Constabulary,
  Police Headquarters,          •
  Carle ton Hall,                 ^
  Penrith,               :      t
  Cumbria,                     f :
  CA10 2AU.              '     L.


   Dear Mr. Sharp

                                       Hillsborough Inquiry

   Thank you for your letter of 30th August following my telephone
   conversation with you earlier that date.

   1 was aware of the matters mentioned in your second paragraph except
   for the PCA statement which you refer to.

   I am aware of the complex and intertwined relationships between the
   various investigations that have been carried our on behalf of Lord
   Justice Taylor, myself, the PCA and the DPP. 1 am also conscious of
   the need to minimise delay in sorting out the disciplinary aspects for
   the reasons which you mention.

   Nevertheless as you know 1 asked you to reconsider releasing the DPP
   file and statements to the South Yorkshire Police until after the
   completion of the Inquests.

    The Inquests having begun proceeedings are sub judice until the
    matter is completed. Inquests are not adversarial and in that sense
    there are no parties to them. Nevertheless certain persons have
    various rights under the coroners rales and there can be little doubt
    that individual officers and probably the SIP force would fall within
    the terms of of the rules.

    I think that to disclose to one party information and statements some
    of which at least would form the basis of the the evidence which will
    be used at the Inquests
       i.   gives that party a potential advantage
       ii. does not appear to be fair and
       iii. is or gives the appearance of being against the rules of
            Natural Justice
Generally speaking I have been against early disclosure though it may
be necessary for the smooth running of these very complex inquests to
modify my practice a little. However in principle I feel that if
disclosure is made to one party then one would have to be prepared to
let others have the opportunity of studying the documentation too.
There are restrictions on the power of the coroner to release police
statements which have not been given in evidence but it would be
difficult I think for me to resist a request to confirm that I had no
objection to WMP releasing copy statements if I knew that they were
already in the possesion of SYP.

The scope and form and content of the evidence and the verdict of the
jury cannot be predicted. It follows that after the completion of the
Inquests it may be that a further look might have to be taken by other
parties at various aspects in the light of what might have been said
or done at the Inquests. This could include questions of discipline. I
would have thought it better and more cost and time effective to say
nothing of reduction in trauma to the officers involved if the
question of whether there have been any breaches of discipline were
dealt with at the end of the Inquests when the matter hopefully could
be dealt with once and for all rather than have the uncertainty that
the matters might have to be reopened.

The following considerations are strictly nothing to do with me as
coroner particularly as there is a division between your
responsibilities so that you are dealing with the DPP and PGA
side of thing . You might however like to weigh the following:

   1.   The position with regard to the Hillsborough disaster
        is already highly charged and I am anxious that nothing should
        be done which could upset or inflame rightly or wrongly a tense
        situation. I fear that if it became known that there had been
        disclosure to one party before the Inquests are completed it
        would generate a great deal of upset.

   2.   I am not fully conversant with the rules and provisions of the
        PGA but I seem to understand that public interest immunity
        might have to be considered. This raises a rather interesting
        thought as to the interrelationship of this with the duties of
        Discovery in civil proceedings. I do not know the answer to
        this but no doubt your legal advisors would be able to offer
        guidance.

In the final analysis the decision as to what should be done will have
to be yours but I hope that the points made above will be helpful in
your discussions and decision taking.

Please let me know what your decision is in due course.

I should perhaps add that I am active considering the timing for the
start of the resumed inquests but am not yet able to give you a date.
I hope however that it will be possible to commence in the relative
near future though the intervention of Christmas and winter does
present some problems.
