 Other Document Form                       Date and time raised
                                                                                                     Number



 Title_______              ATQ /               ~&A & /y fr7 c ± js   '? ess£s6'f?ree>K )   T&    s4^C*£*4a*d>> /          ssO<zp
 (Include source and any document number U relevant)


 Receivers instructions urgent action Y e s /lk f_ _ _ _ _
                                                                                                              I     Receiver            1



 Document registered/jpdexstTaTindicated

 No(s) of actions raised

 Statement readers instructions                                                                                    Statement
                                                                                                                   Reader


 Indexed as indicated                                                                                               Indexer

 No(s) of actions raised

^l^m in e d - further action to be taken                                                                          D/M             SIO




 Further action no(s)                                                                                                   Indexer


 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form

 MIR 15
                        EVIDENCE TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR *S COMMITTEE

                         OF INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




    The Police Federation represents over 120,000 police officers up to and
    including the rank of Chief Inspector. It is our members who have borne the
    brunt of the problems of crowd control, public safety and hooliganism which have
    become so serious since the mid 1960's.

    We are not   as an organisation able to offer the Inquiry any evidence concerning
    the events   at Hillsborough. We are satisfied that the Inquiry has conducted an
    exhaustive   examination of the policing arrangements for the match on 15 April
    and of the   events that occurred.

    It is more than a truism to say that a tragedy such as this could have occurred
    at almost any other match venue in Great Britain. What was surprising was that
^ ^ i t happened in a stadium which is regarded as one of the best equipped and
^Psafest in the country and where the police and the football club had vast
    experience of staging matches, which attract capacity crowds. The disaster
    therefore points to an urgent need for a thorough examination of policing
    arrangements at all major sporting and entertainment venues. It calls into
    question the assumptions on which current arrangements are based and raises
    questions about training of police officers to perform such duties; briefings
    and debriefings with particular relevance to the amount of information which is
    made available to subordinate officers; lines of communication between police
    officers and their superiors and command and control points; the scope and
    quality of contingency plans to cope with sudden emergencies, and; the degree of
    awareness of such among all police officers on duty. These are all matters
    which are primarily the responsibility of police officers of ACPO or
    Superintendent rank, but it is crucial that the lessons of Hillsborough are
    observed by all forces and that every officer is made fully aware of what is
    required of him or her.

    We were disturbed to note from reading the reports of evidence to the Inquiry
    that there appears to have been confusion as to responsibility for crowd safety

•   and we believe it is imperative that areas of responsibility are defined in the
    Inquiry's Report so that there can be no ambiguity in the future.

    We are aware that the Inquiry has heard evidence suggesting that there was
    drunkenness and unruly behaviour among a large proportion of the crowd seeking
    to gain admission at the Leppings Lane end of the ground shortly before the
    kick-off. It will of course be for the Inquiry to attach such weight as it
    deems appropriate to that evidence, but it appears to the Police Federation that
    the situation which developed outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles was a classic
    manifestation of what we have suggested could occur outside grounds, when a
    large press of people seek admission at the same time, and become frustrated at
    delays as the kick-off approaches. Had a national membership scheme been in
    existence, on 15 April, it would presumably have been necessary for those
    tendering tickets to have produced identity cards as well. In the circumstances
    that have been described to the Inquiry, we can only suggest that this would
    have been an added and unwelcome complication.

    It is not at all part of our case to suggest that football hooliganism was the
    reason for this tragedy, but what cannot be ignored is that all policing
    arrangements for major football matches have to be concerned, not only with
    safety in the broadest sense, but with the threat to crowd safety posed by the
    possibility of violence and disorder breaking out among the crowd. To this end
    physical barriers have been erected at all grounds, aimed at segregating rival
    supporters and preventing pitch invasions. The direct relationship between the
                                        -   2   -
    presence of these barriers and the deaths of so many people at Hillsborough is
    self-evident. Had there been no history of hooliganism, the perimeter fences
    and internal barriers would have been unnecessary.

    The Football Spectators Bill proposes to put into law what the Prime Minister
    and other Ministers have said must be done as the State's answer to football
    hooliganism. Our quarrel with Part One of the Bill is, that the remedies it
    proposes are unlikely to be effective, and in some circumstances, could make
    matters worse.

    We are also in some difficulty because the Government has chosen not to put the
    Football Membership Scheme in front of Parliament at the same time as the Bill,
    which merely enables the Scheme to be prepared. It is true that Parliament will
    have an opportunity to debate the Scheme that the Minister has approved, but the
    realities of the Parliamentary process are that a Government with a large
    majority will have its way. We therefore assume that the Scheme as presented to
    Parliament will be a national one. We welcome the Minister's assurance that he
    will consult the Police Federation before the Scheme is put to Parliament.


•    Our position does not align us with the football interests. We fully accept
    that hooliganism is a major problem associated with football and that the
    Government has a duty to take action in the absence of effective response from
    football itself. Our concern is that a football membership scheme as
    foreshadowed in the Report of the Minister for Sport's Working Party, is not the
    answer to the problems.

    It has been suggested that the proposals will reduce hooliganism at a stroke
    because "the hooligans simply will not travel to matches". This assumes, in
    spite of all evidence to the contrary, that a Bill enacted to deal with a
    particular crime will eliminate that crime. In practice some people are going
    to be arrested, charged and eventually convicted of football related offences,
    as yet undefined, and those people will be liable to disqualification from
    membership of the scheme. The reality is, that the vast majority of offenders
    will not and cannot be apprehended. They take advantage of the comparative
    anonymity of large crowds, or a great deal of football related hooliganism and
    crime occurs well away from police surveillance outside grounds, or en route to
    and from venues. These people are not going to be deterred by the threat of
    losing their membership cards.

    It is our considered view that the Bill will not achieve another benefit that
    the Government has claimed for it; a reduction in the number of police officers
    required for football duties.  It is envisaged that a number of new criminal
    offences will be created. Therefore it is more likely that more, not fewer,
    police officers will be required at grounds to deal with breaches of the Act's
    requirements.

    The Police Federation is convinced that segregation is essential. A national
    membership scheme would have to be able to ensure that rival supporters continue
    to be segregated.

    Our opposition to the Government's proposals is far from negative. We have been ...
    impressed with the success of the Luton Town scheme which restricts attendance
    at home matches to members of the clubs own membership scheme. We understand
    that members may introduce guests and, while it is possible that such guests
    could support visiting sides, it is not the presence of such fans, singly or in
    pairs that poses a threat, it is the massed groups of visiting supporters that
    is the main problem. Our support for the Luton solution is based on the views
    of the police as expressed by the Chief Constable of Bedfordshire in a report to
    his Police Authority, which we reproduce below:
                                        .   3   -
       "The Luton Town Football Club Membership Scheme has brought an impressive
       reduction in crime and so many other benefits to the community, that it is
       to ay mind the best example of crime prevention introduced in recent years.

       Had Luton been a more fashionable club and playing on turf rather than on a
       synthetic surface, then more clubs might have adopted its brave imaginative
       initiative.  Since the banning of away supporters the facts speak for
       themselves:

       In 1985/86 at League matches, there were 102 football-related arrests since
       when there has been only one.
       No ejections from the ground for disorderly behaviour.
       No obscene chanting by spectators.
       No segregation of spectators, nor barriers preventing them from getting on
       to the pitch.
       Parents and children now attend in safety.
       Attendances now at 1985/86 levels.
       No reports of football-related damage.
^      No displacement of hooliganism in the vicinity of the ground or elsewhere in
       the town.
       No cases of street robbery or robberies committed against shopkeepers in the
       vicinity of the ground.
       Only two cases of football-related theft from motor vehicles.
       Holders of local liquor licences no longer under pressure to close their
       premises.
       Local residents and shopkeepers do not live in a state of tension.
       Fear of attack upon shoppers by gangs of hooligans in the town centre has
       disappeared and this has given freedom and liberty to the majority of the
       community.
       The average number of officers on duty at league games where away supporters
       are banned is 51 compared with 212 at cup games where thefootball
       authorities compel Luton FC to admit away supporters.
       The remainder of the county is now better policed.

       Unfortunately those facts are reversed when away supporters are permitted to
       attend cup games.

        It is puzzling to understand how in the face of such overwhelming evidence,
        football authorities and the majority of clubs, have not adopted or
        seriously considered the implementation of the Luton membership scheme.
        Recently I heard a Chief Superintendent from another Force say, perhaps
        tongue in cheek, that his Force had soccer hoo91iganism under control as
        there had only been 104 arrests during the past season.  It has to be said
        that it would have been difficult to adopt the Luton initiative in major
        cities but in my opinion it would have been worth a try. Inaction now means
        we are faced with unwanted and unnecessary legislation which is likely to
        impose upon us all a national membership scheme."

    It   is evident that the Luton scheme has removed a major public orderand crime
    problem riot only from the Luton ground but from the town itself..

    It   is noteworthy that there is no evidence that Luton Town supporters do not
    include some hooligans among their number. On the contrary, the Press has been
    quick to highlight occasions when Luton Town supporters have travelled to away
    matches and trouble has occurred - most notably at Ipswich and more recently
    outside Wembley Stadium during the Littlewoods Cup Final last season. This
    suggests, that it is the presence at one venue of two opposing groups that is
    the recipe for football violence. When no large group of visiting supporters is
    present, the incentive or opportunity for home supporters to clash with them is
    removed.
)                                    -   4   -
The Police Federation therefore considers that the scale of football related
hooliganism, violence and crime is such that the authorities have a duty to take
drastic action to reduce opportunities for such behaviour to a minimum. We
believe that the practical experience gained by Luton Tovm speaks for itself.
There is a case for restricting attendance at matches to members of the home
club. We propose that all clubs should introduce their ovm "members only"
attendance arrangements.

We appreciate that this would be an unfortunate restriction for the majority of
those supporters who are not regular supporters of one club, or who wish to see
their own team play away and do not indulge in hooliganism. We accept that it
would be possible for clubs to have reciprocal arrangements to admitmembers of
a visiting club's membership scheme in accordance with carefully
designedarrangements which would preserve segregation. In the event of trouble
that facility would be withdrawn from future fixtures between the clubs. We
believe that this scheme, while more drastic than a national football membership
scheme, would work more effectively to deal with the problem than a national
membership scheme.


I
We are concerned that the Governments' proposed Football Membership Authority
may consist solely or predominantly of representatives of the Football
Association and the Football League. In our view, this should be a statutory
body concerned with licensing, safety standards, membership schemes and so on,
and be responsible to the Minister, and ultimately Parliament. It should have a
wholly, independent chairman who can command the complete confidence of the
public and all interested bodies.

We believe that football itself has consistently failed to meet its
responsibilities in this area. It's irresponsible attitude is epitomised in the
evidence it has submitted to this Inquiry, calling for a return to selling
alcohol at grounds on match days. It should also be representative of wider
interests.

 The Police Federation believes that out of the Hillsborough tragedy there must
 come renewed understanding of the nature of football hooliganism and the threat
 it poses to a major international pastime and to the community at large. We
 hope that your Inquiry will be able to make recommendations that will strengthen
 the ability of the police and the football authorities in their efforts to
^eliminate this scourge from society. It is imperative that such proposals are
*put into practice without delay. This must be one Report that is not allowed to
 gather dust and be consulted afresh only when some further tragedy has occurred.
