 Otftor Documint Form                                 raised
                                        Date and time rai:             ft -         ^   ^
                                                                                                          Number


 Title          W g m frw                    W    t i( ( \t £   l* r          (°A A ,p £ lr^ C L -   |<
 (Include source end eny document number if relevant)


 Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/No .         ^jU
                                                                                                                     Receiver



 Document registerefcindexed es indicated
                                                                                                                         Indexer
 NolsToTacfions raised           ~
                                                                                                                                   «*/
                                                                                                                                   O'
Statement readers instructions                                                                                       Statement
                                                                                                                     Reader

Indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                         Indexer
No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to ba taken
                                                                                                                   0/M             SIO




Further action no(s)                                                                                                 Indexer

When satisfied all actions raised Office Managar to endorsa other Document Master Number Form
MIR 15
             HOME OFFICE
             Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H9AT
                                                             Direct line        2952
                                                            Switchboard <01-2^3 3000



R B Wells Esq QPM                                                            Your reference
Deputy Assistant Commissioner
Metropolitan Police (7 Area HQ)                                              Our reference
3 The Mall
Kenton                                                                       53* May 1989
Harrow
■M id d l e s e x IIA3 9T F -----------------------------




Thank you very much indeed for letting me observe your policing
operation for the FA Cup final at Wembley last Saturday.
I found the day even more instructive than I had expected, and
attach a report I drew up for the information of colleagues. I
look forward very much to your de-briefing on Friday which I shall
now be able to attend.

The extent of attempts by some Merseyside supporters to enter
Wembley without tickets was troubling. Especially after
Hillsborough I found it hard to believe. My report is that of an
inexperienced observer. If you think the behaviour of the
irresponsible element of Merseyside supporters warrants an
authoritative reference to Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry, can I
suggest you consider this with Mr Phillips of Greater Manchester
Police (who moves next week to Devon and Cornwall Constabulary),
who is drafting ACPO's evidence to Taylor.

I am therefore copying this letter and enclosure to Mr Phillips,
and to Commander Robinson and Chief Inspector Evans (with many
thanks), TO 20 Branch NSY.

I was struck by the helpful notice you arranged to have passed to
all ticket holders and the letters you sent to publicans and coach
operators. Might I have a copy of these, please?




                                                                                       F J SMITH
                                                                                       F8 Division
REPORT OF ATTENDANCE AT THE FA CUP FINAL, 20 MAY 1989

F J Smith
Home Office/F8


On Saturday 20 May I attended the Everton v Liverpool FA Cup
final at Wembley, to observe the policing of the match.


2. I am indebted to Deputy Assistant Commissioner Richard Wells
and Ch Supt Bernard Luckhurst who commanded the operation, and to
Ch Insp Brian Evans, TO 20, who escorted me during the day. I
had free access to all parts of the ground and every co-operation
from the police.


3. The policing operation went relatively smoothly, much in line
with the police plan. Out of a crowd of 82,000 there were 81
arrests. The main feature I noticed, with surprise and
disappointment, was the sheer scale of the attempts by some fans
to get into the ground without tickets. There was also a surge
of ticketless fans from outside when gates were opened early in
anticipation of full-time.


4. Of the 81 arrests, 76 were outside - over half for public
order offences. One turnstile operator was arrested on suspicion
of false accounting (ie admitting spectators without tickets, for
payment). 17 police officers were treated for minor injuries
(mainly obtained ejecting fans without tickets) and 250 members
of the public were treated, mainly for heat exhaustion.

Attempts at forced entry without tickets


5. Before the turnstiles opened there was a steady number of
fans seeking tickets, though I witnessed no touts operating. It
was however impossible to walk any distance on the concourse
without being asked for any 'spare* tickets. There was also a
great deal of alcohol being drunk around the stadium: it was not
uncommon to see individuals carrying 6 or more large cans of
beer. The Sunday Times summed this up with the words "Outside
... in the tropical heat, there were as many ticketless fans as
beer cans popping".


6. The serious business of attempting unauthorised entry to the
ground began as soon as the turnstiles opened at about 1.15 pm.
The main device was to press close behind someone whose valid
ticket was being checked; when the legitimate ticket holder was
admitted the second person would press through, squeezed into the
same turnstile space. Often the deception was aided by a ticket
stub passed back through the fence, but often it was not. Given
the volume of people being admitted the only defence to this
technique was for police and stewards constantly to watch every
movement of every turnstile; and pounce on fans as they pushed
in, bundling them into the revolving exit-only gate next to each
group of turnstiles.


7.   The scale on which this cheating was attempted was
substantial. While I observed turnstiles operating, people were
being ejected at the rate of 2 per minute, per group of
turnstiles: if representative of all turnstiles throughout the
time they were operating before kick-off some 1,000 attempts to
gain entry by that means were made. Of those, rather fewer
people would have attempted entry that way, since many were the
same individuals trying the same ruse time and time again. For
example, I saw the same person (with a distinctive cuts and
bruising to his face) thrown out at turnstiles 'E' at 1.45 pm and
at turnstiles 'F' at 2.45 pm. On the concourse X overheard two
fans regretting how difficult it had proved to be to get in at
any of the turnstiles without a ticket.


8. Nor was the problem anything like over once the game began.
About half way through the first half the police 'swept' the
concourse outside using foot and mounted officers to send
remaining people on their way to the public transport. A large
number were shifted, though not without a ragged but brief
pelting of police with discarded beer cans, etc, before a mass
charge away from the stadium.


9. Even so pockets of strongly motivated would-be spectators
remained. Shortly into the second half police units had to be
called urgently to disperse a group of perhaps one or two hundred
who as I understood it had tried to get through some of the
turnstiles before massing outside the stadium offices: a large
unprotected window not far from ground level seemed to be their
point of interest. Most of these were, after scuffles, sent in
the direction of public transport.

10. There were various other attempts to climb in, sometimes
successfully: eg over the roof of a toilet block near the
pedestrian way, and I heard a report that a large group had
gathered outside the players' entrance too.

The influx of fans without tickets at about 3.50 pm


11. It is, I understand, stadium practice (and a condition of
the safety certificate?) that large shutter gates are opened next
to each group of turnstiles 10 minutes before the end of a match,
to allow free passage to spectators leaving the ground. Standing
on the steps into bay 75 (which was full) just before full-time I
became aware of a rush of new spectators when I was pushed out of
the way by a swarm of 20 or more youths, euphoric at having
gained entry. Unable to get to the top of the steps some scaled
the side wall and handrail of the steps into bay 75, to gain
access to the seated area. Those quick enough were just in time
to see Everton score their very late equalising goal - taking the
game into 30 minutes' extra time. The steward controlling access
to bay 75 was doing an excellent job but was powerless to resist
the charge by so many people. A colleague sitting some way to
the right and behind bay 75 confirms that a sudden influx of
spectators in several bays to his left became apparent at that
time.


12. In the circulating corridor outside, I found several more
groups running about, having just entered. The source was two
shutter gates fully open at turnstiles 'F'. These had been
opened by stewards under the direction of the stadium management;
the stewards however seemed to be taking7no action in respect of
the rush of supporters - I would estimate at least 100 and
possibly many more - that poured in. The police, too, were
nearby and might have intervened sooner. Eventually the gates
were re-closed on the direction of the police.and/or a senior
steward who appeared.


13.   (For the record, at this point a well dressed male spectator
in his 40s or 50s appeared, furious, to remonstrate with the
first police officer he saw about the crush and lack of control.
Ch Insp Evans who I was with also intervened in support of the
officer. The gentleman took both officers' names before
departing, having largely regained control of himself.)

Perimeter fencing


14. As was well publicised, perimeter fencing was entirely
removed for the match. The police were prepared to cope with
clearing the pitch had there been a full scale invasion, and
reinforced stewards at the Liverpool end when invasion was though
likely. Otherwise, arrangements for clearing the pitch were
largely with the stewards.


15. Two main types of incursion arose. For much of the match
spectators sat on the greyhound track in front of the spectator
areas, especially at the Liverpool end. This was largely
tolerated because it was considered not an excessive
encouragement to trouble (and because once established it is hard
to resolve: spectators behind move forward and those in front can
only be dealt with by being removed altogether.)


16. Increasingly,through extra-time, and especially after the
match, many fans did run onto the pitch. Encouragingly, a chant
of "Off, off, off!" went up when several fans ran on wrongly
thinking the match was over. In my view the very many stewards
could have been more effective in preventing the pitch invasion
at the end. My conclusion therefore is that it is wrong to say
that the removal of fences was necessarily a failure, since
stewarding was not strong enough. The more severe test, though,
never arose: as the Independent pointed out on 22 May the worst
moment might have arisen if the 89th minute Everton goal (which
resulted in extra time) had been disallowed for an 'off-side'
infringement.
Commentary


17. It is very disappointing to record that with the backdrop of
Hillsborough so very many Merseyside fans were prepared to come
to Wembley without tickets, determined to gain entry without
regard for the consequences. The perimeter of the ground can
only be described as having been under assault from the moment
fans arrived until they were leaving in large numbers after the
match. I could not put an accurate figure on the 'hard core'
involved, but would be very surprised if it were fewer than
several hundred - certainly enough to be dangerous had their
efforts been suddenly successful at one point.


18. It was a clear part of the policing plan to cordon off each
set of turnstiles outside1
                         , to prevent ticketless fans reaching
them. That policing was carried out determinedly, as I
witnessed. However, since so many fans were intercepted emerging
from turnstiles having pushed through without tickets, the
policing immediately outside seemed to fail to prevent (though
not reduce) this. If the policing outside was ineffective in
blocking the path of ticketless fans, this may have been a
weakness not in its execution but in the basis of trying to do it
so close to the turnstiles, and relying on a line of police
horses and/or officers. A serious alternative for consideration
may be excluding ticketless fans far further back, eg to prevent
any reaching the main concourse, perhaps with the aid of some
kind of physical barrier.


19. The attempts to gain unauthorised entry demonstrated that a
substantial minority of fans - even Merseyside fans shortly after
Hillsborough - were determined to force their way in irrespective
of the overcrowding that would cumulatively have produced in the
capacity Wembley crowd. Seemingly then some fans will behave
very irresponsibly no matter what the circumstances. On the
whole, however, the police and stewards succeeded in excluding
them.




                                                  F J SMITH
                                                  F8 Division
22 May 1989
