                                                           5 June 19S1

    _ .'c-'ee dsn
 C.:tirz;an
 Sheffield VTecnescay Football Club Limited
 dillsborcugh
 Sheffield £6 1SW



 Dear Mr KcGee

 I acknowledge receipt of your letter of 20 May. I t-an-: you for the
 cor-.ydircntary remarks in the penultimate par.icrr.rh and wholeheartedly
 a:;ree with you that ’ey learning fror: our ext-eriencss doth the club and
 the police snculd he aole to improve their perfcrr.ar.ce, particularly
 -- that rerfcrr.ar.ce is looked at dispassionately and constructively.

-he letters of cer._>lai:.c you racsivec and thosa l:ot.i ^c^plinentary and
of.«r<iS 2 w;'.i'n I have received have established •:o'*c,r-’ doubt that the
pollsa actio., in 1-ittin-, scectiters on tc the trtch *.?•:.> not only
necessary out w<’3 vitii to avoid further serio»:n itvWri ;s and rcssiblv
save lire. In t.'ij r^3:;ect r.-.v only criticis-.' of       "r.ricr cffloors is
icr not oyenijv* th» jacas earlier thus avoiding th-» em ir^jnc' “sasurr-
or c.llcwinc' and :.sl..-i:.'.- s .actatcrs to climb ovar the fence. Thin tyye
G- decision dev ever ic ofcen necessary in ofer~ticn?I situations and
altr.curn it r.ay icc.: 'untidy' , the needs of the- cccari.cn de"and instant
action irres--ectiv-; ■?: jov> it rsay aypear tc the or-looke?? ^ d o not
t.iird: it is tr.is ty;.» c_: tctian *vnicn r.,f~uir2 s anal-sTs ,"^the st-arching
exauiiiation should •■•- i;;             to vh*-* sue' =■':>   action ‘f-is aver
nectssary.

Cur analysis or '.-hat ,v.\y jne-j is:

 -•    d'icr.ets intense, for ,.'oIvo rn a:n-ten danc c-rors 1 -;u ••r.rters were sold
       tc Tottenham cuy-ortsrs aftor ’.'oivarharrx-ton !•: notified Tctter-ham
       that tr.ey ha-i -jet :i :-osej cf tr:eir alio-iati-^n. ‘'..'Lis -.'as
       irresponsible in that it was likely to create vuhLic iisorder
       orooleiss fciifcou~h t,v:- nixing of opposing su,vr'ortcr-?. (I use the
       wora ’irresponsible ’ _ecause ever/cne in foot-daLl administration
       shoulu be able do .ryreciate the probier.3 be inn created for your
       club and for the police by the indiscriminate sale of tickets. It
       it was felt that the tickets had to be offered for sale at
       Tottenham, then hotn of us snould have been infcrried of what had
       oeen done. I a;a writing to the Football Association on this subject.)

.j .   The Leppings Lane end is not constructed to aive maximum aid to the
       packing and control cf the crowd and the accepted crowd capacity is
       such that there is no safety margin.

c.     3otn the police and the club stewards directed, in good faith,
       Tottenham Hotspur supporters to the Leppings Lane end and
       exacerbated the problems of a capacity crowd at one end, u n n e c e s s a r i l y
       leaving too ouch room for novement at the other end.

                                                                              continued
 E G McGee Esq                       - 2 -                    5 June 1SS


   I accept that we should now be discussing the semi-final operation
  have asked Mr Goslin and Chief Superintendent Herold to arrange ar
  aeeting with Mr England J     I consider it advisable for the Safety a
 -£x&*±udi» CiiLSUTEtee of the South Yorkshire County Council to visit t
  Leppings Lane end to discuss the problems encountered at the seni-
  with a view to taking further preventive measures.      I dc net wish
%. spectators again clinging over the fence and it is therefore inrpc:
   that the construction of barriers and ~he arrangements of the crcv
   the Leppings Lane end should be looked at critically to ensure th~
  police and the stewards are able to control and maintain order rr.or
  effectively within the terrace. I an in favour of a free zone cn
   terraces behind the goal to which spectators can be noved in an er.

 Although we must learn lessons from the seni-final, we should at t.
 tiaie get the whole natter into perspective. Considering that we h
 crowd of 50,000 and we were faced with problems essentially not or
 own making, i.e. the irresponsible sale of tierscs, the emergency
 taken by the police did prevent a disaster without interfering wit
 gane to the extent that play had to be stopped. There were seme
 disappointed ticket-holders who did not see tine crane, and although
 them we re unfortunately delayed by traffic hold-ups and a raotorway
 accident, others I ar, sure did not start their jour-ey early enou.y
 compensate for the possibility cf delay which should have been ant_
 when large numbers of vehicles and pedestrians a.r-a descending on. a
 area. The niarxer of complaints, although too -‘any, :o not indicat
 wholesale condemnation c; cur actions.

»i«s have undertaken cui o'.m debriefing and as usual are ver/ critic
ourselves for not avoiding the problems of sen-~i:v~ a nur-bur of Tct
sue porters to the Leppings Lane end, and I am told that only 7C of
350 spectators who encored the Leppings Lane end over and above td
nanimum number wcaM«—ee:rt -there by police officer??, p^rjdverriara, c
taccic at half ti_v.e to trar.sfit the TotteTiham :nn-.;?ortars tc the f_
was, ~;ith hindsight. a. manoeuvre ••rhich should not have boen atte:.,; .
Additionally, again v.-ith hindsight, wo feel th«t our traffic arran
can be improved am. ddie v/ill be doiUs.

I have tried to he constructive ii this letter. I have not attemv :
seek relief frc;u the res_ onaibility cf ensurir.•; tht- ?af=ty of spec.-
at Hillsborough, but I regar- this tc be a ;cint venture and sugry
when v/e do get problem::, as inevitably we -.-ill, we shculd stand tc
and refrain from blaming one another especially ha Co re all the fac .
been marshalled.

I hope wc can new concentrate cur endeavours u'cn taking the 1331/
season trouble-free for spectators, the club, and the outside publ.
having taxen cognisancc- of cur previous experiences.

Vours s-int-pre ly




        T
       r' \



              -3e on Spion Kop and Leppings Lane terraces in
              -a- v-~ _i_ c i 1   l u   Ti   "C O   pdc rC 2-   C,"   .ft   q   ^   0 ^   Q 'r~   ^xr

      -~!.~'~ess to grouna. - turnsuiles, Leppings Lane, in relation
      ro away supporters (lack of available turnstiles at major
      mat cn.es).

■>-   Sale or programmes outside the ground.

      increase security on entry in West Stand to orevent oreviousi
      used tickets being used.

5.    Jo/aoj.a barrier in West Stand to allow greater number of away
      supporters at certain matches - this was promised last year
      when the alteration took place.

6.    Re-Examine positioning of barriers on Leppings Lane terraces
      to allow easier accesr

      I Ui.uo uils j / Psnis Lon6 Road — feasibil ....tv o f c o r r e c t                              eohsv 1
      turnstiles to speed flow of home support*         -SIS

u.    common keys required for all locks in ground.

J.    Examination and marking of fire points etc in ground-

10. Closed circuit television - evaluation
