  •f
'P7-/,f
     ./ r^tQX^
        - /    (s’
               - / \I
                                %
                          fS7
        S&LsjJ j Qfi+sk
                                      4
                          n s ' * >
      ,     '                                                          <4^
^^b\cO’
  DETECTIVE CONSTABLE 1149 JOHN EDWARD NASH ~ MAIN STREET POLICE

  STATION, ROTHERHAM.

  REPORT RE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER 1989



 At 8.00 am, Saturday, 15th April 1989, I commenced duty at Main

  Street Police Station, Rotherham.       At this time I was in full

  Police uniform forming part of serial 40 under the supervision

  of PS Cloke.     Overall charge   of serial 40, together with serial

  39 was the responsibility of      Detective Inspector Meek who was

  also in full Police uniform.

 We were later transported via the force coach to Hillsborough

  Stadium and on our arrival assembled in the North Stand where

 we       received a pre-match briefing regarding the Semi-Final

  between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

  The briefing was concluded at approximately 10.50 am, and after

  a further short briefing with Detective Inspector Meek all

  members of our serial left the ground and made our way to

  Halifax Road, which was to be our location for phase one of the

  days duties.     The duties of    the serial at this location were to

  meet coaches     and mini buses, park them on Halifax Road and then

  check supporters for offensive weapons, tickets and then to

  point them in the general direction of the ground.       All coaches

  and mini buses parked at this location contained Liverpool

  supporters.      Up until approximately 2.30 pm, very few coaches

  arrived at Halifax Road, however a number of private cars        did

* arriva and park on the slip road which runs parallel to Halifax

  Road and in the main these contained Liverpool supporters all

  of which I spoke to appeared to be respectable people, many of

  them being in family      parties.
                                                             Spfi f t 2
                                -   2   -




From 2.30 pm, coaches containing Liverpool supporters began to

arrive in quantity and such was the influx that it soon became

impossible to physically check each and every supporter for

tickets or offensive weapons.       Before supporters were allowed

to leave the coach a Police Officer boarded and informed them

all of the ground rules concerning alcohol, banners and general

behaviour.   It was obvious that the majority of supporters had

been drinking but the general mood was one of good spirits and

with the exception of one coach, which arrived at about 2.50 pm

all accepted the instructions given.        I did not count the

number of coaches that arrived at Halifax Road but I would

estimate that between 50 and 60 were parked, the last arriving

at about 2.55 pm.

As kick off time drew near our serial walked down Halifax Road

towards Claywheels Lane for refreshments to be taken and whilst

doing so large numbers of empty beer cans and bottles were to

be seen, littering the pavements and road surface.        There was

also large numbers of supporters still walking towards the

ground even though kick off time was only a matter of minutes

away.

Upon entering Claywheels Lane, I saw Detective Sergeant

Tissington and Detective Inspector Charles, both of whom were

in possession of radios, and it was obvious to me that they

were in contact with ground control and holding a conversation,

however at that point I was too far away to hear what was in

fact being said.    I would estimate the time of this as being no

more than two to three minutes ater 3.00 pm.
As I drew near to Detective Inspector Charles he stopped me and

other officers and I was informed that there was some sort of

trouble in the Leppings Lane end of the ground and that ours and

other serials may well be required.    From the general

conversation I heard I was led to believe that supporters in

the ground were fighting amongst themselves and further

assistance was required.   We were then instructed to attend at

the Leppings Lane end and we all then double marched to that

location and on arrival all officers paraded in their

respective serials, at that time four serials in all.

A further radio conversation took place between ground control

and Detective Inspector Charles, the result being that all four

serials were ordered into the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

As we entered the ground we were met by a large crowd of

supporters, some of whom had facial injuries.     They appeared

very hostile towards us which seemed to support the feeling

that fans had been fighting.   As I neared the tunnel entrance I

saw a youth of about 18 or 19 years lying on the floor.     He was

being tended to by two civilians who I saw were giving him

mouth to mouth and heart massage.     This man seemed to be blue

in the face and his eyes were half open and glazed and I was of

the opinion that he was dead and beyond any help.     I offered my

assistance to the two and one, a woman said she was a nurse and

required no help from me or any other Police Officer.     This was

said with some venom which took me a little by surprise.

This was taking place just outside and to the left of the

tunnel entrance which was full of people pushing and shoving in

a blind panic and in order to give some sort of protection to
                                                             •v'^? A C


                              -   4   -




the man on the floor and the two giving assistance I placed

myself in the tunnel entrance in an effort to usher the flow of

people round them.

It was at this point that I saw others lying on the floor being

given first aid and further injured people being carried out of

the stadium through the tunnel and it became obvious to me that

something of a serious nature had occurred in the ground of

which at that time I was not aware.        I was still protecting the

man on the ground and had been joined by several other officers

and a human wall was formed part way across the tunnel

entrance protecting people on the floor being given first aid.

I was then instructed to enter the stadium itself and with

other officers I then fought my way down the tunnel which was

still full of supporters who were shouting and swearing at us

and on more than one occasion was called,        "A Murdering South

Yorkshire Bastard."   I eventually reached the stadium itself

and once inside went to my right.         I could see that the match

had been stopped and that on the pitch near to the perimeter

fence were a number of Police Officers and spectators assisting

others to climb the fence and onto the pitch.         The stadium at

this point was still quite full of spectators,        some of whom

seemed to be in a shock like trance whilst others were crying

and shouting.   I made my way towards the perimeter fence and I

then saw a pile of bodies lying near to the fence more or less

blocking the gate onto the pitch.         Police Officers on the pitch

side of this gate had managed to open it and bodies were being
                                -   5   -




passed through this gate onto the pitch area where I could see

they were being given first aid and assistance by Police

Officers and spectators.

I helped to pass a number of bodies through the gate and it

became obvious to me that this method would take too long and

w ith others I began to pull at the fence in an effort to loosen

it from the posts.     Others on the pitch side also helped and

after a few minutes a hole was made in the fence and bodies

were then passed through this and the gate onto the pitch.

I am unable to say how many people were taken through the gate

or the hole in the fence and could not describe any of them.

Once the inside of the terrace had been cleared of injured and

dead I was instructed     by an Inspector, who I did not

recognise, to stand by the hole in the perimeter fence and not

allow persons onto the pitch.       This I did with another officer,

again I did not know him,    for about five minutes however,    it

came obvious that it was an impossible task as friends and

relatives of injured persons were wanting to go onto the pitch

to be with them.

It was at this time that my attention was drawn to other

spectators who were in the upper part of the stand.        I believe

this is the seating area of the Leppings Lane stand,       one group

in particular were being very aggressive towards Police

Officers,   shouting "Murderers, murdering bastards" and at one

point it seemed that they were about to climb down out of the

stand and attack us.
                                                            % ) <


                               -    6   -




By this point the standing area of Leppings Lane had virtually

cleared of spectators and I was able to see that one of the

crash barriers in the stand had been broken from its posts.         I

was also able to see that another of the barriers had been bent

considerably in the middle.    Strewn about the floor and steps

were various items of clothing, shoes, shirts, watches, etc.            I

was then instructed, I believe from Chief Superintendent

Nesbitt, to leave the stand area and to get onto the pitch

which I did, I was unable to locate my serial or any members

from it and with other officers I began to usher people off the

pitch and out of the ground.       This was not an easy task as

many spectators were trying to find friends and relatives,

however this task was eventually achieved and the ground was

cleared.

I was still unable to locate my serial and joined members of

Sergeant Keenan's group.   I then left the ground and walked a

number of Liverpool supporters to their transport at Claywheels

Lane.

I eventually located other members from my serial and was later

transported back to Rotherham retiring from duty at 7.00 pm.
