 HILLSBOROUGH        r   > 1

I an Police Constable 422 Slater of South Yorkshire police force, currently stationed at
Conisbrough in the Doncaster division.

On Saturday the 15th of April, 1989* 1 came on duty at 0800hours at Conisbrough, and arrived
at Doncaster HQ at  0900hrs, being transferred to Hillsborough on the force coach, arriving at
1000 hrs. I was in  Serial 59* and we were briefed in the North stand.
At 1^00 hrs I went    oni* Penistone Road ^orth, with wPc 3325 Gregson, taking up a position at
the ji|ction with Beulah Rd, where we remained until just prior to the kick off. During these
hours we had a few Liverpool fans coining up Penistone Road North, which tkx I noticed as this
road was supposed to be for Nottingham Forest fans only. I could see that the Liverpool fans
were trying to buy spare tickets, but they were not causing trouble and seemed to be unsuccessfu
Despite the high volume of fans coming along Penistone Road, there were no incidents of real
trouble, and this crowd appeared to be happy.

At approximately l450hrs, we started to walk down towards the ground, as the stream of fans had
nearly dried up. As we got to the Spion Kop turnstiles it became apparent that these turnstiles
had been locked, and we were faced by angry ticketholders. As we placated them I was aware that
something was happening inside, as a traffic car pulled up next to me with the blue lights on.
Without a radio I was unaware of what was happening, but hastily got into the ground where I
met up with Sgt. Venables, our serial sergeant.We were then told that 11 people were dead,
and we streamed onto the pitch with many other officers.

On the authority of an Inspector(Whom I cannot identify) we took up positions along the touchlim
behind the goal away from Jhe Leppings Lane end were told to ensure that there were no Forest
f a n ^ a tt e m pt i n g to climb onto the pitch. As soon as I got onto the pitch I could see that there
w e r ^ b o d i e s of fans being laid out onto the field to my left. The St. John's people were very
much in evidence, as were numerous police officers. The only officer I recognised was Pc
Brookshaw from A1 who was carrying bodies out.
After about ten minutes on the pitch, there was a sudden rush of Liverpool fans towards the end
where xk* we were stood, and we had to contain them and to push them back. It was orly then
that the line of police officers stood across the middle of the pitch.

I was stood nearest to the goalpost, and the press photographers were congregated within that
goal area. As the afternoon progressed the Liverpool fans who had been carrying bodies out would
stop to abuse these phtographers as they deposited the body on the turf. Many of these fans
had to be physically restrained by myself and other officers, including another Inspector who
was nearly physically attacked by one fan. Some of the fans stopped to talk to us, and they
were bewildered and totally lost as to what had happened. None expressed any blame upon us.
When the P«A. system announced, after the bodies had been removed, that the game had been
abandoned, many of the Forest fans, despite the entities, left immediately, and we were ordered
back onto Penistone Road to supervise the dispersal. Despite a knowledge of the kxk* events,
we were still called to sort out some fighting in Hillsborough Park. All of the people to whom
I spoke were aware of what had happened. One pair of old men even told us that the gates had
beeijgjorced open by the Liverppol fans. This was the first mention of the gates that I had heard.
When the crowds had been dispersed effectively, I went back to Hillsborough for a debrief,
when the details of the day were explained to me. I then returned to Claywheels Lane, where
I got a lift in a freight Rover van back to Doncaster HQ, where I went off duty at 2000hours.
