                                                                                                     Ilkfers.
                                                                                                             FILE
k 7 SUBJECT                  Pifeuc. QsfTcgTA^H^Nrr                                                          REFERENCE
                                                                                                             NUMBER

                     T b & T R A k C - -           G   N     F e ft      P Q .& A O ‘ « O t&                ftO -fo /1 2

             DATE                    TO WHOM                RET’D             DATE            TO WHOM             RET’D


     3           +      8b    D         c .C -         VL     *     fa   \%     *    j W f 6 Z fo O flc C       23   •
                                               7
     10      < e -Z b                 f\©m i rv        n       i    fa

     V-      Z       Z b           yW <^7 iV\          ■M     g

          ' 10 -8 (o          &>crr                    7     to S u

                                                       \u     If    #£
     ix> - 1o ~%l&                 h^CfWr^T

     b - )9- - S               ^Drh >r f               fe

                                                       2>o - to '%^
      5>© - to '%'J           Pft. &o^£i/£R£ .

      (c .    7 8 7               p¥C>fT\ i            7      7 / 7
   ADM/70
                                              FILE      £
SUBJECT                                       REFERENCE
                                              NUMBER



    DATE   TO WHOM   RET’D   DATE   TO WHOM       RET’D




ADM/70
                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                                    M ' 2-,

                                                            REF:    LIC/MP/JS
FROM:   INSPECTOR PARKES - LICENSING DEPARTMENT
                                                            STATION/3B®Bf: HEADQUARTERS
TO:     CHIEF SUPT. MEADOWS - HEADQUARTERS
                                                            DATE: 28 AUGUST, 1985

          SUBJECT:    (1)    THE SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS
                             (DESIGNATION) ORDER 1985

                      (2)    SPORTING EVENTS (CONTROL OF ALCOHOL ETC.)
                             ACT 1985



          Sir,

          Comments noted. Draft now attached indicating the sections which are
          relevant to operational officers.

          The sections deleted only relate to matters of procedure relating to
          applications and definitions, etc.




          Inspector




         SOUTH YORKS. POLICE          /) C C



            2 9 A U G 1935            /-vv                         ^ -


        CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT
        OPERATIO NS & TRAFFIC
                                      ^                      C*^L U

                                                                            r




                                                                           2SEP1985

                                                                                    ------
                                                                           OPERATIONS      I
    < *'•-
         "4



                                                          D R A F T




                                         m e SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS

                                                 (DESIGNATION) ORDER 1985



                         On 4sht 9th August, 1985 'Yhis Order came into effect.     It stipulates that

                          the following will become "designated sports grounds” -

                                    Home grounds of all football clubs who are members of the

                                    Football Association of England and Wales, and any other

                                    ground used occasionally or temporarily by such a club;



                                    Any ground used for international football;



                                    Wembley Stadium.

                          This Order also identifies which events will be "designated sporting events"<

                          Wiese are as follows -

                                    All Football Association matches,

                                    All international football matches,

                                    All matches in connection with the European Cup, Cup Winners Cup,

                                      and the UEFA Cup,

                                    All Association matches           come within the Scottish Football

                                      Association,

                                    All football matches played outside Great Britain in connection

                     ^                with the above competitions.       ^

              0 rv        Thig Order does not cover any event which ip p l a y ^ . ^ ^ ’without reward and
                     To                                                                      ‘
                         X l i spectators are admitted free.




                                                                                         \




k        -
                               D R A F T



         SPORTING EVENTS (CONTROL OF ALCOHOL ETC.) ACT 1985



This Act came into operation on iflfc 9th August, 1935*

Section 1   This section applies to the use of public service vehicles or

            railway passenger vehicles primarily used for the carriage of

            passengers for the whole or part of a journey to or from a

            designated sporting event.     Any person who knowingly causes

            or permits intoxicating liquor to be carried on such a vehicle

            committs an offence.   This offence can be committed by the

            operator, servant^ or agent of the operator of a public

            service vehicle.   If the vehicle is hired, then the gerson

            hiring, his servant^ or agent of the person hiring^ A person

            who has intoxicants in his possession or is drunk whilst on

            such a vehicle committs an offence.

Section 2   This section applies to offences committed at or near designated

            sports grounds.    Any person who has in his possession intoxicating

            liquor or article or is drunk in or entering or trying to enter a

            designated sporting event, committs an offence.     An "article"

            means any article capable of causing injury to a person struck

            by it, being a bottle, can or other portable container (including

            such articles crushed or broken) which is for holding drink and

            is of the kind which, when empty is discarded or left to be

            recovered by the supplier.

Section 3   relates to the period of a designated event.

            Where licensed premises or registered club premises are situated

            within the area of a designated sports ground, then such premises

            will be closed for the sale of intoxicating liquor during the

            period of a Sporting event.     The period of a sporting event is

            defined as being two hours before the start of an event and one
    #               hour after the end of the event.    Where the event is delayed

                    or postponed, then the period of the event will be from the

                    time when it is advertised to start.

                    There are provisions for the licensee or club secretary (as

                    the case may be) to apply to a Magistrates' Court for an

                    exemption or variation to this order, and this can be done

I                   only after 28 days notice has been given to the court.       Such

                    an exemption order will last for five months when a new

                    application will have to be made.    No exemption will be

                    granted to licensed areas within the ground where the event

                    can be directly viewed.

                    Where an exemption order is in force and an officer, not

                    below the rank of Inspector, is of the opinion that the

                    sale of intoxicants is detrimental to the good order and

                    safety of the spectators, and it is impracticable to make

                    application to a Magistrates' Court, he can serve written

                    notice on such licensee or club secretary stating that

                    the exemption has ceased or is subject to certain modifica­

                    tions as stated in the written notice.

                    Any person;being the said licensee or club secretary^ who

                    contravenes any such order or notice served under this

                    section, will be guilty of an offence, unless he cany^rove          -
                                                                       S*JU, 4
                    that he has reasonable cause to believe that the                        TW

                    act part—of LR6se~'h0urB.'

        Section 6   allows a Constable in uniform, har at any time during a      f           }
                                             st-
                    designated sporting event^it appears to the officer that

                    the sale of intoxicants is detrimental to good order and

                    safety of the spectators, to require any person having

                    control of a bar to close it, and keep it closed until

                    the end of the event.     A person who fails to comply with

                    this requirement committs an offence.
Section 7    permits a Constable, at any time during the period of a

             designated sporting event to enter any part of the ground

             to enforce the provisions of this Act.   A Constable may

             search a person whom he has reasonable grounds to suspect

             is committing, or has committed, an offence under this

             Act.

             A Constable may stop a public service vehicle (defined

             under section 1) and search such a vehicle if he has

             reasonable grounds to suspect that an offence is being,

             or has been committed, under this Act.

Section 10   amends Scottish legislation to fall into line with the

             requirements of this Act, and therefore permits an

             officer to stop and search a public service vehicle

             (defined under this Act) whilst travelling to and from

             designated events in Scotland.
                     d- U                {jl
                                                                            C ^ U , k>


                                                                                ^Tdro
                                                   J2j >SL   {y^
    QT^K      jlj-


                                                   0
                                               ^p^^/xc^vvv     y^ak v o j




q   a   J U    jl^   (              y i ^ v V o



i ^ V O t L u CJL^el            %




          south yo       ::.-,s , r e .iCi



                2 '•AU-

         CHIEF SUPi
         OPERATior::-;
        i                                                                  ' *
        <                            South Yorkshire Police
                                                                             Reference:     LIC/MP/JS

              FROM:       INSPECTOR PARKES - LICENSING DEPT.                 STATION:     HEADQUARTERS^

              TO:         A.C.C. (OPERATIONS)             ______________     DATE:        20 AUGUST, 1985


             SUBJECT:      1.      THE SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTI^GEVENTS
                                   (DESIGNATION) ORDER 1985

                           2.      SPORTING EVENTS (CONTROL OF ALCOHOL ETC.)
                                   ACT 1985                             ’



             Sir,

             The above legislation came into operation on the 9th August, 1985. I have
             prepared drafts in relation to these matters and I would ask, subject to
             your approval, that they be entered in the forthcoming Force General Orders.




             Inspector



                y     (2 @         J k f   Q    \o                           qJ   L q^ J ( 2 .

                                       /7JK          4 „ .1      ^




                                                                                     5UQI    1


                                                                                     5


                                                                1    '   OPERATION s




             S©UTW YORKS. POLICE                                                                        *




                      «str ••;\
                    1 M i i O ,.


            CHtEF
            OPEaAUor:-.-




GEN/2
                        PROPOSED DRAFT GENERAL ORDER



                   THE SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS               X

                          (DESIGNATION) ORDER 1985                 /



Section 1       The above order shall come into effect on tM!e 9th August, 1985*


Section 2       For the purpose of the Sporting EventsAControl of Alcohol etc#)

                Act 1985 there are hereby designated -

                 (a)   the class of sports grounder specified in paragraphs 1,

                       2 and k of Part I of Schedule 1 to this Order.

                 (b)   the sports ground specified in paragraph 3 of the said Part.

                 (c)   the sports ground ^specified in Part II of that Schedule.

                 (d)   the classes of importing events specified in Part 1 of

                       Schedule 2 tp this Order at any sports ground specified

                       or a olassr specified in Part I of Scheule 1.

                 (e)   the cleufs of sporting events specified in Part II of

                       Schedule 2 at the sports grounds specified in Part 1; arad

                 (f)   thar classes of sporting events specified in Part II of

                       ^schedule 2.



Schedule 1       Shorts Grounds - Part 1

                /(1)   The home grounds of all associated football clubs which

                       are for the time being members of The Football Association
            /
                       Ltd. or The Football Association of Wales Ltd.

                 (2)   Any other ground in England and Wales used occasionally

                       or temporarily by such a club.

                 (3)   Wembley Stadium.

                 (*4-) Any ground (hot already specified in paragraphs 1 and 3

                       above) in England and Wales used for any international

                       association football match.

                 Part II - Shielfield Park, Berwick-upon-Tweed.
    (1)   Association football matches in which one or both of the

          participating teams represents a club which is foi/the

          time being a member (whether a full or associate member)

          of the Football League.                         /

    (2)   International football matches.             /

    (3)   Association football matches (not already specified in

          paragraph 1 of this Part) in the^competition for -

          (a)     the European Cup          /

          (b)     the Cup Winners Cup, or

          (c)     the UEFA Cup.       /



    Part II                       /

    Association football batches which come within the jurisdication

    of the Scottish Fooxball Association Ltd.



    Part III          /

    (1)   Association football matches at a sports ground outside

          Greay Britain in which one or both of the participating

          terras represents -

              )   The Football Association Ltd., or

      / (b)       The Football Association of Wales Ltd., OR

          (c)     a club which is a member (whether a full or

/                 associate member) of The Football League.

    (2)   Association football matches at a sports ground outside

          Great Britain (not already specified in paragraph 1 of

          this Part) in the competition for -

          (a)     the European Cup

          (b)     the Cup Winners Cup, or

          (c)     the UEFA Cup

          in which one or both of the participating teams represent
     a club which is a member of The Fpctball Association

     Ltd., or The Football Association of Wales Ltd.



This Order does not appleto any sporting events in which all

competitors are to^ake part otherwise than for reward and to

which all spectators are admitted free of charge.
                    PROPOSED DRAFT GENERAL ORDER




SPORTING EVENTS (CONTROL OF ALCOHOL ETC.) ACT 1985



1   (1)       This section applies to a vehicle which

              (a)    is a Public Service vehicle or railway passenger

                     vehicle, and

              (b)                                         se of carrying

                                                           journey to or




    (2)       A person who knowingly causes or permits intoxicating

              liquor to be carried oia
                                   op a vehicle to which this section

              applies is guilty of an offence -

              (a)    if the vehicle is a public service vehicle and he

                     is the operator of the vehicle, or the servant, or



              (b)    i f the vehicle is a hired vehicle and he is the

                    /person to whom the vehicle is hired, or the servant,

              /      or agent of that person.

          /

    (^)       A person who has intoxicating liquor in his possession

              while on a vehicle to which this section applies is guilty

              of an offence.


    (*»•)     A person who is drunk on a vehicle to which this section

              applies is guilty of an offence.


    (5)       In this section 'public service vehicle' and #operator'

              have the same meaning as in the Public Passenger Vehicle
Section 2   (l)   A person who has intoxicating liquor or article to which

                  this section applies in his possession -

                  (a)     at any time during the period of a designated sporting




            (2:




            (3:




                  but does not apply to anything that is for holding any

                  medicinal product (within the meaning of the Medicines Act

                  1 9 6 8 ).
Section 3   (1)      Where licensed premises ©r registered club premises

                     situated within the area of a designated sports ground

                     (a)     the permitted hours in those premises for the

                             purposes of Part III of the Licensing Act 196^

                              (hours during which intoxicants may be sold or       S

                             supplied) shall not, subject to the provisional

                             of any order tinder this section in respecjj/of

                             the premises, include any part of the/period

                             of any designated sporting event aC the

                              designated sports ground, a n d /

                     (b)      section 6 3 ( 2 ) (B) of the Lipwasing Act 196^

                              (intoxicating liquor ordered for consumption

                              off the premises) shaal not apply during any

                              part of that period.


            (2)      Where licensed premises or registered club premises

                     are so situated/a Magistrates' Court may by an order

                     under this section provide

                      (a)          that tfte permitted hours in the premises or any

                              partr of them shall, during so much of the period

                              of any designated sporting event at the designated

                             /sports ground as would (apart from this section) be

                         /    included in the permitted hours, include such

                     /        period as may be determined under the order, and

                    /(b)      that during the period so determined such conditions

                /             as may be specified in the order (including conditions

            /                 modifying or excluding any existing conditions of the

        /                     Justices* Licence or, as the case may be, the registra­

                              tion certificate) shall apply in respect of the sale

                              and supply of intoxicating liquor in the premises;

                     and the justices' licence or, as the case may be, registra-
tion certificate shall have effect accordingly.


An order under this section shall not apply to any part of

the premises from which designated sporting events at the

designated sports ground may be directly viewed.


It shall be a condition ©f any order under this section

that there shall be in attendance at the designated sports

ground throughout the period of any designate*!sporting

event, a person                               /

(a)    who is responsible for securing compliance with this

       section, being the holder of / justices* licence or

       a person designated by him; or in the case of

       registered club premises, a person designated by the

       club and              /

(b)    written notice of/whose name and current address has
                         /
       been given to m e Chief Officer of Police.


A Magistrates' Qburt may -

(a)    vary an £\rder under this section, either generally or

       in respect of a particular designated sporting event

       and/ in the latter case, may in particular provide

       jXat « .          s H a U not Ha.e ,«ect „   respect of

      / that event, or

       revoke the order.
 /

A Magistrates' Court shall not in respect of any sports

ground make an order under this section in any terms, or

vary the terms of such an order (otherwise than by

providing for it not to have effect in respect of a

particular event) unless satisfied that, having regard

in particular to the arrangements made for the admission

of spectators and for regulating their conduct, an order
in the terms proposed is not likely to be detrimental to

the orderly conduct or safety of spectators.


Where an order under this section is in force in respect ^
                                                          ,,y‘
of any sports ground and a police officer of the raj^'not

less than Inspector is of the opinion -          /

(a)   that the sale or supply of intoxicating/liquor in

      pursuance of the order during the ]3,«!riod of a
                                       /
      particular sporting event is likely to be detrimental
                                     /
      to the orderly conduct or safety of spectators at

      that event, and

(b)   that it is impracticable for an application to be

      made to a Magistrates' Court for the variation of the

      order in respect of that event,

he may give written notice to the person whose name has been

given to the Chief Officer of Police in accordance with sub­

section k above.


A notice is to be treated as having been given to a person

under sub-section 7 above   if it is left at

(a)   the licensed premises or, as the case may be, the

      registered club premises, or

(b)   the address notified under sub-section *fb above.


A notice under subsection 7 above may state that, with

effect from when the notice is given, the order under

this section shall, in respect of the sporting event

concerned

(a)   cease to have effect, or

(b)   have effect subject to such modifications as may

      be specified in the ®rder

and the order shall apply accordingly.
#               (10)        A person who sells and supplies or authorises the sale or

                            supply of intoxicating liquor at any time that is excluded

                            from permitted hours by virtue of this section or in contra­

                            vention of conditions imposed tinder this section is aot

                            guilty of an offence under section 5 9 (1 )(A) of the Licensing

                            Act 196^ (prohibition of sale, etc. outside permitted hours)

                            but shall be guilty of an offence under this g^b-section if -

                            (a)   he is the holder of a Justices' Licence or as the case

                                  may be, he is the officer of th«yclub, or

                            (b)   he knows, or has reasonable a^use to believe, the sale

                                  or supply to be such a cojrcravention.


                (11) A person is not guilty of A n offence under section 5 9( 1 )(B)

                            of that Act (prohibition of sale and consumption outside

                            permitted hours) iiyrespect of any time which by virtue of

                            a notice under sprosection 7 above is not part of permitted

                            hours unless l^knows or has reasonable cause to believe

                            that the^ti^e is not part of those hours.



    Section f    (1) Subject/to the provisions of this section, an order under

                            section 3 of this Act in respect of any premises shall

                            (unless sooner revoked) cease to have effect -

                            (^)   on the coming into effect of a further order under

                         $/       that section in respect of those premises, or
                        /
                        / (b)     on the expiration of the period of five months
                        /
                    /             beginning with the day on which it came into effect

                /           whichever is the sooner.


                 (2)        An order under that section in respect of licensed premises

                            shall cease to have effect on the transfer of a Justices*

                            Licence or on the premises ceasing to be licensed premises.


                 (3)        An order under that section in respect of registered club
      premises shall cease to have effect if the club ceases to

      be registered.


(k)   Where an order tinder that section is in force in respect

       of any premises and application is made not less than twenty-

       eight days before the order is due to expire for renewd of

       the order or for a further order in respect of the/premises,

       the first mentioned order shall not cease to h^ve effect by

       virtue of sub-section (1)(b) above until tjie application is

       disposed of by the Magistrates' Court


(5)    Applications for or relating to ojraers under that section

       shall be made to the Magistrates' Court acting for the Petty

       Sessional area in which thpr premises are situated.


(6)    There may be charged by Justices' Clerks -

       (a)           in respect of Jme making, (including renewal) of an

                     order under^hat section, a fee of £ 12 .50 , and

       (b)           in respecir of the variation of such an order where

                     application for the variation is made by the holder

                     of thjf justices' licence, or, as the case may be, the

                     clu^s, a fee of &k,

       notwithstanding anything in section 137(1) of the

       Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 (fees).
                 /
             /
         /

(7)    Aid order under section 29 of the Licensing Act 196^ (fees

      /chargeable in licensing matters) may provide that sub­

       section 6 above shall have effect as if, for either or

       both of the amounts mentioned in that sub-section, there

       were submitted such other amounts as may be specified in

       the order.


(8)    Section 197 of the Licensing Act 196^ (Service of Notices)
                   applies for the purposes of this Act as it applies for

                   the purposes of that Act.
                                                                            /
            (9)    The Schedule to this Act shall have effect, but subject
                                                                       /
                   to any provisions that may be made by rules of Court.



Section 5   (1)    Any party to the proceedings who is aggrLdved by the

                   decision of a Magistrates' Court on ^/application for

                   or in respect of an order under se^rcion 3 of this Act,

                   other than an application in respect of a particular

                   designated sporting event o^particular designated

                    sporting events, may appeal to the Crown Court on such

                    grounds as may be specified in his notice of appeal.


            (2)     In the event of suclf an appeal, any other party to the

                    proceedings shalybe party to the appeal.



Section 6   (1)     If at any      during the period of a designated

                    sporting ev«at at any designated sports ground it

                    appears tar a Constable tn uniform that the sale or

                    supply of intoxicating liquor at any bar within the

                    grouncy is detrimental to the orderly conduct or

                    safety of spectators, at that event, he may require

                    any/person having control of the bar to close it and

                    k«4p it closed until the end of that period.
                    /
                   /
            (2)    /A person who fails to comply with a requirement tinder

                  / sub-section (1) above is guilty of an offence, unless

                    he shows that he took all reasonable steps to comply
            f
                    with it.



Section 7   (1)     A Constable may, at any time during the period of a

                    designated sporting event at any designated sports

                    ground, enter any part of the ground for the purposes
                      of enforcing the provisions of this Act.

            \


            (2)       A Constable may search a person he has reasonable grounds

                      to suspect is committing or has committed an offence undff"

                      this Act and may arrest such a person.                  y


            (3)       A Constable may stop a Public Service Vehicle iwithin the

                      meaning of section 1 of this Act) and may j^earch such a

                      vehicle or a railway passenger vehicle A t he has reasonable

                      grounds to suspect that an offence imder this section is

                      being, or has been committed in Respect of the vehicle.


Section 8             A person guilty of an offen/e under this Act shall be liable

                      to summary conviction

                      (a)    In the case of ax/offence under section 1(2) to a fine

                             not exceeding JLevel k (£1,000) on the standard scale.

                      (b)    In the casey&f offences under sections 1(3), 2(1),

                             3(10) orifi(2), to a fine not exceeding level 3 (£*KX>)

                             on the ^standard scale or to a term not exceeding three

                             months or both, and

                      (c)    In/:he case of an offence under sections 1(4) or 2(2),

                                   a fine not exceeding level 2(£100) on the standard

                             scale.


Section 9             (/i)   The following provisions shall have effect for the

                  J          interpretation of the Act.


             !        (2)    *Designated Sports Ground* means any place -

                             (a)      used (wholly or partly) for sporting events

                                      where accommodation is provided for spectators, and

                             (b)      for the time being designated by order made by the

                                      Secretary of State

                             and an order under this sub-section may include provisions
     for determining for the purposes of this Act the outer limit

     of any designated sports ground (not yet defined).


     ♦Designated Sporting Event* -

     (a)       means a sporting event or proposed sporting ev^fft for

               the time being designated, or of a class designated,

               by order of the Secretary of State;

     (b)       includes a designated sporting even€ within the meaning

               of Part V of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980

     and an order under this sub-sectyni may apply to events or

     proposed events outside Great jfritain as well as those in

     England and Wales.


     The period of a designated sporting event is the period two

     hours before the stant of the event or (if earlier) two hours

     before the time at/which it is advertised to start and ending

     one hour after the end of the event, but -

     (a)       where an Jevent advertised to start at a particular time

               on a p^-ticular day is postponed to a later day the

               period includes the period in the day on which it is

               advertised to take place beginning two hours before and

                (ding one hour after that time, and

     (b) /where an event advertised to start at a particular time
           /
         ji on a particular day does not take place the period is

               the period referred to in paragraph (a).
     /
 / 'Registered Club premises* means premises in respect of which
.?
/
     a club is registered.


     This Act does not apply to any sporting events or proposed

     sporting events -

     (a)       where all competitors are to take part otherwise than

               for reward, and

     (b)       to which all spectators are to be admitted free of charge.
             (7)   Expressions used in this Act and in the Licensing Act 1964-

                   have the same meaning as in that Act, and section 58(2) of

                   that Act (meaning of Chief Officer of Police) applies for

                   the purposes of this Act as it applies for the purposes pt
                                                                               /
                   Part II of that Act.                                    /
                                                                       /

             (8)   Any power to make an order under this section shall be

                   exercisable by statutory instrument subject/to annulment

                   in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament,


                                                        /
Section 10         Part V of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980 shall be

                   amended as follows -

                   (a)   in section 68(1) afterparagraph (b) there shall be

                         inserted -

                         "(c)   a sporting rfVent, or class of sporting event,

                         taking place outside Great Britain".

                   (b)   in section 6y, after the words "public service vehicle"

                         there shaUT be inserted the words

                         "or railjjray passenger vehicle"

                         and affrer the word passenger* there shall be inserted

                         tfhe iprds

                         "far the whole or part of the journey".

                   (c)   i/ section 77, at the end of the definition of

                         ’designated" there shall be the words

                         "and designated sporting event includes a sporting

                         event designated, or of a class designated, under

                         section 9(3Ka) of the Sporting Events (Control of

                         Alcohol, Etc.) Act 1985" and

                   td)   in section 77, after the definition of "public service

                         vehicle” there shall be inserted the following definition

                         "railway passenger vehicle has the same meaning as in

                         the Licensing (Scotland) Act 1976".
Section 11   (1)   This Act may be cited as the JJfforting Events (Control

                   of Alcohol, Etc.) Act 1 ^ %


             (2)   Sections 1 to 9 al’and the Schedule to that Act extend

                   to England afl Wales only.

             (3)   This kotJxoes not extend to Northern Ireland.
           THE    SPORTS   GROUNDS   AND   SPORTING   EVENTS   (DESIGNATION)    ORDER    1985 " ( P . 2 2 / 0 2 / 1 2 )

            This Order c-ame Into effect on 9 August 1985.       It stipulates that the following will
become   ’designated sport's grounds

           Home grounds of all football elubs who are members of the Football Association
           of England and Wales, and any other ground used occasionally or temporarily by
           such a club,

           Any ground usod for International football,

           Wembley Stadium.

2.2       This Order alco Identifies which events will be        'designated sporting e v e n + s T h e s e are
as follows:-

          A 11 Football Association matches,

          All International- football matches,

          All matchs In connection with the European Cup, Cup Winners Cup, and the UEFA
          Cup,

          Ail    Association matches which come within the Scottish Football Association,

          All football matches played outside Great Britain In connection with the above
          competitions.                                                      .




                                               Estrael 'from
2.3      This Order does not cover any event In which all competitors play        without reward
which spectators are admitted free.


3           SPORTING EVENTS (CONTROL OF ALCOHOL ETC) ACT 1985 (P.22/02/12)

3.1         This Act came Into operation on 9 August 1985.

            Section 1       This section applies to the use of public service vehicles or
                            railway passenger vehicles prlmarlly used for the carriage of
                            passengers for the whole or part of a Journey to or from a
                            designated sporting event. Any person who knowingly causes or
                            permits Intoxicating liquor to be carried on such a vehicle,
                            commits an offence. This offence can be committed by the
                            operator, servant or agent of the operator of a public
                            service vehicle. If the vehicle Is hired, then the person
                            hiring, his servant or agent of the person hiring commits the
                            offence. A person who has Intoxicants In his possession or Is
                            drunk whilst on such a vehicle commits an offence.

             Section    2   This section applies to offences committed at or near
                            designated sports grounds. Any person who has In his
                            possession Intoxicating liquor or article or Is drunk In or
                            entering or trying to enter a designated sporting event,
                            commits an offence. An 'article' means any article capable of
                            causing Injury to a person struck by It, being a bottle, can
                            or other portable container (Including such articles crushed
                            or broken) which Is for holding drink and Is of the k^nd
                            which, when empty Is discarded or left to be recovered by the
                            supplier.

             Section    3   relates to the period of a designated event.

                            Where a licensed premises or registered club premises are
        ,                   situated within the area of a designated sports ground, then
                             such premises will be closed for the sale or supply of
                             Intoxicating liquor during the period of a sporting event.
                            The period of a sporting event Is defined as being two hours
                            before the start of an event and one hour after the end of
                            the event. Where the event Is delayed or postponed, then the
                             period of the event will be from the time when It Is
                             advertised to start.

                            There are provisions for the licensee or club secretary (as
                            the case may be) to apply to a Magistrates' Court for an
                            exemption or variation to this order, and this can be done
                            only after 28 days notice has been given to the court. Such
                            an exemption order will last for five months when a new
                            application will have to be made. No exemption will be
                            granted to licensed areas within the ground where the event
                            can be directly viewed.

                            Where an exemption order Is In force and an officer, not
                            below the rank of Inspector, Is of the opinion that the sale
                            or supply of Intoxicants Is detrimental to the good order and
                            safety of the spectators, and It      Is Impracticable to make
                            application t o .a Magistrates' Court, he can serve written
                            notice on such licensee or club secretary stating that the
                            exemption has ceased or Is subjectto certain modifications
                            as stated In the written notice.
SPORTING EVENTS (CONTROL OF ALCOHOL ETC) ACT 1985 (C o n tin u e d )

             Any person, being the said licensee or club secretary, who
             contravenes any such order or notice served under this
             section, will be guilty of an offence, unless he can prove
             that he has reasonable cause to be 11eve that the sale or
             supply of Intoxicants took place outside the 'p®1''0^ °f ^ e
             iportlng e v ent’•

Section 6    allows   a Constable    In uniform,  at anytime during      a
             designated sporting event if it appears to the officer that
             the sale or supply of intoxicants Js detrimental to good
             order and safety of the spectators, to require any person
             having control of a bar to close It, and keep it closed until
             the end of the event. A person who falls to comply with this
             requirement commits an offence.

Section 7    permits a Constable, at any time      during the period of a
             designated sporting event to enter any part of the ground to
             enforce the provisions of this Act. A Constable may search a
             person   whom he hasreasonable       groundsto suspect     is
             committing, or has committed, an offence under this Act.

              A Constable may stop a public service vehicle (defined under
              Section 1) and search such a vehicle If he has reasonable
              grounds to suspect that an offence Is being, or has been
              committed, under this Act.



Section       amends Scottish legislation to fall Into line with the
              requirements of this Act, and therefore permits an officer to
              stop and search a public service vehicle (defined under this
              Act) whilst travelling to and from designated events in
              Scot Iand.       ..... , , _ "■ .. *....                   ..._
                                                 COHFIDEHTIAL          '

                                                      ACC(OPS)/HMW
Assistant Chief Constable, Operations                        Headquarters
Chief Superintendent B Division                          23 October 1985


                  SAfETY OF SKMffS GROUND ACI 1975




  I enclose for your infonsetion a letter dated 15 October 1985 from the
  Chief Executive of the South Yorkshire County Council regarding the
  visit at Barnsley Football ground on Tuesday 8 October 1985.

  Please continue to liaise with the Chief Fire Officer and Club
  regarding matters which need to be resolved.




                       nstable



   <&vpjr tot   Chief Constable




                           ivO-o o
                                                                  i>v(


                 South Yorkshire County Council
                 Chief Executive & County Clerk:                                Department of Administration
                 J.C. Harris, M.A., LrL.M. (Cantab)                             County Hall
                                                                                Barnsley
                                       t:                                       South Yorkshire S 7 0 2TN
                                                                                Telephone: Barnsley
                 Deputy County Clerk & Solicitor:                               (STD 0 2 2 6 ) 2 8 6 1 4 1
                 D. A. Hainsworth, LLB.                                         Telex: 5 4 7 6 7 5


                 Our Ref: D V /A A /5 8 3 / 1    Your Ref:                      Date:   15 O c t o b e r 1 9 8 5


                 This matter is being dealt with by          D.   Vaughan       Ext. No.    422



    Dear Sir,                                   .*

    Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

    The Chief Fire Officer has informed me of the results of a spot check carried
    out, on conjunction with the South Yorkshire Police, on the night of Tuesday,'
    8th October (prior to the kick-oXf of a Milk Cun Tie).
             I.
    The following points must be drawn to the Club’s attention:-

    MEANS OF ESCAPE

    1.   Gate No. 1 was totally blocked by a trailer type refreshment stand. ‘ This
         was finally removed from the ground with Police help. Police horses had
         to be used to hold back supporters whilst the gates were opened to remove
         the offending trailer.

    2. - Gate No. 4 was locked and unmanned.?                 Some gates which were manned were
         not unlocked.

    EMERGENCY LIGHTING
     -----------------
                                                                            f
    The following emergency lighting points were unlit:

    Grandstand

    Three lighting points

    Brewery Stand

    The staircase nearest to the Spion Kop

    Pontefract Road Stand

    All lighting points along the boundary wall

    Disabled Stand

    All lighting points beneath the Disabled Stand .
                                                                                  /Conta .
r                                                                   1

    Mr. M. J. Spinks,
    Secretary,               ..
    Barnsley Football Club Ltd., '//
    Oakwell Ground,
    Barnsley.
L   S71 1ET                 v. ..                                   J
            / v '    f

           y ur J.
                t e  * i«                                                          ~ 2
                                                                                     *■ -                                    15 October 1985
     /■/ Mr. H.    Spinks

-y
        F I R E E Q U IP M E N T

        ■T he r e f r e s h m e n t       s ta n d   at    th e    re a r     of   th e   B re w e ry    S ta n d h a s     no   fire     e q u ip m e n t.
        A 5 lb         D ry   Powder E x tin g u is h e r              is     re q u ire d    w h e re   L .P .G .   co o k e rs   a re    used.


         GENERAL


         Stewards

         Stewards manning gates were asked what action wes to be taken in the event of   ^
         an emergency and what was the coded message that would be used. Seven stewards ^
         were picked out at random and out of the seven stewards asked, four were unab.e
         to answer. None of the stewards had written instructions.

         Two younger stewards were asked their                                       ages;       o n e ' was   aged 14, the other 15.

         S e c tio n      9   of   th e     G e n e ra l   S a fe ty        C e rtific a te      ( G e n e r a l T e rm s   and    C o n d itio n s )    s ta te s
         t h a t s a f e t y s te w a rd s s h a l l be f i t                 a n d c a p a b le t o c a r r y o u t t h e i r d u t i e s .  The        ^
         C o u n t y Fire S e r v i c e c o n s i d e r t h a t               a m o r e a p p r o p r i a t e m in im u m a g e o f ,.lb y e a r s o e ,
         th e    c r ite r ia      fo r      e m p lo y in g      S a fe ty    S te w a rd s *


         M o b ile       C a te rin g      U n its

         All catering units                     u sin g     L.P.G. cookers should be provided with 5 lb Dry Powder
         extinguishers.

        JEhesiting of all mobile catering units should be predetermined.

         The practice of caterers selling on walkways and exit routes should cease
          forthwith.

         Proposed sites should be marked on a plan' and submitted to the County Fire
          Service.

         You will recall that the subject of Safety Stewards in particular was raised in
         my letter of 13th May, discussed at the "Summer’' inspection on 11th July,
         discussed at the meeting with all South Yorkshire Football League Clubs at
 o       Police Headquarters, Sheffield on 1st August, and reinforced in ray further
          letter of 9th August.

         Should a further spot check reveal similar situations, the County Council will
         have no alternative but to prosecute the Club for contravening the Safety of
          Sports Grounds Act, 1975.

          As you are aware, the penalty for contravening any term or condition of a
          General Safety Certificate is, on summary conviction, a fine not exceeding
          £2,000 or, bn conviction on indictment, a fine or imprisonment for a term not
          exceeding two years, or both.

                                                                                          Y o u rs   fa ith fu lly ,




                                                                                          'Chief Executive.
                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                      REF:    OPS TWS/SM
      .ibMi      SUPT STUART         OPERATIONS DIVISION
                                                                      STATION/DEPT:   OPERATIONS
      TO:        CH SUPT MEADOWS             OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION   DATE:           18 October 1985


                 SUBJECT:             SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975




                 Attached is a copy of a letter dated 15 October 1985 from South
                 Yorkshire County Council to the Secretary of Barnsley Football Club
                 Limited which relates to a spot check carried out by the Chief Fire
                 Officer and divisional police officers on the night of the Milk Cup-Tie
                 between Barnsley FC and Newcastle United on Tuesday, 8 October 1985 .

                 Copy forwarded for your information and that of the Assistant Chief
                 Constable (Operations). May it please be returned to Operations
                 Division for filing.

                          t


                                                  ■




                 Superintendent


                 Enc




            P SO UTH Y O R K S JP O U C E




  A
              CHIEF S U P t / i r
              O P E R AT I ON S S 8 JTRAFF




GEN/2
                                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                 REF:        OPS TWS/SM
        FROM:   CH SUPT MEADOWS              OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION
                                                                                 STATION/DEPT:      OPERATIONS
                SEE DISTRIBUTION LIST:                                               DATE:          11 October 1985


                SUBJECT:                THE SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS
                                        (DISTRIBUTION) ORDER 1985




                Please find attached for your information and attention a copy of the
                above order which came into effect on 9 August 1985-




                C h ie f   S u p e rin te n d e n t
                O p e ra tio n s   & T r a ffic       D iv is io n



                Enc


                Distribution

                Ch Supts    A Division
                            B Division                                               lQ
                             C Division                              Qj( C-   I**"
                             D Division
                            F Division
                Supt        Training
                Ch Insp     Prosecutions Dept
                Mr C Corker Central Registry




I




                                                                                                                      J

    GEN/2
                                                                                                                      /
     SOUTH YO RKS. POLICE                                       Q.C.C.. t Q x O f o r
                                                           i.   c#?«^3«or~|
                                                                Tnouuiing
              11 OCT 1985                                       ««


         HEADQUARTERS
        A D M IN ISTRATIOT



d e c f e           c^H-
                                                           P O L I C Y       fiL£
PwttulOwe C-

c c^c.<» ^ Sporting                                                  AD M IN D£P r . ttQ



   cpy. yControl of Alcohd,
        7,     Act 1985
< V - ^ .      w
        (^ £ /W v S L                 CHAPTER       57

                     ARRANGEMENT OF
       Section                                                               ‘ ‘
         1.      Offences in connection with alcohol on coaches and trains.
         2.      Offences in connection with alcohol, containers etc. at sports
                   grounds.
         3.      Licensing hours within sports grounds.
         4.      Supplementary provisions about orders under section 3.
         5.      Appeals.
         6.      Closure o f bars.
         7.      Powers o f enforcement.
         8.      Penalties for offences.
         9.      Interpretation.
        10.      Amendment o f Criminal Justice (Scotland) A ct 1980.
        11.      Short title and extent.
                 S c h e d u l e : Procedure.




       * ( j £         *


                                                A
                        ELIZABETH H                              c. 57




         Sporting Events
     (Control of Alcohol etc.)
            Act 1985
                      1985 CHAPTER 57
An Act to make provision for punishing those who cause
 or permit intoxicating liquor to be carried on public
 service vehicles and railway passenger vehicles carrying
 passengers to or from designated sporting events or
 who possess intoxicating liquor on such vehicles and
 those who possess intoxicating liquor or certain articles
 capable of causing injury at designated sports grounds
 during the period of designated sporting events, for
 punishing drunkenness on such vehicles and, during
 the period of designated sporting events, at such
 grounds and, where licensed premises or premises in
 respect of which a club is registered (for the purposes
 of the Licensing Act 1964) are within designated
 sports grounds, to make provision for regulating the
 sale or supply of intoxicating liquor and for the closure
 of bars.                                [25th July 1985]
     e i t e n a c t e d by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and

B     with the advice and consent o f the Lords Spiritual and
     Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the authority o f the same, as follows:—

  1.— (1) This section applies to a vehicle which-                Offences in
    (a) is a public service vehicle or railway passenger vehicle, connection
          and                                                             „„
    (b) is being used for the principal purpose of carrying pass- coaches and
         engers for the whole or part of a journey to or from trains-
         a designated sporting event.
                                A 2
 2                c. 57    Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol e tc ) A ct 1985


                     (2) A person who knowingly causes or permits intoxicating
                  liquor to be carried on a vehicle to which this section applies
                  is guilty of an offence—
                        (a) if the vehicle is a public service vehicle and he is the
                              operator of the vehicle or the servant or agent of the
                              operator, or
                        (b) if the vehicle is a hired vehicle and he is the person to
                              whom it is hired or the servant or agent of that person.
                     (3) A person who has intoxicating liquor in his possession
                  while on a vehicle to which this section applies is guilty of an
                  offence.
                    (4) A person who is drunk on a vehicle to which this section
                  applies is guilty of an offence.
                    (5) In this section “ public service vehicle ” and “ operator ”
1981 c. 14.       have the same meaning as in the Public Passenger Vehicles A ct
                  1981.


 Offences in         2.— (1) A person who has intoxicating liquor or an article to
■connection       which this section applies in his possession-—
with alcohol,
■containers            (a) at any time during the period of a designated sporting
•etc. at sports              event when he is in any area of a designated sports
grounds.                     ground from which the event may be directly viewed, or
                       (b) while entering or trying to enter a designated sports
                             ground at any time during the period of a designated
                             sporting event at that ground,
                  is guilty of an offence.
                    (2) A person who is drunk in a designated sports ground at
                  any time during the period of a designated sporting event at that
                  ground or is drunk while entering or trying to enter such a
                  ground at any time during the period of a designated sporting
                  event at that ground is guilty of an offence.
                     (3) This section applies to any article capable of causing injury
                  to a person struck by it, being—
                        (a) a bottle, can or other portable container (including such
                             an article when crushed or broken) which—
                                   (i) is for holding any drink, and
                                   (ii) is of a kind which, when empty, is normally
                                discarded or returned to, or left to be recovered by,
                                the supplier, or
                        (b) part of an article falling within paragraph (a) ab ove;
                  but does not apply to anything that is for holding any medicinal
1968 c. 67.       product (within the meaning of the M edicines A ct 1968).
        Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) A ct 1985      c. 57


  3.—(1) Where licensed premises or registered club premises Licensing
are situated within the area of a designated sports ground—         sportsW
     (a) the permitted hours in those premises for the purposes grounds.
           of Part III of the Licensing A ct 1964 (hours during 1964 c. 26.
           which intoxicating liquor may be sold or supplied in
           the premises or consumed in or taken from the premi­
           ses) shall not, subject to the provisions of any order
           under this section in respect of the premises, include
           any part of the period of any designated sporting event
           at the designated sports ground, and
      (b) section 63(2X6) of that A ct (intoxicating liquor ordered
           for consumption off the premises) shall not apply dur­
           ing any part of that period.

  (2) Where licensed premises or registered club premises are
so situated, a magistrates’ court may by an order under this
section provide—
      (a) that the permitted hours in the premises or any part of
           them shall, during so much of the period of any desig­
           nated sporting event at the designated sports ground as
           would (apart from this section) be included in the per­
           mitted hours, include such period as may be determined
           under the order, and
      (b) that during the period so determined such conditions as
           may be specified in the order (including conditions
           modifying or excluding any existing conditions of the
           justices’ licence or, as the case may be, the registration
           certificate) sh all apply in respect of the sale or supply of
           intoxicating liquor in the prem ises;
and the justices’ licence or, as the case may be, registration
certificate shall have effect accordingly.

  (3) A n order under this section shall not apply to any part
of the premises from which designated sporting events at the
designated sports ground may be directly viewed.

  (4) It shall be a condition of any order under this section
that there shall be in attendance at the designated sports ground
throughout the period of any designated sporting event a
person—
     (a) who is responsible for securing compliance with this
          section, being the holder of the justices’ licence or a
          person designated by him or, in the case of registered
          club premises, a person designated by the club, and
     (b) written notice of whose name and current address has
          been given to the chief officer of police.
 c. 57   Sporting Events ( Control o f Alcohol etc.) A ct 1985


   (5) A magistrates’ court may—
      (a) vary an order under this section, either generally or in
           respect of a particular designated sporting event and,
           in the latter case, may in particular provide that the
           order shall not have effect in respect of that event, or
      (b) revoke the order.
   (6) A magistrates’ court shall not in respect of any sports
ground make an order under this section in any terms, or vary
the terms of such an order (otherwise than by providing for it
not to have effect in respect of a particular event), unless satis­
fied that, having regard in particular to the arrangements made
for the admission of spectators and for regulating their conduct,
an order in the terms proposed is not likely to be detrimental
to the orderly conduct or safety of spectators.
   (7) Where an order under this section is in force in respect
of any sports ground and a police officer of rank not less than
inspector is of the opinion—
      (a) that the sale or supply of intoxicating liquor in pur­
           suance of the order during the period of a particular
           designated sporting event is likely to be detrimental to
           the orderly conduct or safety of spectators at that event,
           and
      (b) that it is impracticable for an application to be made to
           a magistrates’ court for the variation of the order in
           respect of that event,
he may give written notice to the person whose name has been
given to the chief officer o f police in accordance with subsection
(4) above.
   (8) A notice is to be treated as given to a person under sub­
section (7) above if it is left at—
      (a) the licensed premises or, as the case may be, the regis­
           tered club premises, or
      (b) the address notified under subsection (4)(b) above.
   (9) A notice under subsection (7) above may state that, with
effect from the time when the notice is given, the order under
this section shall, in respect of the sporting event concerned—■
      (a) cease to have effect, or
      (b) have effect subject to such modifications as may be
           specified in the order;
and the order shall apply accordingly.
   (10) A person who sells or supplies or authorises the sale or
supply of intoxicating liquor at any time that is excluded from
the permitted hours by virtue of this section or in contravention
of conditions imposed under this section is not guilty of an
       Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) A ct 1985   c. 57            5


offence under section 59(l)(a) of the Licensing A ct 1964 (pro-1964 c. 26.
hibition of sale etc. outside permitted hours) but shall be guilty
of an offence under this subsection if—
     (a) he is the holder of the justices’ licence or, as the case
           may be, an officer of the club, or
      (b) he knows or has reasonable cause to believe the sale or
           supply to be such a contravention.
  (11)      A person is not guilty of an offence under section 59(1)(&)
of that A ct (prohibition of consumption etc. outside permitted
hours) in respect of any time which by virtue of a notice under
subsection (7) above is not part of the permitted hours unless he
knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the time is not
part o f those hours.



  4.— (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, an order under Supplemen-
section 3 of this A ct in respect of any premises shall (unless provisions
sooner revoked) cease to have effect—                               about orders
     (a) on the coming into effect of a further order under that “nder section
           section in respect of those premises, or
      (b) on the expiration of the period of five months beginning
           with the day on which it com es into effect,
whichever is the sooner.
   (2) A n order under that section in respect of licensed premises
shall cease to have effect on the transfer of the justices’ licence
or on the premises ceasing to be licensed premises.
   (3) A n order under that section in respect of registered club
premises shall cease to have effect if the club ceases to be regis­
tered.
  (4) Where an order under that section is in force in respect of
any premises and application is made not less than twenty-eight
days before the order is due to expire for renewal of the order or
for a further order in respect of the premises, the first-mentioned
order shall not cease to have effect by virtue of subsection il)(b)
above until the application is disposed of by the magistrates’
court.
   (5) Applications for or relating to orders under that section
shall be made to the magistrates’ court acting for the petty ses­
sions area in which the premises are situated.
   (6) There may be charged by justices’ clerks—
      (a) in respect of the making (including the renewal) of an
           order under that section, a fee of £12.50, and
6              c. 57   Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) A ct 1985


                   (b) in respect of the variation of such an order where appli­
                        cation for the variation is made by the holder of the
                        justices’ licence or, as the case may be, the club, a fee
                        of £4,
1980 c. 43.    notwithstanding anything in section 137(1) of the Magistrates’
               Courts A ct 1980 (Fees).
1964 c. 26.      (7) A n order under section 29 of the Licensing A ct 1964 (fees
               chargeable in licensing matters) may provide that subsection (6)
               above shall have effect as if, for either or both of the amounts
               mentioned in that subsection, there were substituted such other
               amount or amounts as may be specified in the order.
                  (8) Section 197 of the Licensing A ct 1964 (Service of notices)
               applies for the purposes of this A ct as it applies for the purposes
               of that Act.
                 (9) The Schedule to this Act shall have effect, but subject to
               any provision that may be made by rules of court.

Appeals.         5.— (1) Any party to the proceedings who is aggrieved by a
               decision of a magistrates’ court on an application for or in respect
               of an order under section 3 of this Act, other than an application
               in respect of a particular designated sporting event or {articular
               designated sporting events, may appeal to the Crown Court on
               such grounds as may be specified in his notice of appeal.
                 (2) In the event of such an appeal, any other party to the
               proceedings shall be party to the appeal.
                 (3) The judgment of the Crown Court on any such appeal shall
               be final.


Closure of       6.— (1) If at any time during the period of a designated sport­
bars.          ing event at any designated sports ground it appears to a con­
               stable in uniform that the sale or supply o f intoxicating liquor
               at any bar within the ground is detrimental to the orderly con­
               duct or safety of spectators at that event, he may require any
               person having control of the bar to close it and keep it closed
               until the end o f that period.
                  (2)    A person who fails to comply with a requirement imposed
               under subsection (1) above is guilty of an offence, unless he shows
               that he took all reasonable steps to comply with it.


Powers of        7.— (1) A constable may, at any time during the period of a
enforcement.   designated sporting event at any designated sports ground, enter
               any part of the ground for the purpose of enforcing the provisions
               of this Act.
        Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) A ct 1985    c. 57             7


   (2) A constable may search a person he has reasonable grounds
to suspect is committing or has committed an offence under this
A ct, and may arrest such a person.
  (3) A constable may stop a public service vehicle (within the
meaning of section 1 of this Act) and may search such a vehicle
or a railway passenger vehicle if he has reasonable grounds to
suspect that an offence under that section is being or has been
committed in respect of the vehicle.



  8.      A person guilty of an offence under this A ct shall be liable Penalties for
on summary conviction —                                              offences.
     (a) in the case of an offence under section 1(2), to a fine
           not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale,
     (b) in the case of an offence under section 1(3), 2(1), 3(10) or
           6(2), to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard
           scale or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
           three months or both, and
     (c) in the case of an offence under section 1(4) or 2(2), to a
           fine not exceeding level 2 on the standard scale.



   9.— (1) The following provisions shall have effect for the Interpretation,
interpretation of this Act.
   (2) “ Designated sports ground ” means any place—
      (а) used (wholly or partly) for sporting events where accom­
           modation. is provided for spectators, and
     ( б) for the tim e being designated, or o f a class designated,
           by order made by the Secretary of S ta te;
and an order under this subsection may include provision for
determining for the purposes o f this A ct the outer lim it of any
designated sports ground.
  (3) “ Designated sporting event ”—
     (a) means a sporting event or proposed sporting event for
           the time being designated, or of a class designated, by
          order made by the Secretary of State, and
     (b) includes a designated sporting event within the meaning
          of Part V of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) A ct 1980 ; 1980 c. 62.
and an order under this subsection may apply to events or pro­
posed events outside Great Britain as well as those in England
and Wales.
  (4) The period of a designated sporting event is the period
beginning two hours before the start of the event or (if earlier)
              c. 57     Sporting Events {Control o f Alcohol etc.) A ct 1985


              two hours before the time at which it is advertised to start and
              ending one hour after the end of the event, but—
                   (a) where an event advertised to start at a particular time
                        on a particular day is postponed to a later day, the
                        period includes the period in the day on which it
                        is advertised to take place beginning two hours before
                        and ending one hour after that time, and
                  (b) where an event advertised to start at a particular time
                        on a particular day does not take place, the period is
                        the period referred to in paragraph (a) above.

                (5) “ Registered club premises ” means premises in respect of
              which a club is registered.

                (6) This A ct does not apply to any sporting event or proposed
              sporting event—
                   (a) where all competitors are to take part otherwise than
                        for reward, and
                   (b) to which all spectators are to be admitted free of charge.

1964 c. 26.      (7) Expressions used in this A ct and in the Licensing A ct 1964
              have the same meaning as in that A ct, and section 58(2) of that
              A ct (meaning of chief officer of police) applies for the purposes
              of this A ct as it applies for the purposes of Part II of that Act.

                (8) Any power to make an order under this section shall be
              exercisable by statutory instrument subject to annulment in pur­
              suance of a resolution of either H ouse of Parliament.



Amendment        10.    Part V of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) A ct 1980 shall
o f Criminal   be amended as follows—
Justice
(Scotland) Act     (a) in section 68(1), after paragraph (b) there shall be
1980.                   inserted—
1980 c. 62.                  “ (c) a sporting event, or a class of sporting event,
                               taking place outside Great Britain: ” ;
                      (b) in section 69, after the words “ public service vehicle ”
                            there shall be inserted the words “ or railway passenger
                            vehicle ” and after the word “ passengers ” there shall
                            be inserted the words “ for the whole or part of a
                            journey” ;
                      (c) in section 77, at the end of the definition of “ designated ”
                            there shall be added the words “ and ‘ designated sport­
                            ing event ’ includes a sporting event designated, or
                            of a class designated, under section 9(3) (a) of the
                            Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) A ct 1985 ” ;
                            and
       Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) A ct 1985   c. 57


    (d) in section 77, after the definition of “ public service
        vehicle ” there shall be inserted the following defi­
        nition—
             “ ‘ railway passenger vehicle ■has the same mean­
           ing as in the Licensing (Scotland) A ct 1976 ”.      1976 c. 66.


  11.— (1) This A ct may be cited as the Sporting Events (Control Short title-
                                                                  ment and
of A lcohol etc.) A ct 1985.                                      extent.
  (2) Sections 1 to 9 of and the Schedule to this A ct extend to
England and Wales only.
  (3) This A ct does not extend to Northern Ireland.
10            c. 57   Sporting Events {Control o f Alcohol etc.) A ct 1985


Section 4.                            SCHEDULE
                                         PROCEDURE
                 1. An application for or in respect of an order under section 3 of
              this Act shall be made by complaint to a justice of the peace acting
              for the petty sessions area for which the magistrates’ court having
              jurisdiction in the matter acts.

                2.—(1) A complaint for the making or variation of such an
              order may be made—
                  (a) in respect of licensed premises, by the holder of the justices’
                       licence, and
                  (b) in respect of registered club premises, by the chairman
                       or secretary of the club.
                (2) The justice of the peace to whom the complaint is so made
              shaM issue—
                   (a) a summons directed to the chief officer of police, and
                   (b) a summons directed to the local authority,
              and each summons shall require the person to whom it is directed
              to appear before the magistrates’ court to show why the order should
              not be made or, as the case may be, varied.
                (3) A summons directed to a local authority under this paragraph
              shill not have effect (and accordingly the local authority shall not be
              party to the proceedings) unless there is in force in respect of the
1975 c. 52.   sports ground concerned a certificate under the Safety of Sports
              Grounds Act 1975.
                (4) A copy of any order made on a complaint made by any of the
              persons mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) above shall be sent to the
              chief officer of police and (where the local authority are party to the
              proceedings) to the local authority.

                3.—(1) A complaint for the variation or revocation of such an
              order may be made—
                  (a) by the chief officer of police, or
                  (b) where such a certificate is in force in respect of the sports
                       ground concerned, by the local authority.
                 (2) The justice of the peace to whom the complaint is so made
              shall issue a summons directed to the holder of the justices’ licence
              or, in the case of registered club premises, to the chairman or secre­
              tary of the club requiring him to appear before the magistrates’ court
              to show cause why the order should not be varied or revoked.
                (3) A copy of any order made on a complaint made by any of the
              persons mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) above shall be sent to the
              holder of the justices’ licence or, as the case may be, to the chairman
              or secretary of the chib.

                4. Where a complaint is made for a new order under section 3
              of this Act—
                   (a) there shall be delivered to the justice of the peace at the
                        time the complaint is made a plan of the sports ground
       Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) A ct 1985                       c. 57   11


        showing the premises within that ground where intoxicating
        liquor would be sold or supplied in pursuance of the pro­
        posed order, and
    (b) the hearing shall not take place before the end of the period
         of 28 days beginning with the day on which the complaint
         is made.
  5. On any complaint made to a magistrates’ court for or in
respect of an order under section 3 of this Act, or appeal to the
Crown Court in respect of such a complaint, to which a dub is a
nartv, the club, if not represented by counsel or a solicitor, shall be
heard by the chairman or secretary, by any number of'the com­
mittee having the general management of the affairs of the dub or
by any officer of the club duly authorised.

  6. In this Schedule, “ local authority ” has the same meaning as in
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.                                1975 c. 52.


                   PRINTED IN ENGLAND BY W. J. SHARP, CB
         Controller and Chief Executive of H er Majesty’s Stationery Office and
                         Queen** Printer of Acts of Parliament
. 57       Sporting Events ( Control o f Alcohol etc.) A ct 1985




            LONDON: PUBLISHED BY HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
(545754)
                                   £2-30 net
                              ISBN 0 10 545785 X
                                                        OPS TWS/SM
CH SUPT MEADOWS   OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION
                                                               OPERATIONS
SEE DISTRIBUTION LIST                                          11 October 1985


               THE SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS
               (DISTRIBUTION) ORDER 1985




Please find attached for your information and attention a copy of the
above order which came into effect on 9 August 1985 .




Chief Superintendent
Operations 8> Traffic Division


Enc


Distribution

Ch Supts    A Division
            B Division
            C Division
            D Division
            F Division
Supt        Training
Ch Insp    ■Prosecutions Dept
            Central Registry
                                                                            SOI           YORKS. POLICE
                                             P O L IC Y         FILE
                                                   7O"mmiw0t?
                                     STATTTTORy           1NST2JJ          ^ - 8           0CTI985
                                                                                  HEADQUARTERS
'Oot      S.W                                                                    ADMINOTRATJdN
'   A t e . (oOi                   CJLk            1985 No. 1151

                          SPORTS GROUNDS A                            RTING EVENTS
     (V>£.-%£ ^
                                          cnrtsG rounds a                        vents.
          f                               (Designation)                         UTH YORK

                                           ,-9 OCT                       5th July 1985
                                                                                     1 00<
                                                                         6th July 1985

                                       g in to Q                       ±    $    m    m    f
                                                                           OPERATIC
              in exercise o f the powers conferred on me by section'9(2) and (5) oF the Sporting
              Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) Act 1985(a), I hereby make the following Order:—

                1. This Order may be cited as the Sports Grounds and Sporting Events
              (Designation) Order 1985 and shall come into operation on 9th August 1985.

                2. For the purposes o f the Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) Act 1985,
              there are hereby designated—

                   (a) the classes o f sports grounds specified in paragraphs 1, 2 and 4 o f Part I
                       o f Schedule 1 to this Order;

                   (b) the sports ground specified in paragraph 3 o f the said Part;
                   (c) the sports ground specified in Part II o f that Schedule;

                  ( d ) the classes o f sporting events specified in Part I o f Schedule 2 to this Order
                        at any sports ground specified or o f a class specified in Part I o f Schedule
                         l; '
                   (e) the class o f sporting events specified in Part II o f Schedule 2 at the sports
                         ground specified in Part II o f Schedule 1; and

                  ( / ) the classes o f sporting events specified in Part III o f Schedule 2.


                                                                                Leon Brittan,
                                                                     One o f Her Majesty’s Principal
                                                                          Secretaries o f State.

              H om e Office.
              25th July 1985.

              ( a ) 1985 c.57.
                                   SCHEDULE 1

                                SPORTS GROUNDS

                                        P art I

  1. The home grounds of all association football clubs which are for the time being
members of The Football Association Limited or The Football Association of Wales
Limited.

   2. Any other ground in England and Wales used occasionally or temporarily by such a
club.

  3. Wembley Stadium.

  4. Any ground (not already specified in paragraphs 1 to 3 above) in England and Wales
used for any international association football match.


                                        P a r t II

                         Shielfield Park, Berwick-upon-Tweed.



                                   SCHEDULE 2

                         CLASSES OF SPORTING EVENTS

                                        P art I

  1. Association football matches in which one or both of the participating teams
represents a club which is for the time being a member (whether a full or an associate
member) of The Football League.


  2. International association football matches.


  3. Association football matches (not already specified in paragraph 1 of this Part) in
the competition for—

   (a) the European Cup;

   (b) the Cup Winners’ Cup; or

   (c) the UEFA Cup.



                                        P a r t II

Association football matches which come within the jurisdiction of the Scottish Football
Association Limited.

                                            2
                                       P art III

   1.    Association football matches at a sports ground outside Great Britain in which one
or both of the participating teams represents—
   (a) The Football Association Limited; or
   (b) The Football Association of Wales Limited; or
   (c) a club which is a member (whether a full or an associate member) of The Football
       League.



  2.     Association football matches at a sports ground outside Great Britain (not already
specified in paragraph 1 of this Part) in the competition for—

   (a) the European Cup;
   (b) the Cup Winners’ Cup; or
   (c) the UEFA Cup;
in which one or both of the participating teams represents a club which is a member of
The Football Association Limited or The Football Association of Wales Limited.




                              EXPLANATORY NOTE
                        (This Note is not part o f the Order.)
  This Order designates sports grounds (mainly by reference to classes) and
classes o f sporting events taking place at those grounds or outside Great Britain
for the purposes o f the Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.) Act 1985. (The
Act does not, by virtue o f section 9(b), apply to any sporting event in which all
competitors are to take part otherwise than for reward and to which all spectators
are to be admitted free o f charge.)




                                           3
     STATUTORY                          INSTRUMENTS



                       1985 No. 1151

SPORTS GROUNDS AND SPORTING EVENTS

   The Sports Grounds and Sporting Events
         (Designation) Order 1985




        Printed in the U K for H M S O hy B u rru p M athicson & Co.. Ltd.
                     190    BM 36717x     M 30   C13   7/85

                                   8 0 p net

                         IS B N 0 11 057151 7
                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                                                                                     P t > | »%■ h i .
                                                                                                                   R EF:              OPS TW S/SM
ACC      ( O P E R A T IO N S )           MR W JACKSON
                                                                                                                   S T A T IO N /D E P T :         OP E RA TIO NS
SEE D I S T R I B U T I O N
                                                                                                                   DATE:                            30 A u g u s t   1985


  SUBJECT:                  SAFE TY OF SPORTS GROUNDS




  On M o n d a y ,        19 A u g u s t             1985,        to g e th e r          w ith       S u p e rin te n d e n t             S tu a rt
  (O p e ra tio n s ),            I    a tte n d e d         a m e e tin g             at      C o u n ty      H a ll,      B a rn s le y ,         w he re
  a d is c u s s io n to o k p la c e w i t h Mr D a v id V aughan                                                 and a s e n io r o f f i c e r
  fro m th e C o u n ty F ir e S e r v ic e .   The p u rp o s e o f                                               th e m e e tin g was t o
 d is c u s s     th e     In te rim              R e p o rt      of    th e          P o p p le w e ll        In q u iry          and     th e     re la te d
 Home O f f i c e c i r c u l a r n u m b e r 5 ^ / 1 9 8 5 .                                  For      ease        o f re fe re n c e ,            a    copy
 o f th e c i r c u la r is a tta c h e d .


 As s ta te d in th e c i r c u l a r , a num ber o f th e In q u ir y R e p o r t's
 re c o m m e n d a tio n s h a v e i m p l i c a t i o n s f o r th e r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s o f
 lo c a l     a u th o r itie s ,             c h ie f       fire       o ffic e r s            and         c h ie f     o f f ic e r s o fp o lic e .
 I t w as n e c e s s a r y t h e r e f o r e t o c o n s i d e r                               th e        re c o m m e n d a tio n s and               to
 e s t a b l i s h w h a t a c t i o n was n e c e s s a r y a t                                th e        p re s e n t tim e .


 The     fo llo w in g            a c tio n          h a s /is     b e in g        ta k e n       in        re sp e ct        of    th e
 f o llo w in g s p e c if ic p o in ts                        ra is e d         in      th e     a tta c h e d        Home O f f i c e
 c i r c u l a r num ber 5V 1 9 8 5 : -


 P a ra g ra p h     5     (a )        (i).           The      S u p e rin te n d e n t              (O p e ra tio n s ) ,           to g e th e r
 w ith       a p o lic e      re p re s e n ta tiv e                   fro m       th e     d iv is io n            co n c e rn e d ,       a re
 m em bers o f t h e S a f e t y o f S p o r t s G ro u n d s A c t 1 9 7 5 O f f i c e r W o r k in g
 P a r t y a n d t h e r e f o r e a l r e a d y f o r m p a r t o f t h e i s s u i n g te a m f o r
 s a fe ty c e r t if ic a t e s .


 P a ra g ra p h     5     (a )        ( ii) .         A c tio n        is       a lr e a d y       b e in g       ta k e n    by      th e
 S a fe ty      of   S p o rts           G roundsA ct              1975          O ffic e r         W o rk in g        P a rty .


P a ra g ra p h      5     (a )        ( i i i ) .       The       C o u n ty         F ir e     S e rv ic e         have      a lr e a d y
c h e c k e d 70         g ro u n d s        in       th e   c o u n ty .             A c tio n        is     b e in g     ta k e n       w here
n e c e s s a ry .


P a ra g ra p h      5     (a )        (iv).           W h e re     th is         a p p lie s          it     is     c o n s id e r e d       th a t
a 'n o s m o k in g '             p r o h ib itio n              c o u ld        be     in c o rp o ra te d            in to       th e     g ro u n d
re g u la tio n s .                                                          .             • '


P a ra g ra p h 5 ( a ) . ( v ) .                  The C o u n ty F i r e                   S e rv ic e have a l i s t o f th e
70 g ro u n d s th e y h a v e                    checked, th is is                         t o be v e r i f i e d a n d a c o p y
th e n   fo rw a rd e d           to      th e       C o u n ty     C o u n c il,           th is       th e n      fo rm in g        a re g is te r.


P a ra g ra p h 5 (a )                (vi).        I t w as c o n s id e r e d t h a t i t was n o t p r a c t i c a l
to e n fo r c e a no                  p a r k i n g z o n e a ro u n d s p o r t s g r o u n d s i n many c a s e s ,
h a v in g    re g a rd      in        p a r tic u la r           to    th e          e ffe c t      th a t        th is    w o u ld       have         on
    —            ----- - ‘ i uj.aj.uj.oti, u u y       n o p&j. King z o n e ' e s t a b l i s h e d
             o :.x j jjr u s e n l c i u d i i i o n a l p rc b ie ju o i n th e v i c i n i t y o f th e g r o u n d s .
D i v i s i o n a l com m anders w i l l t h e r e f o r e d e c id e t h e l e v e l o f o n - s t r e e t
p a rk in g t h a t can                be a llo w e d ,            e n s u rin g            access           to     g ro u n d s     at      a ll       tim e s
by th e e m e rg e n cy                s e rv ic e s .
                                                                    2




Paragraph 5 (a) (vii). This is being considered by the Officer
Working Party in respect of safety certificates that have been
issued so far, and divisions are already incorporating into
their operational orders police presence on exit gates in the
event of an emergency. An amendment to the Force Standing
Instructions for the policing of football matches is attached
in respect of the duties of stewards.

Paragraph 5 (a) (viii). A draft booklet setting out the duties
of stewards has been prepared and is being examined by the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act Officer Working Party with a view
to this being published by the County Council and then issued
to persons employed at designated grounds as stewards. Divisional
Commanders should however ensure that stewards are properly
briefed prior to an event and that they are trained and are
competent to carry out their duties. It is also recommended
that a head steward be appointed.

Paragraph 5 (c) (i). Divisional Commanders should ensure that
officers policing an event are briefed in respect of their duties
in the event of an emergency evacuation.

Paragraph 5 (c) (ii). The force will continue to be represented
by the Superintendent (Operations) and a police representative
from the respective division.

Paragraph 5 (c) (iii). Divisional Commanders to liaise with
management of grounds, fire authority and stewards regarding
training and emergency evacuation procedures.

Paragraph 5 (c) (iv). Divisional Commanders to ensure that
specific officers are identified to man exit gates in the event
of any emergency.

The      fo llo w in g         a m e n d m e n ts     s h o u ld    be     made      to     th e    S o u th    Y o rk s h ir e
P o lic e      S ta n d in g      In s tr u c tio n s        fo r       th e    P o lic in g       of     F o o tb a ll     M a tc h e s


(a )     Rem ove        second        page       of    in d e x     and        in s e rt    new p a g e .


(b) At page               10      add new paragraph                     14.3      as follows:

         14.3         T ra in in g        and    d e p lo y m e n t      of     s a fe ty    s te w a rd s
         s h o u ld    be      d e a lt    w ith      in   a c c o rd a n c e      w ith     A p p e n d ix      ' L 1.


(c) Add new Appendix                          'L'     (page 35).

As     fa r    as     a p o lic e         s u p e rv is o ry       ro le       re g a rd in g      s te w a rd s      is    c o n c e rn e d ,
th a t    is    s t ill        b e in g    d e b a te d    at      ACPO l e v e l .          As     it     s ta n d s      at   p re s e n t
th is     p a r tic u la r        d u ty     s h o u ld    be      c a rr ie d      out     by     th e    c h ie f     s te w a rd    w ith
a p p ro p ria te        a d v ic e       b e in g    g iv e n     by    th e     p o lic e .


I t may w e l l b e t h a t f u r t h e r a m e n d m e n ts a r e n e c e s s a r y t o t h e
i n s t r u c t i o n s when M r J u s t i c e P o p p le w e ll 's f i n a l r e p o r t i s p u b li s h e d .




A s § ilr ta n t      j^ h ie f    C o n s ta b le
^Operation's 5                                                                                             D is tr ib u tio n         o v e rle a f
                                                           3



D is tr ib u tio n


C h ie f O f fic e r s
D iv is io n a l D e p a rtm e n ta l       C om m anders
S u b ^ - D i v i s i o n a l C om m a n d e rs
S u p e r in te n d e n ts       O p e ra tio n s   D iv is io n
                               C o m m u n ity L i a i s o n
                               C o m m u n ic a tio n s a n d      C o m p u te rs
D e t Ch I n s p               C rim e    P re v e n tio n
In s p                         M o u n te d S e c t io n
                               D og S e c t i o n
                                                              HOME OFFICE
                                                     Queen Anne’s Gate, L on don, SW lH 9AT
                                                                Direct line: 01-213
                                                            Switchboard: 01-213 3000

  Our reference:
  Your reference:                                                                  ^    July    1985


 Chief Executives,               County      Councils
 Director           General,     GLC
 Chief Officers             of Police



 Dear Sir

 HOME    OFFICE        C I R C U L A R NO 5 4 / 1 9 8 5
S A F E T Y OF S P O R T S G R O U N D S
A.      C O M M I T T E E OF I N Q U I R Y INT O C R O W D S A F E T Y A N D
        C O N T R O L AT S P O R T S G R O U N D S - I N T E R I M R E P O R T   (Cmnd     9585)
B.      C H I E F FIRE O F F I C E R R E P O R T S


1.      The I n t e r i m Rep o r t of the C o m m i t t e e of I n q u i r y into C r o w d S a f e t y
and Control at S p o r t s G r o u n d s set up by the Hom e S e c r e t a r y f o l l o w i n g
the ev e n t s of 11 Ma y at B r a d f o r d City FC and B i r m i n g h a m City FC has
now been p u b l i s h e d .           The p u r p o s e of this c i r c u l a r is, first, to
in f o r m r e c i p i e n t s of the r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s of the I n q u i r y and the
G o v e r n m e n t ' s r e s p o n s e to them; and, sec o n d l y , to urge r e c i p i e n t s to
re s p o n d q u i c k l y and c o n s t r u c t i v e l y to the s p i r i t of the
r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s in o rder to improve, as n e c e s s a r y , e x i s t i n g s a f e t y
and crowd cont r o l m e a s u r e s at s p o r t s g r o unds.

A.      COMMITTEE        OF I N Q U I R Y   INTO     C R O W D S A F E T Y A N D C O N T R O L AT S P O R T S   GROUNDS

2.   The Report c o n c l u d e s that the B r a d f o r d fire was ca u s e d a c c i d e n t a l l y
and c o m m e n t s that, had the s a f e t y a d v i c e c o n t a i n e d in the Home Of f i c e
G uide to S a f e t y at Sports G r o u n d s (Foot b a l l ) (the 'Green Guid e ' ) been
followed, the t r a g e d y w o u l d not have o c c u r r e d .        On the B i r m i n g h a m City
FC incident, the R e p o r t c o n c l u d e s that the d i s o r d e r was the p r o d u c t
of v i o l e n c e by both sets o f fans t o .a de g r e e w h i c h the po l i c e could
not r e a s o n a b l y have foreseen.

3.      A t t a c h e d at A n n e x A is a copy of the text of the Home S e c r e t a r y ' s
oral s t a t e m e n t to P a r l i a m e n t on 2 4 J u 1 y r e s p o n d i n g to the I n q u i r y ' s
I n t e r i m Rep o r t and at A n n e x B a copy of his m o r e d e t a i l e d w r i t t e n
statement.             The la t t e r sets out each of the R e p o r t ’s r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s ,
i n c l u d i n g the p r o v i s i o n a l r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s , and the G o v e r n m e n t ’s
r e s p o n s e s to them.         All this m a t e r i a l has bee n c i r c u l a t e d to the
go v e r n in** horti»s                   ^ lo r    s p o rts     in    E n g l a n d a n d W a l e s listed
at A nnex C in the e x p e c t a t i o n that the y will a d v i s e their m e m b e r s
to c o n t i n u e to c o - o p e r a t e by a s s i s t i n g in the i m p l e m e n t a t i o n of the
Inquiry's recommendations.

          A n u m b e r of the R e p o r t ' s r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s have i m p l i c a t i o n s
for the r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s of local a u t h o r i t i e s , c h i e f fire o f f i c e r s
and c h i e f o f f i c e r s of police.      They are all a c c o r d i n g l y invi t e d to
                                                                                                   /co n s i d e r
c o n s i d e r as a m a t t e r of u r g e n c y wha t steps they should take as
n e c e s s a r y In t heir p a r t i c u l a r local c i r c u m s t a n c e s to give effect -
w h e r e p o s s i b l e in time for the s tart of the 1985 / 8 6 football
s e a s o n - to the r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s that r e l a t e to t heir r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s .
A l t h o u g h a n u m b e r of the p o i n t s will have a l r e a d y been dealt with
e i t h e r as a result of the r e c e n t e x e r c i s e by c h i e f fire officers
(see Part B below) or, in the case of d e s i g n a t e d stadia, by e x i sting
s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e c o n d i t i o n s , c e r t i f i c a t i n g a u t h o r i t i e s are nonetheless
r e q u e s t e d to r e v i e w their c e r t i f i c a t i o n p r o c e d u r e s and e x i s t i n g
c e r t i f i c a t e s so as to i n c o r p o r a t e as n e c e s s a r y the I n q u i r y ' s interim
recommendations.                 In so doing, a u t h o r i t i e s should bear in mind that
it is not c o n s i d e r e d t hat a c t i o n upo n the I n q u i r y ' s r e c o m m e n d e d
a m e n d m e n t s to the G r e ® G u i d e should wait u pon the issue of the next
e d i t i o n of the G reen Guide.                     (This wil l not be p r e p a r e d until after
the Final Re p o r t is r e c e i v e d . )

5.            The s p e c i f i c p o i n t s for   c o n s i d e r a t i o n by the     responsible
a u t h o r i t i e s are as follows:

(a)     Certificating          authorities          are    a sked     to -
        (i)            e n s u r e that the p o l i c e form part of the i s s u i n g
                       t ea m for s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e s ( R e c o m m e n d a t i o n 1);

        (ii)           c o n s i d e r i n c l u s i o n of a c o n d i t i o n w i t h i n s a f e t y
                       c e r t i f i c a t e s for a d e q u a t e f i r s t - a i d f a c i l i t i e s
                       ( R e c o m m e n d a t i o n 8);

        (lii)          c o n s u l t c h i e f fire o f f i c e r s over the a d e q u a c y of
                       e xits at all s p o r t s g r o u n d s with the aim of
                       r e f l e c t i n g the a d v i c e in new or e x i s t i n g sa f e t y
                       c e r t i f i c a t e s as n e c e s s a r y , b e a r i n g in mind            10
                       s p e c t a t o r n u m b e r s to be p e r m i t t e d into the g r o u n d
                       or part of the g r o u n d and in the case of n o n ­
                       d e s i g n a t e d g r o u n d s and the e m e r g e n c y p r o c e d u r e s
                       u n d e r s e c t i o n 10 of the 1975 Act ( R e c o m m e n d a t i o n 14);

        (iv)           for d e s i g n a t e d stadia, c o n s i d e r the f e a s i b i l i t y of
                       i n c l u d i n g a s m o k i n g p r o h i b i t i o n as a s a f e t y
                       c e r t i f i c a t e c o n d i t i o n w h e r e s t a n d s made of                 y
                       c o m b u s t i b l e m a t e r i a l s are in use ( R e c o m m e n d a t i o n 15);

        (v)            give p r e l i m i n a r y t h o u g h t to ho w best a spo r t s g r o u n d
                       r e g i s t e r m i g h t be set up and used - see also
                       p a r a g r a p h 7 b e l o w ( R e c o m m e n d a t i o n 17);

        (v i )        c o n s i d e r w i t h the e m e r g e n c y s e r v i c e s and a p p r o p r i a t e
                      a u t h o r i t i e s the p r a c t i c a b i l i t y and e n f o r c e m e n t of a
                      *          1         ?    a r o u n d s p o r t s g r o u n d s w h e n an event
                      is l i k e l y to a t t r a c t s i g n i f i c a n t crowds ( R e c o m m e n d a t i o n      4)

        (vii)         consider whether safety certificate conditions relating
                      to m a n n e d e x i t s r e q u i r e a m p l i f i c a t i o n or a m e n d m e n t , and
                      how best to i m p l e m e n t (e.g. p r o t e c t i o n of s t e w a r d s by a
                      po l i c e p r e s e n c e on exit gates) and en s u r e c o m p l i a n c e
                      ( R e c o m m e n d a t i o n 11);   and

        (viii)        r e v i e w for i n c l u s i o n in new and e x i s t i n g s a f e t y
                      c e r t i f i c a t e s s u i t a b l e r e q u i r e m e n t s r e l a t i n g to
                      t r a i n i n g and i n s t r u c t i o n of s t e w a r d s ( R e c o m m e n d a t i o n   12).
  (b)     C h i e f Fire O f f i c e r s    are a sked        to -

          (I)            c o n s u l t and a d v i s e m a n a g e m e n t of n o n - d e s i g n a t e d
                         s p o r t s g r o u n d s on the p r e sence, l o c a t i o n and
                         n a t u r e of f i r e - f i g h t i n g e q u i p m e n t (using the
                         s t a n d a r d s a d o p t e d for s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t i o n at
                         d e s i g n a t e d g r o u n d s as the y a r d s t i c k ) ( R e c o m m e n d a t i o n   6);
          (ii)           by arrangement with sports grounds managers, give
                         assistance in fire-fighting training for stewards
                         (Recommendations 7, 10 and 12);

          Ciii)         advise sports grounds management and local authorities
                        on the adequacy and suitability of exits at sports
                        grounds in relation to the spectator numbers
                        permitted to attend the ground or part of the
                        ground (Recommendation 14);  and
          (iv)          continue, as necessary, inspections of uncertificated
                        stadia to assess the need to restrict or prohibit for
                        reasons of fire safety the number of spectators at a
                        ground or particular part of a ground (Recommendation 16)
                        see also paragraphs 6 and 9 below.

 ^c ^        ie f Officers        o f Pol ice are a sked             to —

          (i)           consider how evacuation procedures at individual
                        grounds can best be incorporated into police
                        training and form part of pre — event briefing   f* ■
                        (Recommendation 1 );

         (ii)           continue provision for police representation within
                        local authority teams for issuing safety certificates
                        (Recommendation 2);

         (iii )         consult the management of sports grounds where a
                        police presence is required at an event (or events)
                        for crowd control within the ground about the
                        training of stewards on how best to assist the      ^
                        police in an evacuation (Recommendation 10);   and
         (iv)          c on s i d e r , in c o l l a b o r a t i o n wit h the local a u t h o r i t y
                       (see 3(a ) ( v i i ) a b o v e ) and s p o r t s g r o u n d s m a n a g e m e n t , '
                       how to a s s i s t in m a n n i n g exit gates.

 6.      As r e g a r d s d e s i g n a t e d stadia, c e r t i f i c a t i n g a u t h o r i t i e s in
c o l l a b o r a t i o n with c h i e f fire o f f i c e r s and c h i e f o f f i c e r s of police
w ill no dou bt wish to c o n s i d e r w h e t h e r , f o l l o w i n g the Home O f f i c e
l e t t e r on d e s i g n a t i o n of 19 J uly to C h i e f E x e c u t i v e s , the best way
to e f f e c t q u i c k l y some of the I n t e r i m R e p o r t ' s recoramendations
( p a r t i c u l a r l y w h e r e s t r u c t u r a l a l t e r a t i o n s are i n v o l v e d ) will be to
             1 ? u Cr ® P e c t a t ° r c e i l i n g b ased on the normal level of a t t e n dance,
   . • ■-•       -J^ n   * ' nominal maximum capacity.                        M a n y s p o r t s g r o u n d s and
st a d i a w h i c h do not fall w i t h i n the p r e s e n t scope of d e s i g n a t i o n
u n d e r the S a f e t y of S p o r t s G r o u n d s Act 1975 will hav e a l r e a d y been
i n s p e c t e d by c h i e f fire o f f i c e r s .           It is h o p e d that s u p p l e m e n t a r y
a d v i c e on such m a t t e r s as fire f i g h t i n g e q u i p m e n t , t r a i n i n g in
i lre f i g h t i n g and e v a c u a t i o n p r o c e d u r e s will be r iven to the
m a n a g e m e n t and s t a f f of s p o r t s g r o u n d s as n e e d e d in the k n o w l e d g e
      the p o w e r to take e m e r g e n c y a c t i o n w h e r e neces s a r y .
7.            C o n s u l t a t i o n s wit h the AHA and A C C will take place w ith the
ob j e c t of d e t e r m i n i n g how best local r e g i s t r a t i o n of sports g r o u n d s
n i g h t be a c h i e v e d ( R e c o m m e n d a t i o n 17). As for the na t u r e of
m a t e r i a l s u sed in c o n s t r u c t i o n of new st a n d s (R e c o m m e n d a t i o n 1 3 ),
it is s u g g e s t e d that b u i l d i n g and p l a n n i n g a u t h o r i t i e s c o n t i n u e
t heir p r e s e n t p r a c t i c e s u n l e s s and u ntil f u r t h e r a d v i c e is received.

B.     CHIEF      FIRE O F F I C E R S     R E P O R T S ON S P O R T S   GROUNDS

8.      The Home S e c r e t a r y has e x p r e s s e d his g r a t i t u d e to c h i e f fire
o f f i c e r s for the p r o m p t and e f f i c i e n t m a n n e r in w h i c h the sur v e y
of s p o r t s g r o u n d s has been c a r r i e d out - see A n n e x A.                 Work on
a n a l y s i n g the r e p o r t s is c o n t i n u i n g in the Home O f f i c e and a digest
of t h e m will be s u b m i t t e d to the Inquiry.                     The Home S e c r e t a r y ' s
s t a t e m e n t s i n d i c a t e the i m p o r t a n t r e s u l t s of the s u r v e y s on w h i c h
i m m e d i a t e a c t i o n has been taken by b r i g a d e s .

9.      It is a p p r e c i a t e d that, in r e s p o n d i n g to Her M a j e s t y ' s C h i e f
I n s p e c t o r of Fire S e r v i c e s ’ l e t t e r of 16 Ma y to c h i e f fire officers,
some b r i g a d e s were onl y able to c o n c e n t r a t e i n s p e c t i o n s on
u n c e r t i f i c a t e d s p o r t s sta d i a w ith a c c o m m o d a t i o n for more than 10,000
s p e c t a t o r s (i.e. w h i c h could be d e s i g n a t e d u n d e r the S a f e t y of Sports
G r o u n d s Act 1975).              However, a large n u m b e r of b r i g a d e s in w hose
area there were f ewer s p o r t s g r o u n d s of this c a p a c i t y were able to
e x t e n d their i n s p e c t i o n s to s p o r t s g r o u n d s w ith a c c o m m o d a t i o n for
far fewer than 1 0 , 0 0 0 s p e c t a t o r s .            S e c t i o n 10 of the 1975 Act is
a p p l i c a b l e to sp o r t s g r o u n d s i r r e s p e c t i v e of the n u m b e r of s p e c t a t o r s
a c c o m m o d a t e d and it is i m p o r t a n t that those b r i g a d e s w hich have not
so far i n s p e c t e d sp o r t s g r o u n d s with a c c o m m o d a t i o n for less than
1 0 , 0 0 0 s p e c t a t o r s s h o u l d do so as p r i o r i t i e s and r e s o u r c e s permit
so that s t a n d s w h i c h r e p r e s e n t a s e r i o u s fire h a z a r d can be
i d e n t i f i e d and r e m e d i a l a c t i o n t aken ( R e c o m m e n d a t i o n 16).

10.       An extra copy of this                   c i r c u l a r and A n n e x e s is a t t a c h e d for c hief
fire o f f i c e r s .     In v i e w o f         the p r o v i s i o n s of s . 16 of the Local
G o v e r n m e n t Act 1985 c o p i e s          are b e i n g sent also to the C h i e f
E x e c u t i v e s of m e t r o p o l i t a n    d i s t r i c t c o u n c i l s and L o n d o n b o r o u g h s .

11.     An y e n q u i r i e s   should          be   directed     to -




                                                                            Yours    faithfully




                                                                            R M MORRIS
            1045
                        S m G n m iK & to r ta m m n                  24 JULY 1983
                                                                                           Sports Grounds (Safety and Control)
                                                                                                                                      1046
              Sports Grounds (Safety and Control)
                                                                                 Tbe inquiry makes 32 recommends,,*           •. ,
           3.53 pm                                                           •** Provisional. They fall i m o i ^              8      hich
              Mr. Max Madden (Bradford W#*cr\-                                concerned with safety and those c o J ^ f      roups: th° *
           order, Mr. Speaker Yo., k!.       est)‘ 0:1 a P9&M of              I am making available separately !             Wlth contr°l.
          the past—most recently yesten^T*5^ y° Ur c_3^™ in                                                                      StatCmCm
          House being made available in arfT*      reP°j^s to this
          understand that the report of Mr S a ? T ia' 1                      *° improve                                           designed
          committee of inquiry into         “ ce/ oppleweIJ,s                 example, improving evacuation ptwedure^A              by’ for
          8n»nds,,bou.Sirthereis^              |* ^ ^ > ‘ « fMt.              stewards, the provision of fire-fightino ’ tr^ung of
          available yesterday to rhe            st^ ™ em- was made            b a s i n g the scope of ^        Ce £ L L CqUrPmem and
          checked at the Vote Office                 “ embargo. I            cases the Government will be invitS fh? ^ ' . aU ^
         repon was not available. I ^                   [°ld     **
                                                                             the police and the spom                     local ^ o ritie s,
         indication of when it would            w         re was no          immediately to the spirit^f th<*         tles t0 respond
         Members. I was s             S           b          to hon-         Government wffl t o J T f a S e d i t i n n ^ T ^ 0115-^ h e
         available at or about m i d d a / ^           11 was               « sports grounds, «he
                                                                            “Kjuuy’s final report.■B w Sev^Sf’.i           ? ,ght of the-
         to the * a T 2                           matters»not least         authorities and the police in „ , ^              certificating
         Members Can see no « ^ a^ Cr tltUCnts« “ V hon.                    take full account o f t h ^ r c c o r ^ ^ ^ V ^ powers to
         should be made a v a i® S t t e ^ reP° f t0thisHousc              S f need
                                                                           no  Z S 1?       b' fore
                                                                                    for' - them         “ su' of ^ » “ edition.
                                                                                                  to wait.              S , Z 'There
                                                                                                                                ”S 8,he
                                                                                                                                     is
         but should be denied/ o MembenofthL          811 embargo
         before a statement / t o E    . °fthe House “*il hours
                                                                            important r M o ^ M d a ^ a ^ i ^ has 1113(16 a number of
        Poor position to X ue« i o ^ ^ US PUttin®us “ a ve^                 and closed circuit television °°cemmS membership cards
        on a repon whicftwas made                        Minister
        before it was n^de available m h J ° **** media long                offences relating1                           T " ^
        please, Mr. Speaker t i l             Members. Can you              missiles and the need for a m           the low ing of
                                                                               On membenhip cJd s             SUUabie P°iice radio,
        Govenmient/Oepartraents stotTth*       ®- t0 ensure                 urgent consideration be given , °qu^>' r!;con™ends that
                                    'S S L ’ Z S Z S 1'* '                 and Wales to introducing 1            t ciubs “ ^giand
                                                                           exclude visiting fans a L            shjp system so as to'
        than co^frMc to exDressmvT3*" ^        1C2n 410much “ Ore          cirruit television                            ^ closed
        °-*jL                                                *• <«.        The Government strongly support* rte ^ ? 0* 3-11grounds>
     previously. It is a matter for th T rZ   yesterday and                mendation, and have already S d e ciear /h ^ 510" rcCOm‘
     H oover, the L e a S of S 2 n U ° T ”6"1’ notfor™-                   a scheme of membereh.v, ^ V                    suppon for
     npfcd what has been said               " “ d willhave                troublemakers. ^ F ^ b ^ r f            * helP e«lude
                                                                         considering the options and T *^1* WOrking party is
                                                                         the Football Association to take heed nf8h ^ kague and
                   B riS n h F ^ S e fto S * H° ™ Departmen{             tions of the inquiry r ^ e S ? in f fr * e reCOnraenda-
      Speaker. Perhaps I shouH           ^        of order- Mr.
  , .occurred. The p £ l « S f “ y **« 1 re^ what has                    “ fc S “ “ "*                          daK          P0Si" Ve
     « 10.30 this morning,                         ****“ *«*             « £ S ' t B n S ' t . £ 2 *t             ski"“ ^ <*—
     would have given hon                 ^     House wiil feel
     it carefully.           Members eno^ time to consider               fo o M grounds and          S w i n^ n? 0iC' -T 11* in
                                                                        proposal will be carefully cnnS^ ^ f         mjss,]es- This
                                                                        in the public                                     inclusion
   . ZZSTgrcX'-                S’*’
                                  *”-''*™* W             » male
                                                                       to introduce next Session T ^ G° VCnuncm hoPe
   taerim repon of the                                                 Telecommunications at the w                 Directorate of
   sports grounds under ml L •                 ^ ar,d control at
                                                                       consider, as a matter of uw « *kC ° ^ Ce wUI 8150
                                                          **»          concern expressed about th epersonal
                                                                                                     L ^ iln ^police
                                                                                                               i- radios
                                                                                                                       l° mcet
                                                                                                                            used11at
                                                                                                                                  16
                                                                       Bradford.

  S e c r e t of s L f J ‘s S ^ y W '“ »■ *** ■*«                      is z ^ £ d                         ^          states that it
  ew efcl for the speedy        “ d l are both deeply                  Fire P r e c a u tio T ™ 7ICt d 8S;°^the pr isions of ^
  * « chain™                    a ° ro“^ « y to which                  Act 1975; that the police            ^            Grounds
 difficult and important t«k.                    6 tlckIed   Ms       search and arrest; and that cnJiT*         ° nal P°wers of
                                                                      creation of a specific off™ ^ f 100 ^ 2iven to the
  probably caused b y l b e ^ j ^ J f ^ 1nadfoid 6x8 was              racialist abuse at a sports ground W e^ S i              °r
  «»tch or cigarette or tobacco on L PPIDg ° f * Jighted              c o n fe r with care any r e c o C e n ^ . ^ rh' S
  below the. rr»v*.      , Dacco on to accumulated mhH^s
 grounds the“green'| 5 d e " l S ? “ sports                              f b o ^ t m S ^ U T ts “ ^ finaI re^ ‘
 tragedy would not have occiirmH ^ ^                   WIth- ***■    House up to date on matters J | Vf ment for me lo bring the
Birmingham     -w W chl         ^       1 *ad **“ * the not at       since my statement on 13 Mav         t0      ^ and contro1
 bave f 4 * e n        c . ^ Ci< S , “ ”2                            Sports GroundsAct? hLv^? •             under      Safety at
outset on violence Nn             from
                                   Js !tc tito n bent        the
                                                                    grounds of clubs in divisions*?              ^ qualifyins
       the
followed       public bearings                  rcp°n ’ or who      League in England and W all?                  ^ Footba11
tbe inquiry has investigated these               T d° ubt ^         2 of the Rugby League Th              as m dlvlsl°ns 1and
possible.                watnese matters as thoroughly as
                                                                    19 July and come imo                          " ' V ™ °D
  540                                                               d .« , cluhs will be refuted to apply
           7        SP°™ Grounds (Safety and Control)
                                                               24 JULY 1985            Sports Grounds (Safety and Control)
                                                                                                                                      1048
        before admitting any spectators. I have made it clear to the
       certifying authorities that the expectation is that they will       fifthly, my hon. Friend the Minister responsible for
                                                                         fP°n has helped to promote and draw Up T co u n cV o f
                       D° nmUy by rteans           is^ing interim
                               Cases’           way of providing                            °D Spectator vioJence which was
       immediate protect.on-while also reducing the costs of             ySSy                 of Europe Committee of Ministers
       implementation     may well be to restrict attendance
       ceilings in grounds or pans of grounds.                           ^There is no single, simple method of making sports
                                                                         grounds safe andI free from violence, but I believe thauhe
                    Fz?end tbe Secretary of State for Scotland          steps taken in the past few months, coupled with the
    ^ f ^ . dcdfor *» P8" not to proceed at present by
    extending designation in Scotland beyond its existing               implementation of die important recommendations of Mr
    touts. However, be has arranged for all non-designated              W e Popplewell’s inquiry, have already made, and will
    2 , “ ^ governing bodies in spon in Scotland to                     ®ake, a significant contribution towards preserving
                                                                        football as a major spectator ^
                                                                           ' V Gerald nauiman
                                                                                       Kaufman (Manchester, Gonon): This
                   ^ uncertificated grounds of the third and           repoftmakes profoundly depressing reading. We must pav
    fourth' divisions of the Football League, of the first and         mbute\o Mr Justice Popplewell for the care with which
    second divisions of the Scottish Football League, and of           S e ^ m X ™ t O* *vailable*° him' he has looked into
   the first and second divisions of the Rugby League have             «            •    account of the events leading up to the
   been mspected as a result of the request that I and my right        o f S u S ^ m Paft,CUlarly heart-rending in the aftermath
   ton Friend made to chief fire officers and firemasters ln           of Sunday \movmg memorial service. The description of
   addition, accommodation for spectators at the larger                o f minH? T F ? “ Bimjingham is a sickening catalogue
                                                                       o f mindless v a len ce and brutality.
                      iRUgby Union grounds, race courses,
 ' 2 X 1 , 08             ^ y hom d tracks, tennis clubs and             We need toVnow what can be done urgentlv to prevent
   athletics grounds has been inspected.
                                                                       SntextUtrIheCS w f t? ee?iCS fr0m happening again. In that
                ° m ° T 311(1 fircmastcrs have sent copies of
  their findings to the management of the spons grounds                sin,,,4 5 3 S,S ^ ‘>wi''8"*rcp‘>"is
  showing what remedial measures have to be taken In                                                   * " inlerim « P o n so that safetv
                                                                                       improved quickly before the stan of the new
  some cases, this will involve the complete closure of a              football season in Aufeist".
  stand until rebuilding or remedial work has been                      5 ? “** ^ b a l l setson begins in just over three weeks
  completed. In other cases, strict limits are being placed on          and although the rep&t contains a number of useful and
  FnC, n ^ rK° Spect3tors aUowed i«o the stand. My hon.                 sometimes important ^commendations, hardlv any of
 fS her t '            resf asibl£ for sport will be looking                  cofu]d “ PlemAted and have a noticeable effect
 further at the financial implications with the interests               ud time for 17 August. \
 concerned in his working group on the financing of safety                 For example, recommendations about improving the
 improvements. Managements have responded in a co­                     efficiency and increasing She responsibilities of stewards
 operative way and have either set necessary work in hand              assume that stewards can % trained to be some kind of
 I I f f COf? CnDg how 10 comP1y with the requirements                super-efficient €hte corps. Anyone who knows the real
                   and ,OCaJ firc authorities have sufficient                i football stewarding L o w s that this is more easilv
 statutory powers to ensure that essential fire safety                said than done. The report points out that in Bradford, for
                   * [' COmplied with- Tbese will in no way be        example, the ages of the stewards ranged from 73 to 12.
                         xparate proposals directed towards               Again, the report’s recommendations on installation of
 T s^ T nl          e preSCf law on * * Precautions published        perimeter fencing does not resSve the two conflicting
 S n o i              consultative document and which I am           roles of such fencing as, on the ohc hand, a protection of
 work                         10 C0DSidcr “ thc context of its      the pitch against hooligans and          the other a prison
                                                                    penning m potential fire victims in cikumstances of panic
 a J 1 y* i8!L h,0fi .Friend ^ s ecretaiy of,State for Scotland       .            recommendations do notWem to have been
 and I are grateful to chief fire officers and firemasters for      thought through. For example, the proposed ban on all cars
         T PtL f      and carefuI “ anner in which this             being parked within a quarter of a mile \ f football grounds
                         °Ut- A digest of ^ reports will            means that law-abiding householders XiU be prevented
oe submitted to the inquiry.                                       from parking their cars outside their hbmes. This will
   T^rdly’ the House will, of course, be aware of the              Jtffect my constituents, for example, and Vo doubt manv
                                                                   thousands of other people.
                                    oftbc Sponing Events
         of Alcohol Etc.) Bill. It W ill be in force by the              Again, immediate designation of all shorts grounds
beginning of the football season.                                  S ,V n a^       lty ° f , 500 ° r more as recom m Lded, could
             steps have a,so bccn ^ e n to enhance police          ^       50,000 small grounds. Is this remotelyVacticable'’
 effKOveness next season. In England and Wales the                             Cre ! T , St:Tiom doubts          4 football
                                                                   jwthonues and the police about the principle and
wSrn*fnrD«           Po!!“ ° fficers has introduced a new          practicality of two Popplewell recommendations—that
f* ® ^ exchanging information about the conduct of
                                                                   o ,            „•} nsniber»hip tickets only and tuat oniv
        T? “ T t           “ “ “cipstrag and preventing            registered supporters of home teams should be pdrmined
will be I S T ki     ^ mc 0llice Photographic vehicles             to attend games. This is an unprecedented proposal with
to*L£f f^able *° ** deployed at football matches,
                                                                   senous implications, which Mr. Justice PopplewelXdoes
mwrned I       tW° " f * 3™.™1*1 high-definition tripod-           not seem to have considered.                        v
                     - ^ S ,S m ,ddition to the £300,000              Even if we set aside these issues, has anything bken
worth of closed circuit television equipment purchased
through funds provided by the Football Tnm. P                     done about such recommendations? We are now nearlv
                                                                  two months beyond the time limit set by the Government
  Ml
                                   /4GK    (S




     INQUIRY INTO CROWD SAFETY MND CONTROL AT SPORTS GROUNDS
    INTERIM REPORT JULY 1985 ( CMND 9585 )




    GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO RECOMMENDATIONS




    GROUND MANAGEMENT


    RECOMMENDATIONS


    1*        Evacuation procedures should be a matter of police training
    and form part of the briefing by police officers before a football
    match.     (Paragraph 3.9).



             The local authority team responsible for issuing safety
    certificates in respect of designated grounds should, as heretofore,
    include police officers.      (Paragraph 3.15)



Certificating authorities and chief officers of police will be
invited to act upon these recommendations (see also Reconmendation 10).




RECOMMENDATIONS


             Those managing sports grounds not governed by safety certificates
MlgHM...give serious consideration, with the assistance of fire authorities,
~-°   presencein a ground of suitable fire fighting equipment.
(Paragraph 3.5*0



7      Stewards at all sports grounds should be trained in fire figftting.
(Paragraph 3.jS)


           In designated grounds it should be a term of the safety certificate
         .an adequate first-aid room should be provided.   (Paragraph 3.99)
 ■           Stewards in all grounds should not only be trained in fire
 precautions and fire-fighting (see Reconmendation 7 above) but should
 also be trained in how best to help the police in evacuation.
 (Paragraph 3.10*0


         *     Suitable and adequate exits should be provided in all sports
 grounds.       (Paragraph 3.138)

 15.         No smoking should take place in combustible stands, that this
should be a condition of entry to the ground that signs to that effect
should be prominently displayed and this should be a condition of
entry to the ground.        (Paragraph 3.1^1)


 The relevant sports authorities will be invited to draw the attention
 of sports grounds managers to these recommendations, and certificating
 authorities will be asked to consider reflecting the recommendations
 in new or amended safety certificates as appropriate in the case of
 designated grounds.       The fire and police services will be asked to stand
 ready to advise on equipment and assist with training as appropriate.




RECOMMENDATION


9.           There should be urgent consultation between the Health and Safety
Executive and the fire authorities and local authorities as to how best
to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and reports.
(Paragraph 3.95)


The HSE has appointed a member of its Executive to review liaison
arrangements between its inspectors and the fire authorities.        He will
consult Government Departments and others in this review, the results of
which will be made public.




RECOMMENDATION


     •         Fire Authorities should identify and visit all sports stadia in their
j*Tgas and should prohibit or restrict the use of any stands which, in their
view, constitute a risk to spectators because of the inadequacy of the fire
precautions. (Paragraph 3.1*42)
 Chief Fire Officers in England and Wales were invited by the Home Secretary
 on 16 May to inspect all sports grounds and were reminded of the powers
 available to them to take emergency action if, in their view, fire hazards
 constituting a risk to spectators are revealed.   The Secretary of State
 for Scotland similarly asked Firemasters to inspect sports grounds in Scotland.
Reports received show that fire brlgacfes -have not hesitated to recosaoend
emergency action where necessary , including in a number of cases a prohibition
on the use of stands or a restriction on the number of spectators allowed
into them.




RECXMffiNDATION


17.    In order to ensure a complete record of sports grounds a
local registration system should be set up.    (Paragraph 3.150)


Consultation will take place with the local authority associations to
establish how such records may best be compiled and maintained.     The
recent visits of the fire brigades fsee Recommendation .16) should have
in practice marshalled much of the relevant data already.




STRUCTURES


RECOMMENDATION


*3.    Building of new permanent stands of combustible materials
should be prohibited as a general rule.   (Paragraph 3.132)
                                                                %

This recommendation will be given speedy and urgent consideration
by the Departments who are responsible for buildir^ regulations.
-GREEN.GUIDE


RECOtfffiNDATIONS              .


4.     The Green Guide should be amended to include in Paragraph 11 a
provision that, wherever practicable, roads within a quarter of a
mile of a sports ground should be kept entirely free of parked vehicles.
(Paragraph 3.35)


11.    Paragraph 6 . m . 6 of the   Green Guide should be amended to read:
"All exit gates should be manned at all times while the ground is used
by the public and be capable of being opened immediately from inside
by anyone in an emergency.11 (Paragraph 3.111)


12.    The Green Guide should be amended to contain a specific provision,
in relation to stewards,


        (i)     that they should be trained and instructed to
       deal with any emergency relating to fire or evacuation
       (see also Recommendations 7 and 10);


       (ii)     that they should be given written instructions
       about the action to be taken in cases of emergency;


       (iii)    that they should receive practical instruction
       and training appropriate to their responsibility;


       (iv)     that no one should be employed as a steward
       unless they have been so instructed and trained; and


       (v)      that they should be adequate in number, physically
       and mentally capable of performing their duties, effectively
       deployed, effectively supervised and readily identifiable.
       (Paragraph 3.117)


19.    The next edition of the Green Guide should make it clear
that it applies to all sports grounds.      (Paragraph 3.15*0
  These points will be noted for inclusion in the next edition of the Green
  Guide which will be needed after the Inquiry’s final report is received.
  Action will not however depend upon the availability of a fresh edition and
  certificating authorities and chief officers of police (Recommendation *1)
  will be invited to take such steps as are open to them now.




 CROWD MANAGEMENT


 RECOMMENDATIONS


 ***     Consideration should be given to making it a criminal offence
 in England and Wales to have a smoke bomb or similar device at sports
 grounds.    (Paragraph 3.^2)


         •^ere should be a specific offence of throwing a missile at
 -gp.°rfcs grounds. (Paragraph 6.57)


 The case for inviting Parliament to create new criminal offences on
 these lines will be studied urgently in connection with the Government’s
 intention of introducing legislation in the next session of Parliament
 following its review of the law relating to public order.




RECOMMENDATIONS


20'    jjrgent consideration should be given by football clubs in
England and Wales to introducing membership system so as to exclude
visiting fans.     (Paragraph 6.M8)


  *    Football clubs should review their arrangements for entry and
                      their turnstiles.   (Paragraph 6.62)


Both these recommendations are for football authorities and clubs, but the
Government hopes that they will be given serious consideration.     The
Government has been encouraging the Football Association and the Football
League to introduce a scheme of membership cards and the options are currently
 being considered in a Football League working group: that group's
 attention will therefore be drawn to the Inquiry's Recommendation 20.
 Hie governing bodiesV attention will also be drawn to Recommendation 23
 which might be influenced by decisions upon Recommendation 20.




 RECOMMENDATION


      •      Closed circuit television should be introduced at League football
 grounds in England and Wales and in the Premier Division in Scotland.
 (Paragraph 6.5*0


The Football Trust has allocated £500,000 for the provision of CCTV equipment
in League grounds during the 1985-86 season.      The Trust's attention, and
that of the Football Associations and the Football Leagues, will be drawn
to this recommendation.




MISCELLANEOUS


RECOMMENDATIONS


3-        Early attention should be given by the Home Office Directorate
of Telecommunications to consider the practicality of producing a more
suitable personal radio for the police.      (Paragraph 3-33)


18.       Consideration should be given as how best to deal with temporary
stands and marquees      (Paragraph 3-151)


2H.       Consideration should be given to the design of a standard,
efficient perimeter fence, with proper exits.     (Paragraph 6.63)


Each of these will be studied as the Inquiry advises.     Recommendations
18 and 24 may best be taken forward in the context of the Inquiry’s next
stage and when it turns to examine the Green Guide as a whole.
1..
.     :.

           .   '/ ■

                      I
                            PROVISIONAL RECOMMENDATIONS


                            (To be reviewed in the Final Report)


                           1.     I am minded to recommend that in England and Wales the police should
                           be given the unfettered right of search before entry to football grounds by
                           statute.'   (Paragraph 3.^1)


                           2.     I am mi nd ed    to recorrmend that Section 10 of the Fire Precautions Act 1971
                           should be amended with a view to giving the Fire Authority power in cases other
                           than those which are regarded as wholly exceptional     (Paragraph 3.61)


                           3-     Linked with the above, I am      minded to recommend that consideration
                           should be given to introducing legislation giving powers for the Fire Authority
                           to apply to the High Court for an injunction (or to the Court of Session for
                           an interdict in Scotland) under Section 10 of the Fire Precautions Act 1971.
                           (Paragraph 3-61)


                           **.    I am m i nd ed   to recommend that Section 10 of the Safety at Sports Grounds
                           Act 1975 should be amended in like manner to Section 10 of the Fire Precautions        -
                           Act 1971 (see Provisional Recommendations 2 and 3) and an application to the
                          High Court for an injunction (or to the Court of Session for an interdict in
                          Scotland) should be an alternative remedy.      (Paragraph 3-76)


                          5.      I am m i n d e d to recommend that the Secretary of State should exercise his
                          -powers to designate all sports grounds, whatever their size to include indoor
                          as well as outdoor activities.     (Paragraph 3.1^5)


                          6.     I am minded to recommend Immediate designation of any ground
                          capable of holding over 5,000 spectators, to cover all sports grounds,
                          not merely football grounds.      (Paragraph 3.1^6)


                          7-     I am minded to recommend that consideration should be given to
                          providing the police with additional powers of arrest under the
                          Public Order Act, 1936.     (Paragraph 6.66)


                          8.     I am minded to recommend that cor?ideration should be given to
                          creating a specific offence of chanting obscene or racialist abuse
                          at a sports ground. (Paragraph 6.67)


                          These are noted and the Government will stand by to assist the
                          Inquiry in its further consideration of the matters.
                                                                                          ANNEX




    Sporting        bodies        to w h o m m a t e r i a l   has   been   circulated.



    Football        Association

    Welsh   Football             Association

    Football        Le a g u e

    Rugby League

    Welsh    Rugby       Union

    R ugby U n i o n

■   Lawn    Tennis       Association

    Cricket     Coun c i l

    National        Greyhound          Racing      Club

    The J o c k e y     Club

    Speedway        Cent r a l      Board

    Speedworth          International            Ltd.

    British     Amateur           Athletic       Board

    British     Sho w J u m p i n g A s s o c i a t i o n

    RAC M o t o r     Sports        Association         Ltd.
                                                  SO U T H YO RK S . POLICE



     CHAPTER 7                                             5 AUG 1985

                                                       H EADQUARTERS

                                                       ADMINISTRATION
    SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS       AMD



    RECOMMENDATIONS

    ’•       a g cuatlcn procedures should be a M t t e p of                  trs ■


    L  ch
    natch-     T    "
               (Paragraphth'
                           brIeflnS
                          ?.Q).     *       P 0 U °e 0fflC‘~    b«f- « *




    *' t(, ^     —      ^thorlty tea, r , ^ . , . . for l33ulng
.certificates,In respect of designated grounds should. as h e r e t o ™ ,
include police officers.            (Paragraph                                  ------ -




3-           Early attention should be given by the Home Office

0r l d 7 r te ^      Tel'C°""UnICatl0"s to^ongider the p r a c t i c e , , »,
         S J B -* m°re sultabl<! l ^ r a o ^ a d l o    for the police.       (Paragraph 3 .31 )




          The Green Guide should be amended to Include In Paragraph n
a provision that, g r e y e r practicable, roads w l t M n , -       of „
Mn .                                '                      ° wuarLer
T    L   ... SP°rtS Frn"nrt ,hn" 1rt-^ J 2 E t ^ntlrely free of ^
                 (Paragraph
8.     In designated grounds it should be a term of the safety
certificate that an adequate first-aid room should be provided.            ■% r

(Paragraph 3.65)




9.    There should be urgent consultation between the Health & Safety
Executive and the fire ^ithorities and local authorities as to how best
to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and reports.
(Paragraph 3.95)




10*    Stewards in all grounds should not only be trained in fire
precautions and fire-fighting (see Recommendation 7 above) but should
also be trained in how best to help the police in evacuation.
(Paragraph 3.10M)




11.   Paragraph 6.1M.6 of the Green Guide should be amended to read:
"All exit gates should be manned at all times while the ground is used
by the public and' be capable of being opened immediately from inside
by anyone in an emergency."     (Paragraph 3.111)




12.   The Green Guide should be amended to contain a specific provision,
in relation to stewards,


       (i)         that they should be trained and instructed to
      deal with any emergency relating to fire or evacuation
       (see also Recommendations 7 and 10)•


       (ii)        that they should be given written instructions
      about the action to be taken in cases of emergency;


       (iii)       that they should receive practical instruction
      and training appropriate to their responsibility;


      (iv)         that no one should be employed as a steward
      unless they have been so instructed and trained; and
                      .   ___       .„                           i         — .— .—   _«.i




          (v)         that they should be adequate in number, physically
         •nd mentally capable of performing their duties, effectively
         deployed, effectively supervised and readily identifiable.
          (Paragraph 3.117)




 13‘     Building of new permanent stands of combustible materials
 should be prohibited as a general rule.          (Paragraph 3.132)




'1i**    Suitable and adequate exits should be provided in all sports
grounds.        (Paragraph 3.138)




 15‘     *LO-fPoking should take place in combustible stands, signs to
that effect should be prominently displayed and this should be a
condition of entry to the ground.           (Paragraph 3.141)




 16‘     Fire Authorities should identify and visit all sports stadia
An .their areas and should prohibit or restrict the use of any stands
which, in their view, consitute a risk to spectators because of
the inadequacy of the fire precautions.           (Paragraph 3.142)




^7.      In order to ensure a complete record of sports grounds a
local registration system should be set up.           (Paragraph 3.150)




         Consideration should be given as how best to deal with
temporary stands and marquees.           (Paragraph 3.151)




19.     The next edition of the Green Guide should make it clear
that it applies to all sports grounds.          (Paragraph 3.154)




20•     tlr8ent consideration should be given^to introducing a
            system so as to exclude visiting fans.           (Paragraph 6.48)
  -                       •   ,        ...




      ^ *       ^.°°ed circuit television should be Introduced at League
      £g-°lball grounds In England and Wales and In the Premier Division
      In Scotland.       (Paragraph 6.54)




      2^*    l
             Thereshould
               M re should be a specific offence of throwing a missile
      at sports grounds
                 grounds.   (Paragraph 6.57)




  2^ ‘          ^g-?-^ba11 d u b s should review their arrangements for entry and
  the organisation of their turnstiles.                (Paragraph 6.62)




  2U'           ^ ° g « ^ g ration should be given to the design of a standard.
  £T£fcie>lt perimeter fence, with proper exits.              (Paragraph 6.63)




 PROVISIONAL RECOMMENDATIONS
  ( To be reviewed in the Final Report)



 K          I am minded to recommend that/the police should be given the
 ■EI?Igttered right of search before entry to football grounds by
 statute.          (Paragraph 3.4t)




 2‘         —     tlon 10 of the l ire Precautions Act 1971 should be amended
 with a view to giving the Fire Authority power in cases other than
 those which are regarded as wholly exceptional.               (Paragraph 3.61)




3.          Linked with the above, consideration should be given to
introducing legislation giving powers for the Fire Authority to apply
to the High Court for an Injunction under Section 10 of the Fire
Precautions Act 1971.             (Paragraph 3 .61 )




/f*                on 10- C f the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975 should be
aaended in like manner to Section 10 of the Fire Precautions Act 1971
(see Provisional Recommendations 2 and 3) and an application to the

High Court for an injunction should be an alternative remedy.
(Paragraph'3.76)
5-     The Secretary of State should excerclse his powers to designate
all sports grounds, whatever their size,to Include Indoor as well as
outdoor activities.   (Paragraph 3.145)




6.     l a m minded to recommend immediate designation of any ground
capable of holding over 5,000 spectators, to cover all sports grounds
not merely football grounds.   (Paragraph 3.146)




7.     I am minded to recommend that consideration should be given to
providing the police with additional powers of arrest under the
Public Order Act. 1936.   (Paragraph 6.66)




8.     I am minded to recommend that consideration should be given to
creating a specific offence of chanting obscene or racialist abuse
at a sports ground.   (Paragraph 6.67)
                                                  Pages      P a ra g ra p h s   Appendices



EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURES/                  10         14.1 - 14.3
  STEWARDS

FOOTBALL MATCH SUMMARY/                           10 & 11    15.1 “ 15.4            'K '
  INTELLIGENCE

INSPECTION OF FOOTBALL STADIUMS                   11         16.1

LIAISON BETWEEN CLUB MANAGEMENT                    11         17.1
  AND THE POLICE



                                            APPENDICES


                      Pages


APPENDIX    'A'       13 - 15                      Standard Operational Order

APPENDIX    'B'           16   -       18          General Briefing

APPENDIX    'C'           19 - 21                  Individual Briefing

APPENDIX    'D'           22                       Grading Criteria

APPENDIX    1E '          23                       Criteria for Levelling Charges
                                                   for Police Services

APPENDIX    'F'           24 - 26                  Control of Spectators

APPENDIX    'G'           27       -   28          Processing of Prisoners

APPENDIX    1H 1          29 - 31                  Standard Forms for Processing
                                                   Prisoners

APPENDIX    'I'           32                       De-Briefing Sheet

 APPENDIX   'J'           33                       Schedule Showing Overall Police
                                                   Commitment

 APPENDIX   'K'           34                       Football Match Summary/Intelligence


 APPENDIX   ’L'           35                        Emergency Evacuation Procedures/
                                                    Stewards
                                                         A P P E N D IX   'L 1




EMERGENCY E VA C U A TIO N PROCEDURES/STEWARDS




1   All exit gates should be manned at all times while the ground
     is used by the public and be capable of being opened immediately
     from inside by anyone in an emergency.

2   Stewards should be trained and instructed to deal with any
     emergency relating to fire or evacuation of the ground.

3   Stewards should be given written instructions about the
     action to be taken in the event of an emergency.

4   Stewards should receive practical instruction on training
     appropriate to their responsibilities.

5   That no steward should be employed unless they have been so
     instructed and trained.

6   Stewards should be adequate in number, physically and
     mentally capable of performing their duties, effectively
     deployed, effectively supervised and readily identifiable.

7   The Ground Commander should ensure that the above
     recommendations are complied with and give appropriate
     advice to the (chief) steward as necessary.

8   Failure to comply with the conditions of the General Safety
     Certificates should be reported to the Chief Superintendent,
     Operations and Traffic Division, so that they can be
     discussed by the Officer Working Party of the Safety of
     Sports Grounds Act 1975, who will consider what action, if any,
     is required to be taken.
                                          E x tm e f   fio ra

                                     fo.itcx- Cpfimi He         * . '




                           i ,




74.   Visits to South Yorkshire Football. League Grounds by the Chairman
      and Vice-Chajrman

The Chief Constable- submitted a report on-the visits by the Chairman and
Vice-Chairman', to Fcotball League Grounds in the County on 27th and 28th June,
1985, in the. light of disorder and safety problems experienced at football
matches in both this country and abroad..

So far as was possible, the P o l i c e p o l i c e        football grounds in a
"community style".   Closed circuit              wfs<, thought to be helpful,
and the segregatior of home and a w a y spectators would continue to be sought.,
Emergency evacuation procedures at the-Grounds ’’ere being reviewed.      Together
with other propositions such, as the ban on the "ale of alcohol at Grounds,
improved police facilities and efficient public address systems, it was
considered  that t’ra policing of the Grounds arid crowd safety during the cowing,
season would be enhanced.

Liaison, with the County Council's Officer Working Parties responsible
(through the Fire Service Committee) for Safety of Sports Grounds Act matters
continued to take place.

So far as the Grounds themselves were concerned, there were considered to be
no particular problems at; Rotherham United, Sheffield United or Sheffield
Wednesday.  At Barnsley, there were a number of minor problems which were
receiving attention, but the major problem was the lack of space to instal
additional turnstiles and coach parking facilities for visiting spectators.
The only other Ground was that of Doncaster Rovers, where the problems were
immense. These had been recognised for some, time and would have been resolved
had the improvement proposals submitted to the Football Improvement Trust by
the Club in January 1985 and approved for grant aid not been subsequently
deferred by the Trust in view of the demand for funds from football, clubs
generally following the Bradford City tragedy.   Urgent discussions were
continuing between the Officer Working Party for the Doncaster District and the
Club to enable action to be taken before the start of the season.

RESOLVED “             .         .


1.    That the contents of the report be noted.

2.    That Magistrate Member Mr.           be requested to take such action as he
is able to assist in the Barnsley ioor.t>al 1 Club having the. use of additional
adjacent land, which would undoubtedly benefit both the residents of Barnsley
and general- policing problems at the Ground,
        POLICE COMMITTEE MEETING....


                       AGENDA ITEM NO      LW.........




SUBJECT:                Vx?                              C^-wOe\^
                          L ^ ’O-^s-e?   4 i ^ v ^




COMMITTEE DECISION:




Chief Superintendent
Management Services
                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL


                                                         POLICE COMMITTEE
                                           u n ts l
                                                            5 AUGUST 1985
                   I   allc
REPORT BY CHIEF CONSTABLE_




REPORT ON VISITS TO SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS BY
THE CHAIRMAN AND VICE CHAIRMAN OF THE POLICE COMMITTEE

In view of the     recent safety and disorder problems experienced at
football matches in this country and abroad, the Chairman and Vice
Chairman of the South Yorkshire Police Committee visited all football
league grounds   in the county on 27 and 28 June 1985.         They were
accompanied on their visit by M r I ,           Assistant Chief Constable
(Operations) and Superintendent St:uart or tt^e Operations Division.

The Police informed the Chairman and Vice Chairman that, so far as was
possible, the football grounds would be policed in a 'community style
and we w o u l d endeavour to ensure that the same officers policed the
same section of      the grounds at all matches. The benefits to be accrued
from this would      be building upa rapport between police and supporters
and identifying and dealing with the hooligan element. Officers cannot
always, of course, be designated the same duties because of annual
leave, sickness or changes in duties.

Closed circuit television was also thought to be beneficial and further
enquiries will be made regarding its use. The Police explained that we
would seek to ensure segregation of home andaway spectators          at
football league matches and that the emergency evacuation procedures
were checked and updated for the coming season. It was thought that
these proposals, together with other propositions such as the ban on
the sale of alcohol at football grounds, improved police facilities and
efficient public address systems would enhance better policing and
crowd safety during the coming season.

 The Chairman and Vice Chairman were also informed that all clubs in the
 county were aware of the need to comply with the Safety of Sports
 Ground Act 1975 and that liaison with the Officer Working Party had
 taken place, to give necessary advice within their remit.

 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

 This club was visited at 10.00 am on Thursday, 27 June 1985 and the
 party were met by Chief Superintendent Moseley and Inspector Calvert
 from the Division, and by the Secretary of the Club, Mr Dick Chester.

 A full inspection of the ground then took place and the refurbished
 police control box was visited and the benefits of the newly installed
 closed circuit television were discussed. It was envisaged that CCTV
 would assist in crowd control and have a deterrent effect on the
 hooligan element.
The Police highlighted the segregation problem in the west stand. This
was discussed and steps were outlined to ensure segregation took place
in this stand between the home and away supporters. Plans had also been
approved in respect of further segregation of spectators coming into
the ground at the visitors' end (Leppings Lane) which should benefit
the policing of the ground next season.

The south stand, which has a wooden floor structure, was also visited
and work was in hand to place thin metal sheeting on top of these
boards so that the flooring would then be encased in metal with
concrete already in position beneath it. This should prevent any fire
hazard in this stand.

There was some discussion regarding the roof, but meetings are being
held with a view to this being replaced during 1986/87.

In the main, the facilities at this ground are exellent and there did
not appear to be any major problems.

Sheffield United Football Club

This ground was visited at 2.30 pm the same day and the party were met
by Mr Smith, the Secretary, and Mr          Superintendent Duckenfield
and Acting Superintendent Sumner were also in attendance from the
Division.

A problem so far as spectator segregation is concerned was highlighted
by the Police in respect of the Bramall Lanestand. Discussions were
taking place with the Club to alleviate this problem.

The John Street stand,    which is of a wooden construction, had been
improved during the closed season to ensure spectator safety in that
gangways and emergency egress gates       had been built in so that
spectators in the stand could quickly evacuate onto the terraces and
this, together with a reduced capacity in this stand, should prevent
any problems so far as fire risks are concerned.

The ground police room was visited, the facilities being very good. The
police control box situated high in the new stand was also visited by
the party. It was felt that this could be better sited in that the
present control did not give any view of those in the stand beneath it.
Discussions are taking place with the Club in respect of this and also
the possibility of installing closed circuit television.

With a ground capacity of justunder       50,000 it was felt that the
installation of CCTV at Bramall Lane could be beneficial and further
enquiries will be made regarding the viability of this.

Problems regarding the parking of coaches were highlighted but,
unfortunately, there would appear to be no area in the vicinity of the
Club at the present time where coaches could be parked.

There were no other particular difficulties      and   the   facilities   in
general were thought to be very good.
Barnsley Football Club

This Club was visited at 10.00 am on Friday, 28 June 1985, the party
being met by the Secretary, Mr Michael Spinks, and a director,
Mr Buckle.    Chief Superintendent Lodge, Superintendent Buckland and
Inspector Gray were also in attendance from the Division.

Mr Spinks    explained to the Chairman and Vice Chairman         their
disappointment in not being able to acquire seven acres of land at the
'kop end' of the ground. They felt that the acquisition of this land
could alleviate many problems in that visiting coaches could de—bus by
new turnstiles that would have been installed at this end of the
ground and then the coaches parked alongside same, thereby allowing
security and the speedy departure of visiting supporters after each
game, with the minimum of disruption to local residents. Due to an
interest in the land by Barnsley District Council the Club were unable
to purchase it. The Chairman undertook to look into this matter as he
felt that the implementation of this plan could greatly benefit both
the residents of Barnsley and general policing problems at the ground.

The police room was visited, and whilst basic was considered to be
reasonable by the officers who worked the ground, albeit there were no
segregation facilities for those arrested. The police control room was
very basic and did not give any view whatsoever of the spectator and
playing areas. It was totally inadequate. It is to be re-sited in the
disabled stand as a temporary measure for the coming season. This gives
a much better vantage point of the ground and its problem areas.

Segregation areas were satisfactory, but the public address system was
inadequate as it had no override facility for police use. Steps are
being taken to rectify this problem.

The officials of the Club and police officers from Barnsley felt that
closed circuit television could be most beneficial. There were cash
problems and their enquiries so far had led them to believe that the
acquisition of such property would only attract a 75% grant and that
25%, therefore, of the cost would have to be met by the Club. This was
a problem. The Chairman suggested that equipment held by the Force
Audio Visual Aids Unit could be used and that it may be possible, if
this was not considered to be adequate, to purchase further equipment
for the Force that could be made available at grounds in the county
that did not have a permanent system installed. Enquiries obviously
need to be made regarding the present equipment available and any
additional equipment identified would need to be evaluated.

The Police explained that arrangements had been made for the fixture
against Leeds United to be re-arranged to take place on a Sunday
morning which would,     therefore,  reduce many problems previously
experienced in Barnsley town centre and in the area near to the ground
itself. Enquiries were also being made with a view to possibly
re—arranging other problem matches to Friday evenings, thereby hoping
to reduce problems on Saturdays in the town itself.
                                         3


       Doncaster Rovers Football Club

       This ground was visited at 2.00 pm the same day, the party being met by
       Superintendents Fell and Owen of the Doncaster Division. Unfortunately,
       there was no-one available to represent the Club.

       Problems at this Club are immense and are fully detailed and
       discussed at meetings of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act Officer Working
       Party (the most recent meeting having been held on 16th July, 1985).
       A tremendous amount of work needs to be completed very quickly
       before the commencement of the coming season. The Chairman and
       Vice Chairman were concerned at the general condition of the ground and
       the dilapidated state of the police room and total absence of any
       police control box.     In addition, the ground was littered at the
       Rossington end with rubble and stones that could be readily used by
       visiting spectators. The ground in general was in a very bad state of
       repair.

       The Safety of Sports Grounds Act Officer Working Party is scheduled to
       meet again at the Club on Tuesday, 20 August 1985, to view what
M      progress has been made and to establish the permitted level of
       spectators that will be allowed entry to the ground at the commencement
       of the coming season.

       Rotherham United Football Club

    ^^^The party visited this ground at 3.00 pm the same date and were met by
        Superintendents Vallance and Lowe, together with a number of directors
        from the Club.

       There had obviously been many improvements carried out at the ground
       over recent years and the Chairman and Vice Chairman were most
       impressed with the condition of the ground and its facilities.

        In addition, a number of improvements were being carried out at the
        time of the visit. Policing arrangements at the ground were considered
        to be very satisfactory so far as the divisional officers were
        concerned and the provision of an area of land at the side of the
        ground assisted the parking of coaches, etc.

        The benefits of closed circuit television were discussed, but in view
        of the size of crowds attending the ground at the present time it was
        not thought that such equipment was needed on a permanent basis. It
        was, however, thought that access to CCTV equipment for local derbys or
        other key games could be beneficial.

        Closed Circuit Television

        A CCTV system has recently been installed at the Sheffield Wednesday
        football ground, but it is necessary to evaluate the use of such
        systems   in   greater  detail   and   also   to  consider  financial
        recommendations regarding their viability at other grounds. A further
        report will be submitted regarding this in the near future.




        P WRIGHT

        P.hipf P.onstable
                   SOUTH YORKS. POLICE

                                                                                     @                              G^VoJpW.
                        31 JUL1985
                                                                                     0       Cop^ w           VWJ^*3

                      HEADQUARTERS                            H O M E O F F IC E
                     A D M IN IS T R A T IO N
                                                    -<Jueen Anne's Gate, London, SW] H 9AT
                                                                Direct line: 01-213
                                                             S witrhhnarfl- 01-213 3000

 Ourreference: J        PO LICY FILE                                                29 July 19 85^
     reference:
                   Rl"uRN- TO ADMIN DEPT-HQ                                 C+J. •SOpT. Jte A O o v^S

Chief ExecuTIves,             County Councils                               <&.                  Pt6rtS6
Director General,             GLC
Chief Officers of Pol; c e s o 'J T H *V O R!CS. P O U C £ _
                                                                               cci^ fee.Jt
                                                             -10
                                                               ,
                                                               35
                                                5
Dear Sir
                                                                              /v^ztV-                   ^
                                                       r-           ds^ t    eS-                   /A**          <?*. / 9   8 f f
HOME OFFICE         CIRCULAR ND(5M|f.i9B8$                                                                                          '

                                                       -iS'i T R A F H C
SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNfe^f^liSlH
A.  COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO CROWD SAFETY AND
    CONTROL AT SPORTS GROUNDS - INTERIM REPORT                                     (Cmnd 9585)                              4/-
B.  CHIEF FIRE OFFICER REPORTS


1.  The Interim Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety
and Control at Sports Grounds set up by the Home Secretary following
the events of 11 May at Bradford City FC and Birmingham City FC has
now been published.  The purpose of this circular is, first, to
inform recipients of the recommendations of the Inquiry and the
Government's response to them; and, secondly, to urge recipients to
respond quickly and constructively to the spirit of the
recommendations in order to improve, as necessary, existing safety
and crowd control measures at sports grounds.

A.   COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO CROWD SAFETY AND CONTROL AT SPORTS GROUNDS

2.  The Report concludes that the Bradford fire was caused accidentally
and comments that, had the safety advice contained in the Home Office
Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (Football) (the 'Green Guide') been
followed, the tragedy would not have occurred.  On the Birmingham City
FC incident, the Report concludes that the disorder was the product
of violence by both sets of fans to a degree which the police could
not reasonably have foreseen.

3.  Attached at Annex A is a copy of the text of the Home Secretary's
oral statement to Parliament on 24 July responding to the Inquiry's
Interim Report and at Annex B a copy of his more detailed written
statement.  The latter sets out each of the Report's recommendations,
including the provisional recommendations, and the Government's
responses to them.  All this material has been circulated to the
governing bodies of the major sports in England and Wales listed
at Annex C in the expectation that they will advise their members
to continue to co-operate by assisting in the implementation of the
Inquiry's recommendations.

^•     A number of the Report's recommendations have implications
for the responsibilities of local authorities, chief fire officers
and chief officers of police.  They are all accordingly invited to
                                                                                                            /c o n s i d e r .
                                      - 2 -




consider as a matter of urgency what steps they should take as
necessary in their particular local circumstances to give effect -
where possible in time for the start of the 1985/86 football
season - to the recommendations that relate to their responsibilities.
Although a number of the points will have already been dealt with
either as a result of the recent exercise by chief fire officers
(see Part B below) or, in the case of designated stadia, by existing
safety certificate conditions, certificating authorities are nonetheless
requested to review their certification procedures and existing
certificates so as to incorporate as necessary the Inquiry's interim
recommendations.  In so doing, authorities should bear in mind that
it is not considered that action upon the Inquiry's recommended
amendments to the Greei Guide should wait upon the issue of the next
edition of the Green Guide.   (This will not be prepared until after
the Final Report is received.)

5.     The specific points for consideration by the responsible
authorities are as follows:

(a )   Certificating authorities are asked to -
       (i)        ensure that the police form part of the issuing
                  team for safety certificates (Recommendation 1);

       (ii)       consider inclusion of a condition within safety
                  certificates for adequate first-aid facilities
                   (Recommendation 8);

       (i i i )   consult chief fire officers over the adequacy of
                  exits at all sports grounds with the aim of
                  reflecting the advice in new or existing safety
                  certificates as necessary, bearing in mind
                  spectator numbers to be permitted into the ground
                  or part of the ground and in the case of n o n ­
                  designated grounds and the emergency procedures
                  under section 10 of the 1975 Act (Recommendation 14);

       (iv)       for designated stadia, consider the feasibility of
                   including a smoking prohibition as a safety
                   certificate condition where stands made of
                   combustible materials are in use (Recommendation 15);

       (v)        give preliminary thought to how best a sports ground
                   register might be set up and used - see also
                   paragraph 7 below (Recommendation 17);

       (vi)       consider with the emergency services and appropriate
                   authorities the practicability and enforcement of a
                   no-parking zone around sports grounds when an event
                   is likely to attract significant crowds (Recommendation 4);

       (vii)      consider whether safety certificate conditions relating
                   to manned exits require amplification or amendment, and
                   how best to implement (e.g. protection of stewards by a
                   police presence on exit gates) and ensure compliance
                   (Recommendation 11);  and

       (viii)     review for inclusion in new and existing safety
                   certificates suitable requirements relating to
                   training and instruction of stewards (Recommendation 12).

                                                                     /(b ) .
                                                  -   3 -




 (b )   Chief Fire Officers are asked to —

                      c o n s u l t and a d v i s e management o f n o n - d e s i g n a t e d
                      s p o r t s g r o u n d s on t h e p r e s e n c e , l o c a t i o n and
                      n a t u r e o f f i r e - f i g h t i n g equipment ( u s in g the
                      s ta n d a rd s adopted f o r s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t i o n a t
                      d e s i g n a t e d g r o u n d s as t h e y a r d s t i c k ) ( Recommendat i on 6 ) ;

        (ii)         by arrangement with sports grounds managers, give
                     assistance in fire-fighting training for stewards
                     (Recommendations 7, 10 and 12);

        (iii)       advise sports grounds management and local authorities
                     on the adequacy and suitability of exits at sports
                     grounds in relation to the spectator numbers
                     permitted to attend the ground or part of the
                     ground (Recommendation 14);  and

        (iv)        continue, as necessary, inspections of uncertificated
                     stadia to assess the need to restrict or prohibit for
                     reasons of fire safety the number of spectators at a
                     ground or particular part of a ground (Recommendation 16)
                     see also paragraphs 6 and 9 below.

(c )    Chief      Officers of Police are asked to -

        (i)           consider how evacuation procedures  at individual
                     grounds can best be incorporated into police
                     training and form part of pre-event briefing
                     (Recommendation 1);

        (ii)        continue provision for police representation within
                     local authority teams for issuing safety certificates
                     (Recommendation 2);

        (^ i i )    consult the management of sports grounds where a
                     police presence is required at an event (or events)
                     for crowd control within the ground about the
                    training of stewards on how best to assist the
                    police in an evacuation (Recommendation 10);   and

        (iv)        consider, in collaboration with the local authority
                     (see 3(a)(vii) above) and sports grounds management,
                    how to assist in manning exit gates.

6.   As regards designated stadia, certificating authorities in
collaboration with chief fire officers and chief officers of police
will no doubt wish to consider whether, following the Home Office
letter on designation of 19 July to Chief Executives, the best way
to effect quickly some of the Interim R e p o r t ’s recommendations
(particularly where structural alterations are involved) will be to
set a lower spectator ceiling based on the normal level of attendance,
rather than the nominal maximum capacity.      Many sports grounds and
stadia which do not fall within the present scope of designation
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 will have already been
inspected by chief fire officers.  It is hoped that supplementary
advice on such matters as fire fighting equipment, training in
fire fighting and evacuation procedures will be given to the
management and staff of sports grounds as needed in the knowledge
of the power to take emergency action where necessary.

                                                                                             /7.
                                              -    n   -




7.     C o n s ultations with the AMA and ACC will take place with the
object of d e t e r m i n i n g how best local r e g i stration of sports grcvnds
might be achieved (Recommendation 17).               As for the nature of
materials used in c o n s truction of new stands ( R e commendation 1 3 ),
it is suggested that building and p l a nning a u t h o r i t i e s continue
their present practices unless and until further advice is received.

B.    CHIEF FIRE OFFICERS           REPORTS       ON SPORTS GROUNDS

8.    The Home S e c r e t a r y has exp r e s s e d his gratitude to chief fire
officers for the prompt and efficient manner in which the survey
of sports grounds has been carried out - see Annex A.                  Work on
ana l y s i n g the reports is c o n t i n u i n g in the Home Office and a digest
of them will be submitted to the Inquiry.                  The Home Secretary's
statements indicate the important results of the surveys on which
immediate action has been taken by brigades.

9.      It is a p p r e c i a t e d that, in resp o n d i n g to Her Majesty's Chief
Inspector of Fire Services' letter of 16 May to chief fire officers,
some brigades were only able to c oncentrate i nspections on
u n c e r t i f i c a t e d sports stadia with a c c o m m o d a t i o n for more than 10,000
spectators (i.e. which could be d e signated under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975).                However, a large number of brigades in whose
area there were fewer sports grounds of this capacity were able to
extend their i nspections to sports grounds with a c c o m m o d a t i o n for
far fewer than 10,000 spectators.                Section 10 of the 1975 Act is
applicable to sports grounds i r r e s pective of the number of spectators
acco m m o d a t e d and it is important that those brigades which have not
so far inspected sports grounds with a c c o m m o d a t i o n for less than
10,000 s p ectators should do so as priorities and resources permit
so that stands which represent a serious fire hazard can be
identified and remedial action taken (Recommendation 16).

10.    An extra copy of this              c i r cular and Annexes is attached for chief
fire officers.     In view of             the p r ovisions of s . 16 of the Local
G o vernment Act 1985 copies              are being sent also to the Chief
Ex ecutives of m e t r o p o l i t a n    district councils and London boroughs.

11.    Any enquiries       should        be directed       to -




                                                                  Yours   faithfully




                                                                  R M MORRIS
        1045
                      Sports Grounds (Safety and Control)           24 JULY 1985
                                                                                         SportsGrounds(SafetyandControl)                     1046
          Sports Grounds (Safety and Control)
                                                                             «      «      S      d      M              b        *°*
                                                                             I am making available separately                controh
                                                                             deaJmg with each of the recommeLuio^           SUtCment
                                                                                Tne safety recommendations include several /<»*•
                                                                            to improve arrangements at snorts tm, ^            S18ned
                                                                            example, improving evacuation procedures the t » v f°f
                                                                            stewards, the provision of fire-fighting e a u im ^ ”* °f
                                                                            “ creasing the scow nf           “ i ® equipment and
                                                                                 A      S        S      i ’S B S S S L 1' ? “ i "
                                                                           the police and the spom a S                  autho™ «>
                                                                           immediately to the soirir^f »k.             to respond



                                                                           S S .L ^ 'S T p o t o i T e S ”
                                                                           take full account of the «»« ’ ^ g 111611 powers to

                                                                           no need for them to wait              “       edltl0n' There »



                                                                          a            p                S                 S
                                                                          3s wrfSS3ffr,5£2-c
                                                                              s g  ^   s  s
                                                                                            lubs!“^:
                                                                          S S in e b S ^ n * ? 0
                                                                          The G ^ v e ^ m ^ ^ UCed “ lMgUC foolbBU *»«“ * .


                                                                          trouSfnSers       A S ^ n PrCanlS l° ^                    Mc,ude

                                                                        S f Js s s optionsMd 1 w^ e" J ®
                            s“ “ for "* Ho“        * * « « «            t iL T f tS       tOUkchecd of the recommenda-
                                                                       conclusions at t h e ^ e s T ^ S ^                 ^         P0S“ Ve

                                                                       ■*£'^ S              >SS tt « neW °ffeD“ S Sh°Uld * created
                                                                       £S 3 2 S              £       S T S S i n f ? oke ,r          bs in
                                                                       t o S T ib S   b^ f * Uycoasid'™lfor°pos“ ble S i Jion
  •                  Mr-         1 snouici like „
  ai sutement. The Government have today published**                  f     in^“                                     t        r       h° i
                                        f *     J S K it              S y i T , lT CaDOnS % * * Homc Offl“ will also
                                                                                           £Tgency’ how * “ 10 meet
                                                                      Bradford                perSOnal    radl0S used at
 S K S J V S ?                                                  "
                                                                      is iriiwiLriTV*S*0n*^ conclusions, the inquiry states that it
                                                                      F i i ^ , h recof mend c»«n«es to ft? p S is to S J S 2
                                                                     £ ? S S t t £ * J ? 7lz dStfeTy r f                          * " ”£
                                                                     search and      ^     * * ven additional P°weis of
                                                                     ^ o n ^ f T £ L “? * 5 conside™ °" be given to the
   The inquiry concludes that the Bradford                  -
                                                                     ncialist abuse    °    ence ° f chanting obscene or
                                                                     S S r ^ f c l , SPOm 8roUnd‘ We sha11- of course.


                                                                     House              1,50 ** convenient for me to bring the
ss^ S S S W A t                                                      Mouse up to date on matters relating to safety and control

                                                                    Spom aw inds Act I have designated all the qualifying
                                                                    pounds of clubs in divisions 3 and 4 in the
followed the public            ^ " 5 ^        rcport’ OT "**>



  940
1047        Sports Grounds (Safety and Control)         24 JULY 1985        Sports Grounds (Safety and Control)

before admitting any spectators. I have made it clear to the        Fifthly, my hon. Friend the Minister responsible for
certifying authorities that the expectation is that they will    sport has helped to promote and draw up a Council of
work swiftly, normally by means of issuing interim               Europe convention on spectator violence which was
certificates. In some cases, die best way of providing           adopted by the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers
immediate protection—while also reducing the costs of            yesterday.
implementation — may well be to restrict attendance                 There is no single, simple method of making sports
ceilings in grounds or pans of grounds.                          grounds safe and free from violence, but 1believe that the
     My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Scotland    Reps taken in the past few months, coupled with the
has decided for his part not to proceed at present by            implementation of the important recommendations of Mr.
extending designation in Scotland beyond its existing            Justice Popplewell's inquiry, have already made, and will
limits. However, he has arranged for all non-designated          make, a significant contribution towards preserving
clubs and all governing bodies in sport in Scotland to           football as a major spectator sport.____________
conduct an urgent review of ground safety in co-operation
with their local fire authorities.
     Secondly, all uncertificated grounds of the third and
fourth divisions of the Football League, of the first and
second divisions of the Scottish Football League, and of
the first and second divisions of the Rugby League have
been inspected as a result of the request that I and my right
hon. Friend made to chief fire officers and firemasters. In
addition, accommodation for spectators at the larger
cricket grounds, Rugby Union grounds, race courses,
motor racing tracks, greyhound tracks, tennis clubs and
athletics grounds has been inspected.
    Chief fire officers and firemasters have sent copies of
their findings to the management of the sports grounds
showing what remedial measures have to be taken. In
some cases, this will involve the complete closure of a
stand until rebuilding or remedial work has been
completed. In other cases, strict limits are being placed on
the number of spectators allowed into the stand. My hon.
Friend the Minister responsible for sport will be looking
further at the financial implications with the interests
concerned in his working group on the financing of safety
improvements. Managements have responded in a co­
operative way and have either set necessary work in hand
or are considering how to comply with the requirements.
Local authorities and local fire authorities have sufficient
statutory powers to ensure that essentia] fire safety
requirements are complied with. These will in no way be
affected by the separate proposals directed towards
streamlining the present law on fire precautions published
yesterday in a consultative document and which I am
 inviting the inquiry also to consider in the context of its
 work.
     My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Scotland
 and 1 are grateful to chief fire officers and firemasters for
 the prompt, efficient and careful manner in which this
 survey has been carried out. A digest of the reports will
 be submitted to the inquiry.
     Thirdly, the House will, of course, be aware of the
 rapid passage through both Houses of the Sporting Events
 (Control of Alcohol Etc.) Bill. It will be in force by the
 beginning of the football season.
     Fourthly, steps have also been taken to enhance police
  effectiveness next season. In England and Wales the
  Association of Chief Police Officers has introduced a new
  system for exchanging information about the conduct of
  fans, which should assist in anticipating and preventing
  trouble. Three of the Home Office photographic vehicles
  will be available to be deployed at football matches,
  together with two experimental high-definition tripod-
  mounted cameras. This is in addition to the £500,000
  worth of closed circuit television equipment purchased
  through funds provided by the Football Trust.
    541
»




    INQUIRY INTO CROWD SAFETY AND CONTROL AT SPORTS GROUNDS
    INTERIM REPORT JULY 1985 ( CMND 9585 )




    GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO RECOMMENDATIONS




    GROUND MANAGEMENT


    RECOMMENDATIONS


    1-       Evacuation procedures should be a matter of police braining
    and form part of the briefing by police officers before a football
    match.     (Paragraph 3.9).



    2.       The local authority team responsible for issuing safety
    certificates in respect of designated grounds should, as heretofore,
    include police officers.      (Paragraph 3.15)



    Certificating authorities and chief officers of police will be
    invited to act upon these recommendations (see also Recommendation 10).




    RECOMMENDATIONS


    6.       Those managing sports grounds not governed by safety certificates
    should give serious consideration, with the assistance of fire authorities,
    to the presence in a ground of suitable fire fighting equipment.
    (Paragraph 3.5M)


             Stewards at all sports grounds should be trained in fire fighting.
    (Paragraph 3-55)


    8.       In designated grounds it should be a term of the safety certificate
    that an adequate first-aid room should be provided.    (Paragraph 3.99)




                                           1
 10.     Stewards in all grounds should not only be trained in fire
 precautionsand fire-fighting (see Recommendation 7 above) but should
 also be trained in how best to help the police in evacuation.
 (Paragraph 3.10*0


 1*1.    Suitable and adequate exits should be provided in all sports
grounds.    (Paragraph 3.138)

15.      No smoking should take place in combustible stands, that this
should be a condition of entry to the ground that signs tc that effect
should be prominently displayed and this should be a condition of
entry to the ground.    (Paragraph 3.1*11)


The relevant sports authorities will be invited to draw the attention
of sports grounds managers to these re^onmendations, and certificating
authorities will be asked to consider reflecting the recommendations
in new or amended safety certificates as appropriate in the case of
designated grounds.    The fire and police services will be asked to stand
ready to advise on equipment and assist with training as appropriate.




RECOMMENDATION


9.       There should be urgent consultation between the Health and Safety
Executive and the fire authorities and local authorities as to how best
to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and reports.
(Paragraph 3-95)


The HSE has appointed a member of its Executive to review liaison
arrangements between its inspectors and the fire authorities.    He will
consult Goverrment Departments and others in this review, the results of
which will be made public.




RECOMMENDATION


     -     Fire Authorities should identify and visit all sports stadia in their
areas and should prohibit or restrict the use of any stands which, in their
view, constitute a risk to spectators because of the inadequacy of the fire
precautions. (Paragraph 3.1^2)
 Chief Fire Officers in England and Wales were invited by the Home Secretary
 on 16 Mey to inspect all sports grounds and were reminded of the powers
 available to them to take emergency action if, in their view, fire hazards
 constituting a risk to spectators are revealed.   The Secretary of State
 for Scotland similarly asked Firemasters to inspect sports grounds in Scotland.
 Reports received show that fire brigades have not hesitated to recommend
 emergency action where necessary, including in a number of cases a prohibition
 on the use of stands or a restriction on the number of spectators allowed
 into them.




RECOMMENDATION


17.    In order to ensure a complete record of sports grounds a
local registration system should be set up.   (Paragraph 3-150)


Consultation will take place with the local authority associations to
establish how such records may best be compiled and maintained.     The
recent visits of the fire brigades ''see Recommendation 16) should have
in practice marshalled much of the relevant data already.




STRUCTURES


RECOMMENDATION


13.    Building of new permanent stands of combustible materials
should be prohibited as a general rule.   (Paragraph 3.132)


This recommendation will be given speedy and urgent consideration
by the Departments who are responsible for building regulations.




                                 3
  GREEN GUIDE


 RECOMMENDATIONS


 *i.   The Green Guide should be amended to include in Paragraph 11 a
 provision that, wherever practicable, roads within a quarter of a
 mile of a sports ground should be kept entirely free of parked vehicles.
 (Paragraph 3.35)


 H-    Paragraph 6.1^.6 of the   Green Guide snould be amended to read:
 "All exit gates should be manned at all tiroes while the ground is used
 by the public and be capable of being opened immediately frcn inside
 by anyone in an emergency."   (Paragraph 3.111)


 12-   The Green Guide should be amended to contain a specific provision,
in relation to stewards,


        (j.)    that they should be trained and instructed to
        deal with any emergency relating to fire or evacuation
        (see also Recommendations 7 and 10);


        (ii)    that they should be given written instructions
       about the action to be taken in cases of emergency;


       (iii)    that they should receive practical instruction
       and training appropriate to their responsibility;


       (iv)     that no one should be employed as a steward
       unless they have been so instructed and trained; and


       (v)      that they should be adequate in number, physically
       and mentally capable of performing their duties, effectively
       deployed, effectively supervised and readily identifiable.
       (Paragraph 3.117)


19•    The next edition of the Green Guide should make it clear
that it applies to all sports grounds.   (Paragraph 3.15*0
These points will be noted fcr inclusion in the next edition of the Green
Guide which will be needed after the Inquiry’s final report is received.
Action will not however depend upon the availability of a fresh edition and
certificating authorities and chief officers of police (Recommendation *4)
will be invited to take such steps as are open to them now.




CROWD MANAGEMENT


RECOMMENDATIONS


5.     Consideration should be given to making it a criminal offence
in England and Wales to have a smoke bomb or similar device at sports
grounds.   (Paragraph 3 .*12)


22.    There should be a specific offence of throwing a missile at
sports grounds. (Paragraph 6.57)


The case for inviting Parliament to create new criminal offences on
these lines will be studied urgently in connection with the Government's
intention of introducing legislation in the next session of Parliament
following its review of the law relating to public order.




RECOMMENDATIONS


20.    Urgent consideration should be given by football clubs in
England and Wales to introducing membership system so as to exclude
visiting fans.     (Paragraph 6.48)


23.    Football clubs should review their arrangements for entry and
the organisation of their turnstiles.     (Paragraph 6.62)


Both these recommendations are for football authorities and clubs, but the
Government hopes that they will be given serious consideration.    The
Government has been encouraging the Football Association and the Football
League to introduce a scheme of membership cards and the options are currently



                                      5
     being considered in a Footbaj.1 League working group: that group’s
     attention will therefore be drawn to the Inquiry's Recommendation 20.
     The governing bodies' attention will also be draw:; to Recommendation 23
     which might be influenced by decisions upon Recommendation 20.




  RECOMMENDATION


  21.       Closed circuit television should h*-. introduced at League football
 g> ounds in England and Wale? ana in the Prc-nr.er Division in Scotland.
 (Paragraph 6.5*1)                                                     ~


 The Football Trust has allocated £500,000 for the provision of CCTV equipm
 in League grounds during the 1983^6 season.        Ine T r e t ’s attention, anl
 that of the Football Associations and th, Fcoibali Leagues, will be drav:n
 to this recommendation.




MISCELLANEOUS


RECOMMENDATIONS


3-        Early attention should be given by the Home Office Directorate
of Telecommunications to consider the practicality of producing a more
suitable personal radio for the police.       (Paragraph


I®-       Consideration should be given as hov best to deal with temporary
stands and marquees       (Paragraph 3-151)


2*1.      Consideration should be given to the design of a standard,
efficient perimeter fence, with proper exits.       (Paragraph 6.63)


Each of these will be studied as the Inquiry advises.        Recommendations
18     and 2*4 may best be taken forward in the context of the Inquiry's next
stage and when it turns to examine the Green Guide as a whole.
0   PROVISIONAL r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s


     (To be reviewed in the Final Report)


    1.        I am minded to recommend that in England and Wales the police should
    be given the unfettered right of search before entry to football grounds by
    statute.’ (Paragraph 3.^1)


    2.       I am minded           to recorrmend that Section 10 of the Fire Precautions Act 1971
    should be amended with a view to giving the Fire Authority power in cases other
    than those which are regarded as wholly exceptional               (Paragraph 3-61)


    3-       Linked with the above, I am              minded to recommend that consideration
    should be given to introducing legislation giving powers for the Fire Authority
    to apply to the High Court for an injunction (or to the Court of Session for
    an interdict in Scotland) under Section 10 of the Fire Precautions Act 1971-
    (Paragraph 3-61)


    *4.       I am minded           to recommend that Section 10 of the Safety at Sports Grounds
    Act 1975 should be amended in like manner to Section 10 of the Fire Precautions
    Act 1971 (see Provisional Recommendations 2 and 3) and an application to the
    High Court for an injunction (cr to the Court of Session for an interdict in
    Scotland) should be an alternative remedy.               (Paragraph 3-76)


    5.        I am minded to recommend that the Secretary of State should exercise his
    powers to designate all sports grounds, whatever their size to include indoor
    as well as outdoor activities.               (Paragraph 3.1^5)


    6.      I am minded to recommend immediate designation of any ground
    capable of holding over 5,000 spectators, to cover all sports grounds,
    not merely football grounds.                (Paragraph 3-1^6)


    7.      I am minded to recommend that consideration should be given to
    providing the police with additional powers of arrest under the
    Public Order Act, 1936.              (Paragraph 6.66)


    8.      I am minded to recommend that consideration should be given to
    creating a specific offence of chanting obscene or racialist abuse
    at a sports ground. (Paragraph 6.67)


    These are noted and the Government will stand by to assist the
    Inquiry in its further consideration of the matters.



                                                  7
                                                                                   ANNEX




S po r ti ng bodies         to whom material              has   been circulated.



Football       Association

Welsh Football            A ss oc i a t i o n

Football       League

Rugby League

Welsh Rugby Union

Rugby Union

Lawn Tennis          A ss oc i a t i o n

Cricket      Council

National       G reyhound        R ac in g Club

The J ockey Club

S pe e dw ay Central         Board

S p e ed wo rt h    International          Ltd.

Brit is h A ma te ur At hl et ic Board

B ri t is h Show J u m p i n g      A ss oc i a t i o n

RAC M ot or        Sports    A s s o c i a t i o n Ltd.
                                                                             All correspondence must be
                                                                             addressed to the Chief Constable

                                                                             P 0 Box 22 (S. West PDO)
                                                                             Chester House
                                                                             Boyer Street
                                                                             Manchester M16 ORE
                                                                             Telephone 061 855 2 8 0 6

                                                                             Y o u r reference

                                                                             Our reference X / J J S / E W
                                                                             Date     2 6 th     J u ly ,   1985




Dear    S ir ,


                    SAFETY       OF     SPORTS        GROUNDS         ACT,         1975
         D E S IG N A T IO N    OF  3RD   AND   4TH    D IV IS IO N                   CLUBS
      OF  THE       F O O TB A LL  LEAGUE   AND   D IV IS IO N S    I                  AND  II
                               OF  THE   RUGBY   LEAGUE



                  I e n c l o s e a c o p y o f a l e t t e r f r o m t h e Home
O f f ic e c o n fir m in g th e p ro p o s e d d e s ig n a tio n o f g ro u n d s
i n th e 3 rd and 4 th D iv is io n s o f th e F o o t b a ll League and
t h e p r o j e c t e d e x t e n s io n o f d e s ig n a t io n t o c o m p a ra b le
g ro u n d s i n D iv i s io n s I and I I o f th e Rugby L e a g u e .


                                                     Y o u rs     fa ith fu lly




                                                     A s s is t a n t C h ie f C o n s ta b le
                                                     S e c r e ta r y t o th e A .C .P .O .
                                                     S u b -C o m m itte e o n H o o l ig a n i s m
                                                     a t S p o r t in g E v e n ts




To:    A ll      C h ie f C o n s ta b le s   in   E n g la n d   a n d W a le s
                                                   HOME OFFICE
                                           Queen Anne’s Gate, London, SWIH 9AT
                                                     Direct tine: 01-213   168
                                                  Switchboard: 01-213 3000

    Our reference: E N T / 85 *177/13/10
    Your reference:


    B M o r r i s s e y Esq QPM
    A s s o c i a t i o n of Chief Police Officers
    ACPO Of fi ce
    New S c o t l a n d Yard
    Broadway
    LONDON              SWIH 0BG                                          July   1985

    Dear   Mr M o r r i s s e y

    S A F E T Y OF SP O R T S GROUNDS ACT 1975: DESIGNATION OF SPORTS GROUNDS:
    3RD AN D 4TH DIV ISIONS OF THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE
■   D I V I S I O N S I AND II OF THE RUGBY LEAGUE

    1.         I wr ote to you on 23 May about the projected timetables for
    d e s i g n a t i o n of the grounds of clubs in the 3rd and 4th Divisions
    of the Fo otball League and the projected extension of de s i g n a t i o n
    to c o m p a r a b l e grounds of clubs in Divisions I and II of the Rugby
    Le a g u e .
           •r                               '
.2.       - I am now w r i t i n g to confirm that in the light of these
  co n s u l t a t i o n s , designation of the 3rd and 4th Division Football
  L e a g u e . g r o u n d s is to go ahead on the basis of the timetable proposed,
  n a m e l y for the Order to be made a little later this month 'so as to
  come into o p e r a t i o n early in August.         The Home Secr etary ha's also
 ■decided, f o l l o w i n g consul tation with the Rugby League, that it is
 no l ess i m p ortant in the interests of spectator safety that the
 c e r t i f i c a t i o n procedures in respect of the relevant. Rugby League
 D i v i s i o n I and II grounds should be in place before the start ,of the
 next play i n g season.             It is a ccordingly intended that the de s i g n a t i o n
 O r d e r in re spect of these ..grounds should al-so be made before the ehd
 of this month so as to come.into operation by mid-August, before the
 s t a r t of the next Rugby season.
    I                                                 ,               .

 3.         Copies of the two lists of soccer and rugby grounds to be
 d e s i g n a t e d are attached.       These differ slightly from those you had
 b e f o r e as one football ground (Torquay) and one Rugby ground
 (Rochdale Hornets) have dropped below the 10,000 spectator c a p a c i t y
 th r e s h o l d for designation.


                                                            Yours sincerely

                            f




                                                             (Miss)
        * '                       S A F E T Y OF SPORTS               GROUNDS         ACT   1975
   '*                                                  FOOTBALL        LEAGUE




      Grounds       proposed          for d e s i g n a t i o n


  • 3rd       Division

      Bournemouth
      B r a d f o r d - p r o m o t e d into 2nd D i v i s i o n at end 1984/85 season
      Brentford
      Donc'aster
      Gillingham
      Hull C i t y - p r o m o t e d into 2nd D i v i s i o n at end 1984/85 season
      Lincoln
      M i l l w a l l - p r o m o t e d into 2nd D i v i s i o n at end 1984/85 season
      Newport •
      Plymouth
      Reading
      Walsall                              . •
      tfigari /
      ‘York '                 ’                v   '


      '4th. D i v i s i o n
  •                           .        *                                          *


    Aldershot •
    Blackpool'
■■ [Bury I                        •        •                                  •
   ■ Chester            .
     Chesiterfield
     Colchester
’ - Crewe
     D a r l i n g t o n ’’
     Exeter                                            ;
     Halifax                                                                                       *   :
     Hartlepool
     Hereford
     Mansfield
     Northampton
     Peterborough                                                 1
     Port V a l e
   'Rochdale.1
 • ^Scunthorpe                                             .            ...
     Southend             .                                       ,
  ' .'Stockport .0
     Swindon
     Tranmere




       2 6 June      1985
                                 S A F E T Y OF SPORTS   GROUNDS   ACT   1975

                                               RUGBY LEAGUE




Rugby League g r o u n d s i d entified by the Rugby Football League as haying
spe c t a t o r c a p a c i t y o f over 10,000 and as falling within the definitions
a stad i u m in s . 17 of the Sa f e t y qf Sports Grounds Act 1975.       (Mr Oxley
l e t t e r of 2 4 . 6 . 8 5 )           —



Grounds          proposed-for        designation


CLUB                                           GR OUND

 Di vi s i o n    I
                                               Craven Park — relegated to Division II
  Barrow
  B r a d f o r d Northern.                    Odsal Stadium
  C as tl e f o r d                            Wh el d o n Road
  F e a t h e r s t o n e Rovers               "Post Office Road
  Ha li f a x                                  Thrum Hall
  Hull                                         The Boulevard
  Hull K i n g s t o n Ro v e r s              Craven Park'
  Leeds                                        Headingley
                                               Hilton .Park - relegated to. Division II
'L e i g h ...w : •
/Oldham/                                       Watersheddings
  St'' Helens /                                K n o w s l e y Road
.W a r r i n g t o n     •'                    Wilderspool
 • Widnes.                                     N a u ghton Park
‘.'Wigan '<*!■■                                 Cen tral Park                         _
■‘W o r k i n g t o n Town                      De rwent Park -          ^     " V 0 3_.


 Division         II

 Bailey1                                        M o u n t Pleasant                   :
 Dewsbury                                       Crown Flatt - promoted to Division I
‘H u d d e r s f i e l d                        Arena 84
{S a l f o r d r-                               The Willows - promoted to Division I
' Wakefield Tr in it y                         • Belle Vue
 .Swinton                                       S tat i o n Road - 1promoted to Division I




  26   June       1985
       •* —''
                  South Yorkshire Police
                        MINUTE SHEET                                                                                             date...,..
                                                                                                                                                   IX
                        Subject                    ..B.Y.ERQ.m„D.EMQN.S.TMT.I<M



To:-

ACC(Operations)

Mr W Jackson             On Thursday, 11 July 1985, I attended this b o called
                         demonstration of the above equipment at Barnsley Football
                         Ground.

                         The d e m o n s tr a tio n               was    s c h e d u le d      to    s ta rt       at     2 .3 0      pm a n d
                         th e re        w ere      c o n s id e r a b le     te c h n ic a l        d iffic u ltie s             w h ic h
                         re s u lte d         in    a s m a ll        amount o f           w a te r b e in g           s p ra ye d      o n to
                         th e     te rra c e s ,        b a s ic a lly       by     th e    F ir e      B rig a d e ,       at     4 .2 0    pm.
                         I     was,      to     say     th e .le a s t,         not      im p re s s e d .


                         I t    w ill     be       seen      th a t     th is     e q u ip m e n t      is    b e in g
                         d e v e lo p e d       b y way o f           a g ra n t       fro m     th e     B a r n s le y
                         M e tro p o lita n           B o ro u g h      C o u n c il.       At      th is     s ta g e      th e
                         e q u ip m e n t       seems        to    be no m ore             th a n    so m e f o r m         of               >
                         g lo r ifie d          fire      h y d ra n t.


                         I f    t h i s a p p a r a t u s i s t o be e f f e c t i v e , t h e n m uch n e e d s
                         to     be d o n e t o d e v e lo p i t so t h a t i t o p e r a t e s e f f i c i e n t l y .
                         I     fe e l    th e      d e v e lo p e r s    have       been       som ewhat h a s ty                in
                         a rra n g in g         th is     d e m o n s tra tio n          and     th a t      it    s h o u ld      be
                         lo o k e d      at     m uch m o re          c lo s e ly      b e fo re     any      d e c is io n        is    made
                         a b o u t u s in g          th is    e q u ip m e n t      a n yw h e re .

                         I     have      in fo rm e d        S u p e rin te n d e n t       P a rk e r       of    th e     S .R .D .B .
                         at     S a n d r i d g e , o f my v i e w s              on     th is      e q u ip m e n t      a s h e was
                         u n a b le      to     a tte n d .        In    v ie w     of     what      to o k       p]
                         w o u ld h a ve           had a w a s te d          jo u rn e y .




                         S u p e rin te n d e n t                                                                                o p e r a t e
                         OPS TWS/SM
              W ith                       OLICE



B R A C O N D O VE Co.. Ltd      - 2 JULI985
Design and Innovation (^onsultantss,
20, Parker Stre&t,          CHIEF SUPERINTENDE IT
Barnsley. S70 6EG.
Tel. 0226 387861.           OPERATIO NS  T*
           B R A C O N D O V E Co. Ltd
                                            Design & Innovation (Consultants)

                         20 PARKER STREET, BARNSLEY S70 6EG
                                   Telephone 0226-387861                  Your Ref.
           O u r Ref.




                                     INVITATION

     July 11th 1905                                        P.JO pra onwards

     Barnsley Football Ground, ( Oakwell )
     Grove Street,
     BA.RNSI.EY.

     Your are cordially invited to a demonstration at Brim f ley Football
     Ground.

     Bar and Refreshments wi!11 be provided.

     B.S.V.P.           Please let us know if you will not be able to attend.
                                                                T’
                                                                 nankyoii.


                                  THE HYDRO-REMOTE FIREMAN                            iJune 1985

1.    HYDRO - the automatic remote controlled hydrant, a unique device developed
      to put out fires completely automatically in unmanned buildings or
      by remote control in crowded areas.

2. The HYDRO is ideally suited for use on oil and gasriggs, in pumping
    stations, hotels, warehouses and most public and commercial buildings.

3.    The Hydro is particularly suitable for sports grounds where its
      links to close circuit TV monitors enables one man to control the device
      remotely and accurately and direct water to the point where
      a fire has started. No need to wait for a Fire Brigade to arrive -
      fires can be tackled quickly and safely.

4. The Hydro has a diffuser jet which can spreadwater over a wide
    area, equally the jet can be directed onto one person
    or small group of troublemakers, without affecting innocent bystanders.

      The soaking wet hooligans could be identified easily by the public
      authorities.

5.    With the benefit of hindsight it is apparent that both the Bradford City
      fire AND the Liverpool/Juventus disasters could have been avoided by the
      use of the HYDRO. Both disasters happened', too quickly for conventional
      equipment to be used.

6.    Fire and hooligans can be controlled remotely and safely within seconds
      by use of the HYDRO.      (ZSfT&t
                               BRACONDOVE LTD

                            HYDROID DEMONSTRATION

                    at Barnsley F.C. July 11th, 1985

                                  PROGRAMME

2.30 p.m.       Registration and Informal Reception

3.00 p.m.       Welcome and Introduction

3.15 p.m.       Tour of Exhibition

3.25 p.m.       Assembly in the Main Stand

3.30 p.m.       Hydroid Demonstrations

3.45 p.m.       Questions

4.00 p.m.       Departure

All enquiries to Bracondove Ltd. 20 Parker Street, Barnsley

Tel: Barnsley   (0226) 387861.


We would like to express our appreciation for the support given

by Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council in the development of

the HYDROID prototype.


We would also like to thank Barnsley F.C. for the use of the

Oakwell Ground for the demonstration today.
                        HYDROID                                                                     HYDROID
Just some of the places where the Hydroid can be used :                      - the automatic remote control hydrant, a unique fully patented device to
                                                                             put out fires completely automatically in unmanned buildings or by remote
                                                                             control in crowded areas.


                        Football Grounds                                    How it works :..
                        Sports Grounds
                        Stadiums                                            1 The HYDROID sensor will locate a fire in 1 to 20 seconds at a range of
                                                                              upto 60 metres.
                        Hospitals
                        Schools                                             2   The HYDROID sensor will automatically open the water main valves
                        Public Buildings                                        and extinguish the fire.
                        Hotels                                              Fail - safe : ..
                        Warehouses
                        Ships                                               The sensor will also sound a klaxon and telephone the local fire brigade.
                        Oil & Gas Rigs                                      Remote Control:..
                        Unmanned Pumping Stations
                        Farms                                               The HYDROID is designed to be used with close circuit T.V monitors and with
                                                                            the manual HYDROID control facility, can be used safely in crowded situations


                                                                            HYDROID (S) - a robust static model for use in public and commercial
                                                                            buildings, sports grounds, ships etc.

                                                                            HYDROID (P) - a portable model for use at public events . Galas, Shows,
                                                                            etc, wherever a temporary fire risk exists.
and at events such as Shows, Galas, Fairs etc in fact anywhere that fires
start.                                                                      N.B. - The HYDROID has an intruder detection facility as well!.
                             Bracondove Ltd
                                        *
                                      the

                                HYDROID
                               the remote fireman


      All enquiries to
   BRACONDOVE Ltd
     20 Parker Street
         Barnsley
 South Yorkshire S70 6EG

Tel: Barnsley(0226) 387861
                     r
                                        %%twat from
                              ..l o Ji’c v

                                  CaMtaulfe*      .... .
                     j    u x jfu kt . m s
                                                           ,J




47/85     ANY OTHER BUSINESS

        1. Safety at Sports Ground Act

          Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) reported that he was
          contributing to the ACPO Working Party as a member for No.2 Region,
          and Superintendent Stuart (Operations Dept.) was dealing with local
          members, via ACC (OPS), examining,therequirements  of the Act and
          was currently assessing the closedcircuittelevision systems being
          installed at the Barnsley and Sheffield United football grounds,
          and bringing the Football Order up to date. The Chief Constable
          intimated that the costs associated with the purchase, maintenance,
          and insurance, of the CCTV equipment would rest with the club
          concerned.
   t
           Item discharged.
                                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                                                     ( z i j o x h z
                                                                                               REF:          B/DHQ/PL/JG
        FROM:   C h ie f    S u p e rin te n d e n t L o d g e ,   'B '   D iv is io n
                                                                                               STATION/DEPT: BARNSLEY
                A .C .C .       O p e ra tio n s ,   M r.   W.   Jackson                       DATE:
                                                                                                              8 July 19a*"“*-Viv
                                                                                                        --------

                SUBJECT:                S AF E T Y A T F O O T B A L L GROUNDS           -   URGENT



                I forward herewith correspondence from Barnsley Foot±>all Club and the
                Football Trust in respect of the use of closed circuit television at
                football grounds and particularly with reference to the Barnsley ground.
                It will be seen at paragraph 4 of the letter from the Football Trust that
                the procedure for the grant of application for monies from that body in
                respect of C.C.T.V. requires a letter from the South Yorkshire Police to
                the Barnsley Football Club, confirming that -

                           1.       C.C.T.V. is required.

                           2.       Whether the police would accept responsibility for the
                                     ownership and maintenance of the equipment.

                           3.       An indication of the tasks we see C.C.T.V. performing.

                           4.       Whether C.C.T.V..could be used at more than one ground
                                     in South Yorkshire.

                In view of the nature of the questions asked I would suggest that there is
                a need for any such letter/statement to be issued on a central basis from
                Headquarters, and this correspondence is forwarded for your information and
                attention.   I would draw particular attention to the mention on page 3 that
                Football Clubs are asked to reply by Friday 19th July at the latest if their
                grant application is to be considered.




                Chief Sugg-rH^tenjent.




                                                                                             Id*




                                              JL                                                        _____ V


                                         q   .

                                                                                                              9 JULIES

                                                                                                                  a !c •
                                                                                                                       .o»■»
                                                                                                                           .'........j...
                                                                                                                           .*
                                                                                                             'PERATICNS



GEN/2
  FOOTBALL CLUB LTD                                                 . E S T A B L IS H E D 1887 •

  OAKW ELL G R O U N D    BARNSLEY       SO UTH YORKSHIRE S71 1ET
                  TELEPH O N E: BARNSLEY (0226) 295353
  MJS/JM                                                                                            6th July, 1985.

   Chief Superintendent P. Lodge,
   South Yorkshire Police,
   Churchfields,
   Barnsley.


   Dear Peter,

        I enclose a copy of a circular letter received
   in this morning's post, from The Football Trust,
   which I feel sure you will find of interest.

        Perhaps when you have had chance to read it
   you will telephone me so that we can discuss the
   matter further.




                                                                                      Yours sin^ferelv.

           SOUTH YORKS POLICE

                                                                                      M. j. SPINKS,
                        - 8 JUL1985                                                   Secretary.


                         ’b ’ d . h . q .
                     BARNSLEY



D IR E C T O R S '   G . BU CK LE L .L .B . ( C H A I R M A N )      J .A . D E N N IS     M . R. H A Y SE LD EN                R. F. P O T T E R   C . B. TA Y LO R
                                    S E C R E T A R Y : M . J . SPIN K S          T E A M M A N A G E R : - R '- 'Yv-e e f c t -tN S
                                                          R E G IS T E R E D IN E N G L A N D N O . 66716
Second Floor, Walkden House, 10 Melton Street, London NW1 2EJ.                    Tel: 01-388 4504.
                             Chairman: The Rt Hon Lord Aberdare KBE GCSU
                               Deputy Chairman: Sir Norman Chester CBE
                                     Secretary: Richard Faulkner




                                                                            4 July 1985

      To the Chairmen o f all clubs in the Canon and Scottish Leagues

      Dear Chairman

                            CLOSED CIRCUIT TELEVISION

      I am writing to advise you that at their m eeting on 2 July the
      Trustees decided to a llo ca te a total of £500,000 to assist with the
      installation of closed circuit television at major grounds in the Canon
      and Scottish Football Leagues. This decision follows the successful
      experim ent, funded by the Trust, at first and second division grounds
      in the West Midlands and G reater Manchester, and at the two premier
      division clubs in Edinburgh.

      The allocation o f the new ££ million for CCTV will                   obviously require
      th e most, careful consideration, not least because                  the sum will not
      be su fficien t to cover more than 20 or 30 grounds.                 We are therefore
      adopting the following guidelines which I hope you will               consider carefully.

      1.   Eligibility

             U ltim ately the Trustees hope to see CCTV installed as widely
      as possible throughout the two leagues. Initially, however, we intend
      to con cen tra te on grounds in the first and second division in the
      Canon League, and the premier division in Scotland. Clubs outside
      th ese divisions are not ruled out com pletely, if special circum stances
      exist.    But as far as this first £500,000 is concerned, we exp ect
      this to be spent at grounds in the three major divisions only.

     2.    S cale o f assistance

           One important ou tcom e o f the experim ents was that it has
     proved generally more sa tisfa ctory for CCTV equipment to be the
     entire responsibility o f the local police force as regards both owner­
     ship and maintenance.      Accordingly we are prepared to o ffer grants
     o f 100 per cen t on expenditure up to £25,000 per ground if the
     equipment is owned and maintained by the police, apart from a
     very small contribution by. clubs towards the co st o f cam era mounting
     points. If the clubs prefer to have the equip ment in their ownership,
     or the police are reluctant to take on the responsibility, grants
     o f 50 per cen t towards maximum expenditure o f £25,000 will be
     considered.
Type of equipment and specification

This is a vital area, and one to which I would ask you to pay partic­
ular attention. I im agine that your o ffic e , like mine, has been inund­
ated with promotional material from CCTV firms in the last few
w eeks.   It is hard to judge betw een one firm and its products, and
another.     To ensure that equipment purchased with Football Trust
help represents th e best value for money, and does the job required
o f it, we have en listed the help of the Home O ffice's S cien tific
R esearch and D evelopm ent Branch, and o f the Association o f C hief
P o lice O fficers.   They will shortly be making recommendations to
us on th e tech n ical specification s on which we should insist, and cn
whether w e should p lace a single contract with one or more suppliers
who are able to m eet the technical specifications, provide the necessary
geographical cov era g e around the country, and operate a proper maint­
enance agreem ent. The other alternatives to a national supplier are
a small number o f regional contracts, or a larger number of lo c il
agreem ents.     A t present we have an open mind on this issue, but
it is vital that any equipment installed with our help m eets the agreed
technical sp ecification s.

We are looking for a combination o f "command and control" equipment
(which enables th e police to deploy o ffice rs inside and outside grounds,
anticipating trouble and dealing with it when it breaks out) and
"evidential" equipment (to provide video recordings and possibly still
photographs o f disorder, o f su fficien t quality for subsequent use i s
evidence in court).       It is likely that at many grounds the command
and control ca m era s will be permanently mounted, whereas the high
quality* evidential cam eras may well be m obile, being brought in by
th e police on sp e c ific match days and taken back by them afterwards.
It may w ell prove possible for this equipment to be used at more
than one ground within a police authority area ■ our experim ent in
Edinburgh has shown that this can work well.

As no two grounds are identical, requirements will vary, but experience
has taught us that th e combination I have outlined is likely to prove
the most useful.

One a ltern ative option which we are prepared to consider (it is likely
to be very much less expensive) is the provision o f an entirely portable
cam era carried by a police officer, taken around the perim eter cf
the pitch, or film ing the crowd outside the ground. This has proved
an e f f e c t iv e d eterrent in som e circum stances previously, and whilst
it does not represent a co m p lete alternative, it can so m etim es assist.

Procedure for grant applications

From the foregoing, you will appreciate that whilst there is a feeling
o f urgency within the gam e that the use o f CCTV should be widel /
extended, it is important not to rush into com m itm en ts which may
subsequently be regretted. Above all, it is vital that the right equip­
m ent is installed, which is why we. a tta ch such importance to tha
work being done on our behalf by the Home O ffic e and the A ssociatior
o f C hief P o lice O fficers.
We do however want to decide which clubs are to be covered by
th e initial £500,000 allocation as soon as possible. So if you wish
your club to be considered, would you pleae let me know by Friday
19 July at the la test. You should en close with your le tter a sta te ­
m ent from your local police force confirming that they wish to
s e e CCTV at your ground together with an indication o f whether
th e club or the police would be responsible for the ownership and
maintenance o f the equipment. It would also be helpful if the police
gave som e indication o f what tasks they see CCTV performing (e.g.
command and control inside and outside the ground, the production
o f evidence, d eterren ce etc), and whether they would like to be
able to use som e o f the CCTV equipment at more than one ground.
I should also be grateful if you would please confirm that you
are prepared to a cce p t the cost of cam era mounting points, to
which I referred in guideline 2.

Applications will be considered by a special working group o f the
Trust, chaired by Sir Norman Chester, and containing representatives
o f the Football League, the Football Association, and the Association
o f C hief P olice O fficers. This group is empowered to decide which
sch em es to support, and its decision will be final.

The clubs whose        applications are successful will be notified by 16
August, and they        will be given guidance on what equipment should
be c h o s e n . .
    •j             •    *       4/v '•                 '■           'i   ‘‘!
                                                                           '
                                                                           V
If you would like      further' guidance, please do not h e stita te to con tact
me. .,                                                                       ;


Yours sincerely


Kicnara rauiKner
Secretary
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES A T F O O TB A LL GROUNDS


The      A s s is ta n t          C h ie f     C o n s ta b le        (O p e ra tio n s ),              Mr Ja ckso n ,              ra is e d       th is
ite m      p o in tin g           out     to       m em bers       th a t      a c tio n          a lre a d y     ta k e n       by      th e      F o rc e
a fte r     th e     B ra d fo rd             C ity      d is a s te r       had        p re -e m p te d        a d v ic e       c o m in g        fro m
th e     Home O f f i c e .               He       re m in d e d      D iv is io n a l            C om m anders            th a t     e v a c u a tio n
p ro c e d u re s         s h o u ld      be       in c o rp o ra te d         in       o p e r a tio n a l       o rd e rs         fro m       th e
b e g in n in g      of        next       season.


C h ie f    S u p e rin te n d e n t               M o s e le y    th e n      in fo rm e d          th e      m e e tin g       of      th e
in s ta lla tio n              of    s o p h is tic a te d            ca m e ra         and       v id e o     e q u ip m e n t       at
H ills b o r o u g h           F o o tb a ll        G ro u n d .        He b e l i e v e d           th a t     it.    w o u ld       be      a g re a t
h e lp     next      season              in    m o n ito rin g          cro w d         b e h a v io u r .        He a l s o          s a id       th a t
S h e ffie ld        W ednesday w e re                     in s ta llin g           a     la s e r      c o u n tin g       s y s te m        on    th e
tu r n s tile s           at      th e    'S p io n        Kop'       in     o rd e r        to    m ore       e a s ily      re g u la te
n u m b e rs    at        th a t     end       of       th e    s ta d iu m .


S u p e rin te n d e n t            O 'N e ill          re c o u n te d      p ro b le m s         w ith       th e    B a rn s le y          F o o tb a ll
C lu b     m anagem ent              and       th e      la c k    of      fa c ilitie s             f o r 't h e      p o lic e         at     O a k w e ll.
He a s k e d        if      any      p re s s u re         c o u ld     be     b ro u g h t        to    bear         on    th e      C lu b       fro m
H e a d q u a rte rs .

Mr     Jackson            s a id     th a t        he     c o n s id e r e d     th is        a m a tte r          fo r     d is c u s s io n          at
th e     a n n u a l m e e tin g              of     C lu b     C h a irm e n       and       S e c re ta r ie s           and      it     w as
im p o rta n t           th a t     D iv is io n a l           C om m anders            e n s u re d      re p o rts        w ere        s u b m itte d
w he re     C lu b s        fa ile d          to     ta k e     a p p ro p ria te            s te p s     in     a c c o rd a n ce         w ith       th e
S a fe ty      of        S p o rts       G ro u n d s       le g is la tio n            so    th a t      a p p ro p ria te           a c tio n        c o u ld
be     ta k e n .


Ite m      d is c h a r g e d .
                                                                                                    S O U T H YORKS. PqT
                                                                                                                      OLiCE



                                                                  H O M E OFFICE             I              17   MAY 1985
                                                          Queen Anne’s Gate, London, s w i h ^ q a t           __
                                                                    Direct line; 01-213                 H E A L 'Q   , \ o T!F i s ~
                                                                 Switchboard: 01-213 3000

        Our reference:
        Your reference:

                                                                                             16 May 1985
     All Chief O f f i c e r s of Police
      in En gland and Wales C W                                                        Aec (o p s ) J* Or,.                            O^T
                                                                                                       to


     Dear Sir
                                                                                              t o
     HOME OFFICE CIRCU,E'Ar S « ^ 37 / 1j^l5
     FOOTBALL SAFETY/AND CROWD C0N” R0L                          20   MAY 1935

     Following th^ events at Bradftird"~an^p|^^4'R:Sham o:i Saturday 11 May
     the Home Secretary made a s ta tti
                                      ggre’tTt‘l
                                               ,'“tTr*trttre**^'Hatrse""bf Commons on
     13 May, a C/bpy of which I attach.        In his statement the Home Secretary
     announced ^hat he was asking Chief Fire Officers to visit uncertificated
     sports stadia in their areas to advise management on the steps they
     should taWe to secure proper standards of crowd safety.

     2.  I attach a copy of a letter which Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of
     Fire Services is today sending to all Chief Fire Officers.   In
     carrying put their task Chief Fire Officers may wish to seek your
     views and; advice, but,without waiting for any such approach, you will
     no doubt Wish to draw to the attention of the Chief Fire Officer any
     points of; concern about stadia in your area of which the Chief Fire
     Officer ip not already aware

     3.  Any enquiries about this circular should be addressed to
     Miss R M l^letton, F8 Division, (Tel No 01 213 5231 ).




                                                                   D J BELFALL


                                                                    CK v y Q             I




                          S O U T H Y O R K S . POL!
                                                                               A   j r f                               ■




                               2 1 MAY 1935
\ h m
                                  S' - P E '- M N T r ^
                          ?PER AT I Jf-iS c.< i *■>
 te)ji$»vs                                                                                                       '4/fa.
                                               H O M E O FFIC E
                                       Queen Anne’s Gate, L o n d o n , SW 1H 9AT
                                                 Direct tine: 01-213
                                              Switchboard: 01-213 3000

Our reference: FIR/85   8/14/7
Your reference:                                                 No 6/1985

                                                                 16   May   1985

 To all Ch ief Fire O f f i c e r s


Dear Chief Offi c e r


 SAFETY AT SP OR TS STADIA

 In the sta te ment w h i c h the Home S e c r e t a r y made to the House of
 Common s on Monday, 13 May about the fire tragedy at B r a dford City
 footba ll ground, he said that he wa s a s k i n g chief fire offic ers
 im m e d i a t e l y to visit u n c e r t i f i c a t e d sports stadia in their areas
 to ad vi se m a n a g e m e n t on the steps they should take to secure proper
 s t a nd ar ds of crowd sa f e t y in their p a r t i c u l a r circumstances.
 Al tho ugh the statement has been w i d e l y reported in the media, I
 enclose, for your information, a copy of an extract from Ha nsard
 w hi ch also co ver s the e x c h a n g e f o l l o w i n g the statement.

2.      I kn o w that f o l l o w i n g the Bradford fire, many chief fire officers
will have a l r e a d y begun to review fire safety at football stadia
in their areas, and that others will have this matter in hand. The
pu rpo se of this letter is to ask you, in a c c o r d a n c e with the Home
Se c r e t a r y ' s request, to ar range for vi s i t s to be made to all
u n c e r t i f i c a t e d sports st adia in your area to di scuss fire safety
a r r a n g e m e n t s with m anagement. For this p u r p o s e you will wis h to have
regard to the d e f i n i t i o n of a "sports st adium" for the p u r p o s e s of
the Safety of Sp orts Grounds Act 1975.                     This       is pr ovided in section
17 read in c o n j u n c t i o n with sect i o n       1 of the Act.             But since the
combined ef fec t of the r e l evant d e f i n i t i o n s is a little c om plicated
you may find it he lpful to have the                   a t t a c h e d syn t h e s i s (see Annex)
w hi ch sets out wha t the d e f i n i t i o n s       t o g ether comprise. You will wish
to note that the d e f i n i t i o n e m b races stadia used for p u r p o s e s other
than football, eg athletics, cricket, tennis.                           In his statement,
the Home Se c r e t a r y i n dicated that one of the matt e r s w h i c h would no
do ubt be d i s cu ss ed was the o p e n i n g and l o c k i n g of gates, and more
g e n e r a l l y c hi ef fire o f f i c e r s will wish to bear in mind the advice
c o n ta in ed in the Home D e p a r t m e n t s Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
(Football) w h i c h was pu b l i s h e d in 1976 and is o b t a i n a b l e from HMSO.

3.    In c a r r y i n g out these visits and discus sions, chief offic e r s
will wi s h to ha ve regard to the Home S e c r e t a r y ' s a n n o u n c e m e n t that
he intend s to d e s i g n a t e all g r o u n d s in the Third and Fourth Divisions
of the Fo otb all League so that they become subject to the sy s t e m of
sa fe ty c e r t i f i c a t i o n u nder the Safety of Sports Grou n d s Act 1975.
You will note from the sta t e m e n t that the timing of i m p l e m e n t a t i o n is
E .R .


         b e i n g u r g e n t l y d i s cussed wit h the football authorities, but in
         v i s i t i n g such gr ounds fire a u t h o r i t i e s will want to consider, in
         the light of the Horae Depart m e n t s Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
         (Football) wha t m e a s u r e s they will be r e c o m m e n d i n g when de s i g n a t i o n
         takes effect.

         4.     A l t ho ug h there are no imme diate plans to des i g n a t e other sports
         stadia un der the 1975 Act, p e n d i n g the re sults of the in quiry into
         the o p e r a t i o n of the Act by Mr Justice Popplewell, w hich was also
         ann ounced by the Home Secretary, chief fire o f f i c e r s will wis h to
         bear in mind the p r o v i s i o n s of se ction 10 of that Act.       If in the
         course of visits to these stadia it be comes a p p a r e n t that there would
         be a serious risk to s pectato rs in the event of fire and that
         ap p r o priate re medial m e a sures are not b e i n g taken, chief fire officers
         will wish to c o n sider i n v i t i n g their Council to take ac t i o n under
         section 10 of the 1975 Act.

         5.  In his statement, the Home Sec r e t a r y reco g n i s e d that the visits
         to sports stadia w ould be the more c o m p r e h e n s i v e if chief fire
         officers were a c c o m p a n i e d by other m e m b e r s of the local a u t h o r i t y
         safety teams, but to avoid any d elay he c onsidered that the duty
         fell best ini t i a l l y on chief fire officers.            No doubt you will be
         liaising with the c hief exe c u t i v e on this matter, and for this
         purpose I am s e n d i n g a copy of this letter to him.            A copy of this
         letter is also b e i n g sent to chief o f f i c e r s of police.

         6.      Mr Justice Popp l e w e l l has a l r e a d y indi cated that he would find
         it helpful to his inquiry, and p a r t i c u l a r l y in the context of m a k i n g
         an interim report or r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s as s u ggested in the Home
         Secret a r y ' s statement, to have an early i n d i c a t i o n of the ou tcom e of
         the programme of visits to u n c e r t i f i c a t e d sports stadia.          I should
         therefore be g r a teful if you w ould let me have reports on the number
         and types of u n c e r t i f i c a t e d stadia in your area g i v i n g a b rief o u t ­
         line of the re sults of your visits and d i s c u s s i o n s w ith m a n a g e m e n t
         and taking ac count of any vie ws of other parts of the local a u t h o r i t y
         safety team and the police.               This should include the extent to w hich
         the crowd safety a r r a n g e m e n t s of each s t a d i u m are regarded as
         s a t i s f a c t o r y and, if not, the steps w h i c h are b e i n g taken to make
         them s a t i sfactory.         (Priority should of course be given to those
         Third and Fourth D i v i s i o n grou n d s in your areas as yet u n d e s i g n a t e d
         under the 1975 Act.)             It w ould be help f u l if these re ports could be
         sent to me p r o g r e s s i v e l y in s tages as parts of the task are completed
         and copied to the Chief Executive, c o - o r d i n a t o r of the safety teams
         and the chief o f f i c e r of police.          All re ports should reach me not
         later than 12 July.             In the light of these p r e l i m i n a r y reports,
         Mr Justice Popp l e w e l l may w ish to seek further information.

         7.    I r e c ognise that this task will rep r e s e n t an a d d i t i o n a l burd en
         for your fire p r e v e n t i o n depa rtment, and that it will p r o b a b l y be
         n e cessary to make s h o r t - t e r m a d j u s t m e n t s to your priorities.
         However, I kno w that I can rely on your c o o p e r a t i o n to ensure that
         the fire service does all that it p o s s i b l y can to prev e n t a
         repet i t i o n of the kind of tr agedy w h i c h oc curred in Bradford.

         8..   The Home Office will,          of course,      keep   local a u t h o r i t i e s   informed
of d e v e l o p m e n t s c o n c e r n i n g the future d e s i g n a t i o n s w h i c h are.to b
made under the Sa f e t y of S ports Grou n d s Act 1975.




                                                                SIR PETER DARBY
                                                                                 ANNEX


S AFE TY AT SPORTS G R O U N D S ACT         1975


The effect of se ction 1 read with sect i o n                      17 is that a sports
st ad i u m is defined as any place -


   w he re sports or other c o m p e t i t i v e acti v i t i e s           take place
   in the open air; and

   where a c c o m m o d a t i o n has been provi d e d for s p ectators
   c on si s t i n g of a r t i f i c i a l stru c t u r e s or of natural
   s t ru ct ur es that have been a r t i f i c i a l l y mo dified for the
   purpose; and

   that a c c o m m o d a t i o n w h o l l y or s u b s t a n t i a l l y sur r o u n d s the
   area used for a c t i v i t i e s taking place on the ground; and

   in the opin i o n of the S e c r e t a r y of State the s t a d i u m has
   a c c o m m o d a t i o n of more than 10,000 spectators.
                                   E X T R A C T FROM HANSARD

  19                   Football Grounds                     13 MAY 1985                     Football Grounds                    20

                   Football Grounds                                 charged with a variety o f criminal offences. That is a
                                                                    further example o f disgraceful football violence, which
  3 .3 0 pm                                                         illustrates the link between the problem o f crowd safety
                                                                    and the problem o f crowd control. With regard to this
        The Secretary o f State for the Hom e Departm ent
                                                                    incident, inquiries are also being made by the Football
    (M r. Leon Brittan): With permission Mr. Speaker, I             Association, and these must proceed.
    should like to make a statement. The entire nation has been
                                                                        Investigations at Bradford are continuing and inquests
    horrified and appalled at the terrible tragedy at Bradford      will be conducted both there and at Birmingham. I shall
    City football ground on Saturday. I know that the whole
                                                                    expect to receive further reports in due course giving the
    House will wish to join together in expressing our deepest
                                                                    conclusions o f the police, forensic and fire brigade
    sympathy for the families and friends o f the dead and of
                                                                    inquiries in Bradford and o f the police inquiries in
   the many who were injured, some o f whom remain
                                                                    Birmingham. But over and above these investigations and
   critically ill.
                                                                    hearings, the magnitude o f the events demands that urgent
       The fire started just before half-time, at about 3.35 pm,    steps should immediately be taken to examine what can
   under the floor at one end o f the main stand. The stand was     be done to prevent such incidents. With my right hon.
   an old one made o f metal and timber with a bitumen and          Friend the Secretary o f State for Scotland I have,
   felt roof, and the fire spread extremely rapidly. There were     therefore, asked Mr. Justice Popplewell to chair an inquiry
   about 3,000 people in the stand. The majority managed to         with the following terms o f reference:
   move down onto the pitch, but a number tried to escape               “To inquire, with particular reference to the events at
   through the exits at the rear and found themselves trapped        Bradford City and Birmingham football grounds on 11 May, into
   in a narrow alley between the back o f the stand and the          the operation of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975; and to
   wall o f the ground. In accordance with long-established          recommend what if any further steps should be taken, including
                                                                     any that may be necessary under additional powers, to improve
   practice at sports grounds, the gates were locked to prevent      both crowd safety and crowd control at sports grounds.”
   unauthorised spectators gaining admission. It was there           I understand that Mr. Justice Popplewell will visit
   that many people died.                                            Bradford tomorrow.
       The chief constable o f West Yorkshire informed me this          The inquiry’s fundamental task will be to ensure that
   morning that 51 people died at the ground. Two more have          the demands o f safety, on the one hand, and control, on
   since died in hospital. A further four people are reported        the other, are not only each satisfied in themselves but
   missing and remain unaccounted for. The bodies o f most           satisfied compatibly with each other. A subsidiary but
   o f those who died at the ground have not yet been                important task will be for the inquiry to review what is
   identified. In addition, over 200 people were injured, of         known as the “Green Guide”— the “Guide to Safety at
  whom 60 are still in hospital. Twenty two policemen were           Sports Grounds”— which provides guidelines for local
  injured, o f whom two are in hospital, and three firemen           authorities as to the conditions that they should require of
  were injured, none o f whom is still in hospital.                 clubs that seek certification under the 1975 Act. I shall ask
       The cause o f the fire has not yet been ascertained, but     that the inquiry should proceed with all possible speed,
  a team o f detectives from the West Yorkshire police,             taking account o f and supplementing, as necessary, the
  assisted by forensic scientists are members o f the West          findings o f the current police, forensic service and fire
  Yorkshire fire brigade, began sifting through the debris as       brigade investigations. I shall arrange for the chairman to
  soon as it had been made safe to do so. The police have           be assisted by appropriately qualified assessors — for
  asked for witnesses to come forward, who might be able            example, from the police and fire services— and to have
 to give evidence about the possible cause o f the fire, and        available such technical advice and support as he requires.
  it is essential that members o f the public should give every     He w ill, o f course, be able to make any further factual
 assistance.                                                        inquiries into what happened that he thinks necessary. If
      I should like to pay tribute to the courage and               the chairman thinks it necessary or desirable, I and my
 professionalism o f the police and fire services. No one          right hon. Friend w ill welcome any interim report or
 who has seen the television film o f the events can doubt , recommendations he wishes to submit.
 that as much as could be done was done to get people out !            In addition, and in parallel with the work o f the inquiry,
 o f the stand, and then to deal with the aftermath o f the fire.  I have decided to designate all grounds in the Third and
 I should also like to express the warmest appreciation for        Fourth Divisions o f the Football League so that they
 the dedication and skill o f the medical and pathological         become subject to the system o f safety certification under
 teams, the ambulance service and all the hospital and             the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975. The effect w ill be
voluntary agencies who have since been working day and             to require such clubs to apply for certificates from the
night, treating the injured and consoling the bereaved.            relevant local authority specifying in considerable detail
      Further, the House w ill be aware that at Birmingham        what physical conditions and management practices—
on the same day many people were injured and                       including as to fire precautions— must be followed. The
subsequently one spectator died as a result o f a serious         Government announced only on 1 April that we should be
crowd disorder at the match between Birmingham City and           extending designation to third and fourth division grounds,
Leeds United, arising from violence by groups o f fans            but starting with those with a record o f club violence, it
from both clubs. There were repeated invasions o f the            is plain, however, that the time for selective action has
pitch, m issiles were thrown, and the police were attacked.       passed, and I shall accordingly be discussing with the
In all, there were 125 arrests, 96 police officers required       football authorities immediately how universal designa­
medical treatment, o f whom two are still in hospital, and        tion may be implemented as soon as possible. It w ill, of
over 80 spectators were injured. Some o f the injuries were       course, be for the inquiry to recommend any changes in
caused when a wall collapsed following a surge in the             the present certification procedures or any other steps that
crowd, and a boy o f 15 subsequently died o f the injuries        should be taken to improve crowd safety and control. But
he received. All 125 o f those arrested have now been             I can see no reason why designating the third and fourth
21                  Football Grounds                    13 MAY 1985                     Football Grounds                     22

division clubs or any o f the other steps announced on 1        loved one can never be compensated for financially, it is
April should wait on its conclusions. It is clearly important   right that financial restitution should be made. In the case
that the public should be given all the protection that the     o f those injured, the nature o f their injuries may mean
existing law allows as quickly as possible, and that any        years o f medical treatment and loss o f earning power or
measures to enhance safety and security that can be             educational opportunities. Proper and appropriate com­
introduced speedily as a result o f the work that has           pensation should be made available for that.
currently been proceeding should be implemented at the              Further, w ill the Government be ready to consider the
earliest possible date.                                         possibility o f making legal aid available to those who wish
    To ensure that the measures I have announced o f a swift    to consider legal action under the Occupiers Liability Act
inquiry and a new programme o f designation do not leave         1957? Is the club’s insurance against public liability
gaps meanwhile in public protection, I am asking chief fire     adequate to meet claims that will surely be made? The
officers immediately to visit uncertificated sports stadia in   Opposition believe that the Government should have
their areas to advise management on what steps they             oniered a separate public inquiry, presided over by a
should take to secure proper standards o f crowd safety in      judge, into the circumstances o f the Bradford fire.
their circumstances. They will no doubt wish to discuss,             There are many questions to be answered, including the
among other matters, the opening and locking o f gates at       discrepant statements about whether Bradford City club
sports grounds. While I imagine such visits will be the          had been warned about the need to improve its safety
more comprehensive if chief fire officers are accompanied       precautions some months ago. The leader o f West
by other members o f the local authority safety teams, this     Yorkshire county council has now published a letter which
work w ill brook no delay and, for that reason, I consider       strongly indicates that such a warning was given. We need
the duty to fall best initially on chief fire officers.         to know what the fire precautions were and why massive
    I must stress that the measures announced today are          amounts o f combustible litter had been allowed to
additional to those announced on 1 April after the meeting       accumulate under the wooden stand for a considerable
at 10 Downing street with the football authorities. That         period o f time, We need to get to the bottom o f allegations
programme o f measures agreed to combat football                 that arson may have caused the fire. The bereaved and the
 hooliganism goes ahead with renewed urgency.                    injured have a right to know the full facts. We also believe
    The events at Bradford and Birmingham were in their          that there should be a' separate inquiry into safety at
 different ways both tragic and sickening. Nothing will          football grounds, and at all sports grounds and other places
 wipe away the memory o f that terrible afternoon. But our       where large numbers o f the public gather together.
 task now must be to take urgent steps to minimise the               That inquiry should be empowered to make
 chances o f recurrence. The measures I have announced           recommendations. The matters that it should be
 today are designed to that end. I w ill report to the House     empowered to consider should include whether the 10,000
 in due course on their progress and outcome.                    lower capacity limit for designation should be reduced,
                                                                 and the use o f the Secretary o f State’s activating powers
    M r. Gerald Kaufman (Manchester, Gorton): May I              under the Fire Precautions Act 1971. At present, no
first, on behalf o f Her Majesty’s Opposition, offer our         football grounds have been designated under the Act. The
profound and heartfelt sympathy to those who were                inquiry should consider meanwhile whether the 10
bereaved and fearfully injured in last Saturday’s horrifying     grounds with wooden stands should close those stands.
disaster? It is especially poignant that hundreds o f people     Equally urgent is the necessity to consider the question of
setting out to enjoy a pleasant spring day, which was, for       the perimeter fencing-off o f spectators from pitches, as
Bradford City’s fans, supposed to be one o f celebration as      there is general agreement that if such fencing had been
w ell, should have seen that day end in torment and agony,       installed at Bradford the casualty toll would have been
or not seen that day end at all.                                 even more horrific.
    We send our sympathy also to the citizens o f Bradford           Ought not the Football Association to suspend its order
and Lincoln, who have been stricken by these appalling           to Luton Town to install a perimeter fence? The subject
events. I also want to pay tribute to the emergency services     o f the control o f egress from grounds must be considered
— to the fire brigade, the medical staff, hospital workers       urgently, in view o f the disastrous effects o f the closing
and the police— and also to the fans and ground staff            o f the exits at Bradford. The nature o f the material used
who sought to help, for their heroism and dedication in this     for seating as well as stands must be considered, in view
emergency.                                                       o f the effect o f the plastic seating at Bradford on the spread
    The Opposition believe that the Government have made         o f the fire.
a serious mistake in linking in one statement and in one             The ownership o f grounds should be considered to see
inquiry the Bradford fire with the violence at Birmingham.       whether burdens can be lifted from the less successful
The nature o f those two events is different, even though        clubs. The funding o f football must be examined. There
some matters are relevant to both. To begin with, it is          is a glaring disparity between the Government’s attitude
unfitting that questions on the disaster and on an outbreak      towards racing compared with football. It is essential both
o f mob violence should be mingled. It creates the most          for the Government and for all commercial interests which
difficult task for you, Mr. Speaker. I shall therefore           benefit from their relationship with football to consider
confine my intervention to the Bradford fire and leave           their financial obligations to a sport from which they
questioning about the Birmingham episode to my right             obtain so much revenue and profit but provide so little in
hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Small Heath               the way o f return. The nature o f these issues is' such that
(Mr. Howell).                                                    an urgent interim report is essential w ell before the
    With regard to Bradford, I therefore ask the                 opening o f the new football season, so that all possible
Government to open forthwith a fund for the relief o f the       advance precautionary action can be taken.
victims and their families. Some families may have been              I did not think for one moment that I should be coming
left without a breadwinner, and although the loss o f a          to the House this afternoon to ask controversial questions.
23                   Football Grounds                      13 MAY 1985                     Football Grounds                     24

[Mr. Gerald Kaufman]                                               said that it would be open to Mr. Justice Popplewell to
                                                                   make such a report if he thought that it was necessary or
The reaction o f my right hon. Friends and m yself is one          appropriate to do so.
o f astonishment and disbelief that the Government should
                                                                      M r. Alex Carlile (Montgomery): May I, together with
join these two issues and treat this tragedy in this way. The
                                                                   my right hon. and hon. Friends, join the Home Secretary
Government’s response to this disaster in setting up this
                                                                   in expressing our deep sadness and sympathy for those
joint inquiry is insensitive and in the worst possible taste.
                                                                   who have suffered as a result o f the tragedy on Saturday
It will be deeply offensive to the bereaved, to the victims,
                                                                   afternoon at Bradford? It is a terrible sadness that some of
to the stricken cities and to the nation. Let this be clear.
                                                                   those who went to the Valley Parade to celebrate the third
The nation has reacted to this terrible disaster with grief.
                                                                   division championship should not have returned home at
If negligence or complacency allow such a catastrophe to
                                                                   all or should have to wait many months before returning
be repeated, the reaction w ill not be grief. It w ill be anger.
                                                                   home severely maimed.
                                                                      May I also join the Home Secretary in expressing our
    M r. Brittan: I am grateful to the right hon. Member
                                                                   gratitude to the emergency services, the ground staff and
for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) for his expression
                                                                   die many courageous football fans who joined others in
o f regard for the work done by the emergency services, but
                                                                   trying to save people in dangerous circumstances?
I think that some o f his subsequent remarks do not respond
                                                                      teMay I impress upon the Home Secretary the
to the mood o f the nation or o f the House.
                                                                   importance o f urgently solving the problem o f safety,
   As for the right hon. Gentleman’s main complaint—               which it is hoped may be solved fairly quickly, where as
that there is to be a single inquiry— some o f the points          problems o f control have occupied us for many years now
which he suggested should be considered by the inquiry             and may not be so easy to solve?
themselves make it clear that safety and control are very             Will the Home Secretary give the House his assurance
much related and that it would be wholly artificial to             that his welcome decision to bring third and fourth division
divorce the two. One is in no sense equating the two               grounds within the provisions o f the Safety o f Sports
incidents, one in which a life was lost and the other in           Grounds Act will be extended to other comparable stadia
which so many lives were lost, if one says that the inquiry        and, above all, that the Government w ill provide the
should properly be able to consider both control and               money to enable those clubs and sporting facilities which
safety. That is what the inquiiy will be able to do.               cannot afford to bring their facilities up to standard to do
   The point is best illustrated by one o f the matters raised     so? In doing that, will the Home Secretary bear in mind
by the right hon. Gentleman, namely, the perimeter                 that Bradford City was a club which gave cheap entry to
fencing. The suggestion has been made, in effect, that             the unemployed and the disadvantaged
perimeter fencing is inconsistent with safety, or goes
                                                                      M r. Speaker: Briefly.
against safety. Anybody who looks at the green guide will
readily see that the designation requirements have to be              M r. Carlile: Finally, w ill the Home Secretary please
looked at as a whole. They include the ability to evacuate         ensure that the insurance companies will not be allowed
grounds and stands speedily. Perimeter fencing which did           to fall back on the position which they expressed this
not meet the requirements would not be approved under              morning, that no compensation will be paid unless
the safety certificate. There is, therefore, a relationship        negligence is proved? W ill he ensure that in this case at
between safety and control.                                        least the principle o f no fault liability is laid down for those
  I take note o f the right hon. Gentleman’s suggestion            who have suffered?
about opening a fund for the relief o f the victims. I shall          M r. Brittan: I am grateful to the hon. and learned
want to consider it in the light of the situation as it develops   Gentleman for his expressions o f appreciation to those
concerning the needs o f everybody who has been affected           involved in dealing with these tragic events. He mentioned
and the resources available to provide for those needs.            some particular groups who are worthy o f commendation
   Legal aid w ill be available in the normal course o f           but whom I was unable to mention specifically in my
events for any eligible person who is able to make out a           statement.
case for such aid to the legal aid committee.                         We shall want to consider the extension o f designation
                                                                   beyond the third and fourth division football grounds in the
  There is still some uncertainty about the insurance
                                                                   light o f the inquiry as it develops.
question, and that is being looked into.
                                                                      The House will be familiar with the existence o f the
   With regard to warnings given to the club concerned,            Football Grounds Improvement Trust and the Football
I have in my possession the text o f letters emanating in          Trust, which receive some o f the “spot the ball” revenue
1984 and on 30 April 1985 on that matter. I understand that        from the Pool Promoters Association. Quite a lot o f that
there may be some dispute whether those letters were               money is used to improve football clubs’ facilities. For
received, but there can be little doubt that they were sent.       example, we are talking o f expenditure at the rate o f £7
   I can give the right hon. Gentleman some reassurance            million a year.
on the many matters that he mentioned, because when one               As it happens, before these tragic events occurred a
takes account o f some o f the forensic points there is not        meeting was arranged for this coming Wednesday between
really all that much between us. Almost all o f those points       my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister and Lord
fall well within the ambit o f Mr. Justice Popplewell’s            Aberdare, the chairman o f the Football Trust. In
inquiry, which will be extremely comprehensive, as I               discussions on designation I shall be involved with my
think the right hon. Gentleman w ill agree, on mature              hon. Friend the Minister with responsibility for sport and
reflection, when he studies further its terms o f reference.       the Football Trust to see what the financial situation is. I
In particular, the right hon. Gentleman referred to an             know that my hon. Friend is also considering whether
interim report, and the House will recall that I specifically      assistance can be given under the urban programme.
                      Football Grounds                       13 MAY 1985                    Football Grounds                   26

   M r. Donald Stewart (Western Isles): May I associate              focused on apparent divisions within it, real community
my hon. Friend the Member for Dundee, East (Mr.                      spirit shone in a crisis, showing just how shallow those
Wilson) and m yself with the expressions o f condolence              divisions really are.
and sympathy of the Home Secretary at this appalling                     I welcome the announcement o f an inquiry, and the
tragedy? On the face of it, it appears to raise again matters        people o f Bradford w ill also welcome it. If public
such as escape doors, gates and other forms o f egress from          confidence is to be restored and people are to feel safe at
sports grounds. W ill the Home Secretary seek to introduce           football matches, urgent action must follow upon the
legislation, or amend existing legislation, so that where            report o f that inquiry, before the start o f the new season.
such exits exist, whatever the difficulties caused to the            I hope that the Government and the football industry,
corporation or sports ground owning them, they should be             through the Football Trust, w ill be prepared to respond to
available for egress in the event of a disaster?                     the financial implications o f that report.
                                                                         Obviously, there is great public concern about what
   M r. Brittan: I am grateful to the right hon. Gentleman
                                                                     would have happened if there had been a fence instead of
for what he has said. In response to his last and very
                                                                     a lo w wall along the front. I think that the view of Bradford
substantial point, the House might be interested to know
                                                                     supporters is that it is all very well hemming in a minority
that paragraph 6.14.6 o f the green guide clearly states:
                                                                     o f hooligans, but that at the same time a potential death
    “All exit gates should be manned at all times while the ground
is used by the public so that they can be opened immediately in      trap might be created for thousands o f decent supporters.
an emergency.”                                                           I hope that all the lessons that can be drawn from this
That condition would normally be applied where there has             incident and learnt and that there does not have to be
been designation.                                                    another disaster for more mistakes to be discovered. I
                                                                     apologise for delaying the House, but may I ask the
   M r. Robert Maclennan (Caithness and Sutherland):                 Government to make money available in the form o f an
Although it is obviously premature to consider what                  urgent cash injection, through the urban programme, the
funding will be necessary to bring safety standards up to            Sports Council or the Football Trust, so that a stand can
an acceptable level, w ill the Government undertake to               be erected as quickly as possible at Bradford City’s ground
ensure that money does not stand in the way o f seeing that          to match the determination and resolve o f the people of
those standards are reached?                                         Bradford to overcome the tragedy?
                                                                         Thousands o f Bradford citizens w ill want to attend the
   M r. Brittan: I have already said that the means by
                                                                     first home match o f the season as their way o f paying their
which the requirements that w ill flow from designation are
                                                                     respects to the loyal supporters who died on Saturday. To
implemented will be discussed with the football                      enable them to do so, and to reflect that spirit and resolve,
authorities.
                                                                     we must see a real and tangible metal phoenix rise out of
     M r. G eoff Lawler (Bradford, North): May I offer my            the terrible ashes that currently lie at Valley Parade.
 sincere thanks to all o f those hon. Members who have                   M r. Brittan: I am grateful to my hon. Friend the
 expressed their sympathy following the tragic event on               Member for Bradford, North (Mr. Lawler) for his
 Saturday? I know that my constituents and the people of             expressions o f gratitude to and appreciation of those
 Bradford will greatly appreciate those expressions o f               involved in dealing with this tragic event. My hon. Friend
 sympathy and will derive some comfort from them. May                mentioned a number o f other people in addition to those
 I thank, in particular, the Minister o f State, Home Office,        already mentioned in the House. I fully endorse what he
 my hon. Friend the Member for Pudsey (Mr. Shaw) and                 said about them. I should like to take the opportunity to
the Parliamentary Under-Secretary o f State for the                  pay a tribute to my hon. Friend for the way in which he
 Environment, my hon. Friend the Member for Sutton and               assisted over a long period in Bradford. It is an exemplary
 Cheam (Mr. Macfarlane) for coming up to Valley Parade               manifestation o f the local leadership which an hon.
so promptly to see the situation at first hand? That prompt          Member can give on such an occasion.
reaction was again an expression o f the Government’s
                                                                         My hon. Friend expressed anxiety about proposals for
concern, and was much appreciated.
                                                                     perimeter fences. I can assure him, as I did the right hon.
    I welcome the appreciation that has been expressed by            Member for Gorton, that there is no question o f simply
my right hon. and learned Friend the Home Secretary and              putting up a fence which would create a trap. The
other hon. Members for the work o f the emergency                    arrangements for a ground as a whole w ill have to be
services. I am sure that they would join with me in paying           considered, taking into account the nature of the ground,
tribute not only to the emergency services but to members            the means o f getting out o f the stands, the gaps in any
o f the Salvation Army, who were there throughout                    fence and the manning o f exits. Unless those
Saturday night, doling out tea and refreshments to those             professionally involved take the view that a perimeter
working late at the ground, to the St. John’s ambulance              fence adds to safety and security, it w ill not be approved.
men and to the anonymous heroes — many o f them                      Safety and security are related. It is unrealistic to refuse
young people — who stayed behind at the wall and                     to recognise that important fact.
helped to pull the less able and less agile over it, at great
                                                                        My hon. Friend asked for assistance to put the Bradford
risk o f personal injury to themselves. Many o f those
                                                                     club back on its feet. My hon. Friend the Minister with
helpers, indeed, ended up in hospital or suffered from
                                                                     responsibility for sport is on the Front Bench today and
bums.
                                                                     will appreciate the sincere and determined desire in
    I am sure that hon. Members w ill also want to pay               Bradford to revive football there, with all that that means.
tribute to the local community. People opened their doors
and provided tea and comfort to the survivors. It is                    M r. Thom as Torney (Bradford, South): I associate
interesting to note that members o f that community are of           m yself with the expressions o f sympathy for all the people
varied origin and that at a time when attention is very much         in Bradford who have lost loved and dear ones and for

   23
27                  Football Grounds                     13 MAY 1985                    Football Grounds                   28

[Mr. Thomas Torney]                                                  M r. M ax M adden (Bradford, West): I associate
                                                                 m yself and my constituents with all the expressions o f
those who are suffering in hospital. I associate m yself and     sympathy to the relatives and friends o f those who died and
the people o f Bradford with the tributes to the emergency       to those who were seriously injured at Bradford at the
services— to the courage o f the police, the fire service        weekend. I also pay tribute to all the emergency services.
and the ambulance personnel, who rescued many people,                It is with regret that I have to say that there will be
often at great danger to themselves. I also praise the           understandable reservations in Bradford about the form of
dedication o f the hospital staffs who tended, and are still     the inquiry which the Home Secretary has announced. He
tending, the injured. The duty o f the Government and the        said that the events at Bradford and at Birmingham were
House is to the 52 or 53 people who died and to ensure that      tragic and sickening, but different. Many people in
nothing like this happens again anywhere in the United           Bradford will therefore think that the two incidents should
Kingdom.                                                         be investigated separately. If the Home Secretary is not
    I should have preferred a public inquiry, as would the       prepared to reconsider the form o f the inquiry, w ill he give
people o f Bradford. I hope that there w ill be a public         a clear assurance that it w ill sit in Bradford and take
inquiry, because confidence must be restored. Whatever           evidence in public, and that its full report will be
conclusions the inquiry arrives at for improving safety          published?
precautions at football grounds throughout the United                Is the Home Secretary satisfied that the terms o f
Kingdom, I hope that they w ill be speedily enforced by the      reference w ill enable the inquiry to look into all matters
Government. Enforcement requires money. The improve­             o f concern associated with the tragedy? I was pleased to
ments that are necessary in Bradford and elsewhere will          hear the right hon. and learned Gentleman’s response to
cost more money than can be provided by some trust or            my right hon. Friend the Member for Manchester, Gorton
other. The Prime Minister is in her place. I beg her and         (Mr. Kaufman). W ill he give serious consideration to
the Government to ensure that the Chancellor provides            establishing a fund from which the relatives o f those who
money to implement the necessary safety measures.                died and those who were grievously injured may apply for
    May I suggest to the Chancellor some immediate               the compensation and help which inevitably w ill be
actions which could be taken? Surely a law can be passed,        needed? W ill the Home Secretary also urgently consider
or instructions given, that exit doors are not to be locked.     enabling Bradford City football club to make its ground
Perhaps some paint-like material can be applied to wooden        secure and safe?
stands at other grounds which w ill make the outbreak o f            I was pleased at the Home Secretary’s response to
fire less likely. Surely we can order the use o f sprinkler      previous requests o f that kind. We all recognise that if
systems. Perhaps if there had been such a system in              third and fourth division grounds are to be made safe—
Bradford the fire would not have been so bad, because the        indeed, non-league and sporting club grounds also— the
system operates automatically with heat.                         clubs w ill be in desperate need o f financial help, because
    We owe it to those involved in the disaster to find the      many o f them are short o f money. W ill the right hon. and
money. There must be no excuses. The money must be               learned Gentleman urge the Chancellor o f the Exchequer
found to make football grounds throughout the United             to reduce the betting levy tax and to remove VAT from
Kingdom safe for our people.                                     repair work? That would be o f some financial help to
                                                                 enable the desperately ill-financed clubs to ensure that
   M r. Brittan: I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for         their grounds are made safe quickly and effectively so that
his expressions o f sympathy and for his appreciation of         the tragic events in Bradford on Saturday occur nowhere
those involved in dealing with what happened at Bradford.        else in this country, or, indeed in the world.
   Towards the end o f my statement I said that I was
asking chief fire officers immediately to visit sports stadia        M r. Brittan: I shall, o f course, draw the hon.
which are uncertificated to advise on what should be done        Gentleman’s tax suggestion to the attention o f my right
right away. I added:                                             hon. Friend the Chancellor o f the Exchequer. I am sure the
   “They will no doubt wish to discuss among other matters the   hon. Gentleman w ill understand that I cannot say any more
opening and locking of gates” .                                  about that at this stage.
The hon. Gentleman’s suggestion about exits is well                  Obviously, the conduct o f the inquiry is a matter for
taken. I am not sure o f the validity o f what he said about     Mr. Justic Popplewell, but there is no question that its
sprinkler systems, but that can be examined on a                 findings and report w ill not be published in full. I regard
professional basis.                                              it as inconceivable that the inquiry will not sit in Bradford.
   The inquiry will be comprehensive, and it w ill be able       I assure the hon. Gentleman— and I hope that this w ill
to supplement, in any way thought appropriate by Mr.             be appreciated in Bradford—that there is no question o f
Justice Popplewell, die findings o f the police and the          there being anything other than the fullest examination of
inquest, which are the main means o f investigation, at          what occurred at Bradford.
least in the first instance. Mr. Justice Popplewell will be          There is an important part to be played by the police,
able to satisfy himself about what occurred and thereby be       the fire service and the coroner. Mr. Justice Popplewell
able to make appropriate recommendations.                        w ill then decide what further inquiries are necessary to
   I do not think that the House wishes to hear the trust        supplement the information obtained in order to achieve
spoken o f disparagingly, because it has provided, and is        a frill picture o f what happened. He will be fully
providing, the substantial sum o f £7 million a year. The        encouraged to do whatever is necessary to secure that.
hon. Gentleman asked what would be done to deal with                 We are as determined as the hon. Gentleman and other
the financial problems. The Prime Minister w ill be              hon. Members to ensure that the lessons are learnt, but I
meeting representatives o f the trust. When discussing the       repeat that I do not believe that we would be doing any
implications o f designation with the football authorities I     service to the memory o f those who died at Bradford if we
 shall, o f course, discuss that aspect.                         failed to take comprehensive measures to ensure that those
29                  Football Grounds                    13 MAY 1985                    Football Grounds                     30

who go to football grounds are as safe as possible from all         M r. Brittan: I am not sure that the final matter raised
hazards. To do that is not to show any disrespect for what      by my right hon. and learned Friend comes within the
occurred at Bradford or to equate it wth anything else. It      terms o f the inquiry, but it is obviously something that it
is to recognise the complex nature o f the problem and the      w ill have to consider.
necessity o f providing solutions, as far as we can, to every
                                                                   M r. Bruce George (Walsall, South): In following hon.
aspect.
                                                                Members who represented constituents who died, we must
   M r. Kenneth Carlisle (Lincoln): On behalf o f the           be deeply conscious o f the fact that, but for the grace o f
people o f Lincoln, I offer our deepest sympathy to all those   God, any one o f us could be making a similar statement,
who have suffered in this terrible tragedy. Lincoln has the     because all our constituencies have sporting grounds with
greatest admiration for the heroic efforts o f the emergency    stands which are as inflammable as that which went up in
services in Bradford. In particular, the Lincoln City           flames on Saturday.
supporters wish to record their thanks to them.                    Does the Home Secretary have any idea o f how many
   Such a tragedy must never happen again. I welcome the        sporting grounds — whether football, rugby, tennis or
inquiry, which above all, must concentrate on the               anything else — have stands comparable to that at
paramount need for safety.                                      Bradford? W ill he reiterate that other sports must take
                                                                seriously the events o f last Saturday?
   M r. Brittan: I am grateful to my hon. Friend and               What is there in the British national character which
entirely endorse everything that he has said.                   requires such a catastrophe to force us into waking up to
   M r. M erlyn Rees (Morley and Leeds, South): Does            a fact which should have been manifestly obvious to the
the Home Secretary accept that, as a Leeds Member o f           House and the country before the events o f Saturday?
Parliament, I speak for all its citizens in saying that I am        M r. Brittan: I take note o f the hon. Gentleman’s last
ashamed o f the actions o f the so-called Leeds fans at         point. I cannot give him the figure for which he asked, not
Birmingham on Saturday? I regret that their actions should      only for football, but for other sports. It is something that
in any way be mingled or bracketed with the bravery and         w ill have to be considered. O f course, the legislation is not
tragedy at Bradford. The two things are separate.               confined to football, so the inquiry will not be confined to
   The Government are to act now, quite properly, in the        football. Therefore, the hon. Gentleman has raised matters
face o f what we all saw on Saturday, which was dreadful.       that fall to be considered.
W ill the Home Secretary explain where the division o f
responsibility lies between his Department and the                 M r. M arcus Fox (Shipley): It is right to point out that
Department o f the Environment — which, I acknow­               it is not only the city o f Bradford that has suffered
ledge, has an active Minister with responsibility for sport     grievously. Many people living on the borders o f the city
— in monitoring on a day-to-day basis the problems of           also suffered. Indeed, some o f my constituents lost their
safety, not only at soccer grounds, but at rugby league and,    lives or were injured.
in some instances, rugby union grounds? We must not wait           We want from my right hon. and learned Friend a
for another tragedy before we act. We all know o f third        categorical assurance that we will do everything in our
and fourth division grounds and others where the stands         power to discover the cause o f the fire. I have spoken to
could go up in flames in exactly the same way as the stand      many o f my constituents who were at Bradford, and they
at Bradford.                                                    expressed deep anxiety that events occurred that should
                                                                never have occurred, but today is not the occasion to
    M r. Brittan: The right hon. Gentleman is absolutely        pursue that.
right to say that there is no comparison between the               It would be foolish in the extreme to close grounds on
behaviour at Bradford and that at Birmingham, and I am          the basis o f safety regulations, while allowing the violence
glad to have the opportunity to confirm that.                   and hooliganism that is rampant in the sport to continue.
    I have statutory responsibility for the Act, but its        The two are closely associated. I welcome the inquiry, and
implementation on a general basis is considered closely in      I am sure that it w ill go into everything that it can consider.
discussions not only with my hon. Friend the Minister with
responsibility for Sport but with the football authorities.        M r. Brittan: I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his
On the question o f the detailed implementation on a place-     remarks, particularly his closing remarks. I am sure that
by-place basis, the responsibility for issuing a certificate    he is right. I can give him the categorical assurance that
lies with the local authority, which takes heed o f what the    he seeks. We shall certainly do everything that we can to
technical and professional experts say, whether they be         discover the cause o f what happened. It is in nobody’s
fire officers or engineers. It also takes into account the      interests that anything other than that should happen.
green guide produced by the Home Office.
                                                                   M r. Peter Snape (West Bromwich): I wish at the
   M r. M ark Carlisle (Warrington, South): While               outset to declare my interest as a director o f a fourth
welcoming my right hon. and learned Friend’s decision to        division football club.
extend designation under the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act         Does the right hon. and learned Gentleman accept that
1975 to all third and fourth division grounds, may I ask        the tragic and harrowing scenes that we saw on Saturday
whether he agrees with many hon. Members that that will         night must never recur in British professional soccer? W ill
be very expensive and will cost considerably more than the      he comment— I regret to have to make this point— on
money currently available for ground improvements under         the stories appearing in at least two national newspapers
the Football Trust?                                             today to the effect that this appalling tragedy was caused
   W ill the inquiry under Mr. Justice Popplewell also          by the throwing o f a smoke bomb at the football ground?
consider methods of financing and funding ground                   W ill the Home Secretary accept from me that,
improvements, especially methods to obtain a greater            regrettably, o f all sports in Britain, for some reason
income from betting and football pools?                         professional football seems to attract that mindless
31                   Football Grounds                     13 MAY 1985                    Football Grounds                    32

[Mr. Peter Snape]                                                     On many occasions when I have visited the ground, the
                                                                  narrow passageways at the back o f the ground have caused
minority who care little for the game and who, indeed,            me concern. I recognise, however, that it is easy to be wise
appear rarely to watch the game? What plans do the                after the event.
Government have to combat that endemic hooliganism and                Does my right hon. and learned Friend appreciate that
enable us in Parliament to do something about the civil           this is a personal tragedy for the chairman o f Bradford City
liberties o f millions o f people who wish only to go about       football club, Mr. Stafford Heginbotham, who has
their business and not to be threatened and assaulted by          adopted a tough and imaginative approach to the problem
people masquerading as football fans?                             o f crowd violence to prevent it from coming to Bradford
    Is the Home Secretary aware, from the point o f view          City as it has come to nearby Leeds United, and who has
o f designating sports grounds in the third and fourth            seen this event occur just as the club was reaching the very
divisions, that no clubs in those divisions can at present        pinnacle o f its success?
afford the funds necessary to put their grounds in order             M r. Brittan: I agree with everything that my hon.
under the well-merited and needed provisions o f the Act?         Friend has said.
Is he further aware that unless Government money is
forthcoming third and fourth division football clubs in               M r. Joseph Ashton (Bassetlaw): Is the Secretary of
Britain are doomed?                                               State aware that many o f those who were members of the
                                                                  committee which looked into the question of the safety of
   In view o f the money that has been taken out o f
                                                                  sports grounds 11 years ago knew that it was a question
professional football by way o f VAT, betting tax and pools
                                                                  o f cash versus safety, and that it is clear that cash won?
levy, it is time for the Government— any Government—
                                                                      Why does the Department operate the Horserace
to do more to give football clubs some degree o f assistance
                                                                  Betting Levy Board, which channels an 8 per cent, tax
if what was once Britain’s national game, a game which
                                                                  from that sport back into improving safety standards at
we were proud to give to the world, is not to disappear
                                                                  race tracks, whereas football, which pays 42 per cent, by
entirely.
                                                                  way o f tax, relies on a charitable trust? W ill the right hon.
   M r. Brittan: I note what the hon. Gentleman said at           and learned Gentleman ask the Chancellor to allow
the end o f his remarks, but I urge him to take account o f       football to be freed o f that tax for a year so that the
the fact that 75 per cent, o f the cost o f meeting designation   resultant £212 million may be ploughed back into football
is currently provided, and that is a not inconsiderable           to prevent a recurrence o f this tragedy? W hy, if it is good
amount. However, I have said that I have taken note o f the       enough for the sport o f kings, is it not good enough for the
financial points that have been made.                             sport o f the working class?
   I greatly welcome what the hon. Gentleman said about              M r. Brittan: The Chancellor will, o f course, have
the mindless minority, which underlined, as many in the           those remarks drawn to his attention, though the hon.
House will agree, the inevitable relationship between             Gentleman did not present the analogy completely fairly.
safety and behaviour and crowd control. The two cannot            Football betting, in the form o f pools, and horserace
be divorced.                                                      betting are subject to tax. In addition, a levy is payable on
   In answering the hon. Gentleman’s question about what          betting which is used to finance matters relating to racing.
is being done, I refer him to the answer that was given in        There is no such levy in relation to football. However, in
the House on 4 April, when an outline was given o f what          each case there is a means o f financing improvements to
was agreed between the football authorities and the               football, in the one case by a statutory levy, and in the
Government at the Downing street meeting. I refer                 other by a voluntary trust. The question whether the
specifically to the fact that we shall be introducing             funding is adequate and what should be done about it is
legislation on the lines o f the Scottish legislation in          a legitimate one, though I do not feel that the hon.
relation to alcohol; that the review o f the public order Acts    Gentleman put the matter entirely fairly in his question.
which I shall be giving to the House shortly w ill contain           M r. M ichael M orris (Northampton, South): As the
recommendations relevant to this area; and that I have            representative o f the young man who tragically died in
made clear to magistrates our support for them in                 Birmingham, I welcome the joint nature o f the inquiry. Is
following the tough guidelines o f the Court o f Appeal on        my right hon. and learned Friend aware that in
football violence. I shall not rehearse all the measures          Northampton we have a wooden football stand and a
which are on the record, but at this stage remind the hon.        wooden rugby football stand, and that one o f the major
Gentleman only o f those.                                         stands at the county cricket ground is wooden? Should we
   To answer the hon. Gentleman’s question about the              not therefore look at the whole aspect o f spectators and
throwing o f a smoke bomb, I am, o f course, conscious that       stands? I hope that the Government will take that on board
that allegation has been m ade.) was in touch with the chief      and consider the financial implications involved.
constable to get the latest picture just before making my            M r. Brittan: The question o f the material o f which
statement today. The position is that he does not feel that
                                                                  stands are made w ill obviously be central to the inquiry.
he as yet knows the cause o f the fire, in spite of the various
allegations that have been made.                                      M r. Robin Corbett (Birmingham, Erdington): May I,
                                                                  on behalf o f the thousands o f loyal and sensible supporters (
   M r. Gary W aller (Keighley): Is my right hon. and             o f Birmingham City and Aston Villa, express the disgust
learned Friend aware that one o f the first victims o f this      o f those supporters and fans at the hooligan behaviour at
tragic event to be identified was one o f my most noted           Birmingham City football ground on Saturday?
constituents, Mr. Roy Mason, a historian who died o f his             Although I do not like the form o f the joint inquiry
burns despite the heroic efforts o f police and bystanders        which the right hon. and learned Gentleman has
to extinguish the flames that were engulfing him?                 announced, will he confirm that that inquiry will be free
                    Football Grounds                    13 MAY 1985                    Football Grounds                   34

to sit in Birmingham? W ill he also consider giving             equally right to imply, however, that the difficulty o f
councils power to close football and other sports grounds       identifying and dealing with those factors in terms o f basic
until such time as their safety standards are up to the         social trends is likely to be such that we should be failing
necessary limit, in the way local councils can proceed          in our duty if we did not take such immediate practical
against other businesses and take enforcement action, even      measures as can be identified.
if his agreeing to do so would mean delaying the start o f
                                                                    M r. Anthony Beaum ont-Dark (Birmingham, Selly
the football season?
                                                                Oak): Does my right hon. and learned Friend accept that
   M r. Brittan: I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for        the Bradford incident was a tragedy o f Aberfan
his expression o f disgust at the hooliganism at                proportions and casts a blight on the entire nation? Does
Birmingham. I share it. The inquiry w ill certainly be free     he also accept, however, that the death o f one person in
to sit in Birmingham should it feel that that would be          a sad, shameful and barbaric episode at Birmingham City
helpful and appropriate.                                        is just as sad for the family concerned? Does he agree that
   In answering his final question, I draw the attention of     those incidents may be linked by mindless acts o f
the House to the provisions o f the Safety o f Sports Grounds   hooliganism o f the kind that may have occurred at
Act 1975 and the Fire Precautions Act 1971, both o f which      Bradford and certainly occurred at Birmingham City? Is
allow application to be made to the court in effect to          not one o f the most important questions to be investigated
restrict the use o f premises should circumstances relating     that o f why a national game is becoming a national
to safety make that desirable.                                  disgrace?
   Sir Hector M onro (Dumfries): The whole world of                 In this context, is there not a vital part to be played by
sport— the Central Council o f Physical Recreation, the         the magistrates who, week after week, deal with hooligans
governing body, and everybody— mourns the events o f            who have done their worst but often impose very small
the weekend. I welcome the measures that my right hon.          fines on them? Has not the time come to ask magistrates
and learned Friend has announced, particularly the              and judges to look upon the hooligans as the criminals that
designation o f the third and fourth divisions. W ill that      they are? Is not part o f the problem that o f ensuring that
include the Scottish first and second divisions, which are      people have the w ill and spirit to enforce the law as it
equally important?                                              already exists?
   W ill my right hon. and learned Friend in response to           M r. Brittan: We must certainly encourage magistrates
what other hon. Members have said, consult the                  to use their powers to the full, and I have done that. I am
Chancellor about the enormous sums taken from sport by          also in touch with the police with a view to giving priority
way o f taxation to see whether further relief can be given     to the bringing o f charges which would enable the courts
so that the Football Ground Improvement Trust, which            to impose the correct penalties. To be fair to the
does an excellent job, can ensure greater safety at grounds     magistrates, however, difficulty in obtaining evidence is
before the beginning of next season, so that all sports fans    an important part o f the problem.
in the United Kingdom can enjoy their sport in safety?             As for a national game becoming a national disgrace,
   M r. Brittan: I take note o f the points that my hon.        I yield to no one in my disgust o f and abhorrence for those
Friend has raised from his experience, especially in            who make that seem to be so. Nevertheless, for the vast
relation to Scotland. The operation o f the Safety o f Sports   majority o f people, both players and spectators, the game
Grounds Act in Scotland was reviewed last year by my            is still a perfectly decent and honourable pursuit.
right hon. Friend the Secretary o f State for Scotland in
                                                                    M r. Roland Boyes (Houghton and Washington): May
consultation with the Convention o f Scottish Local
                                                                I draw the Home Secretary’s attention to early-day motion
Authorities, the association o f Chief Police Officers
                                                                461, which calls for a reduction in the pools betting tax?
(Scotland), the Scottish football authorities and other
                                                                Is the right hon. and learned Gentleman aware that Mr.
interested bodies. At that time, it was concluded that there
                                                                Jack Dunnett, president o f the Football League and a
was no need to extend designation beyond the premier
                                                                former Member o f Parliament, has calculated that a
division, but the position has been kept under review and
                                                                reduction o f 0-5 per cent, would bring in £1 million? May
my right hon. Friend hopes that all aspects o f the
                                                                I also associate m yself with the comments o f my hon.
effectiveness o f the Act in Scotland, including future
                                                                Friend the Member for Bassetlaw (Mr. Ashton) as vice-
designation policy, will be considered carefully within the
                                                                chairman o f Hartlepool United and point out that the
ambit o f that arrangement.
                                                                c h airm an , Mr. John Smart, would very much like to
    M r. M ichael M eadowcroft (Leeds, West): Is not one        replace the wooden stand? Is the right hon. and learned
o f the fundamental problems the fact that measures             Gentleman aware, however, that a reduction o f a few
designed to improve security within sports grounds are          percentage points in the betting levy would not
likely to run directly counter to measures to improve safety    compensate for the amount o f work that needs to be done
in getting out o f grounds? Does the Home Secretary agree       at football clubs? I welcome the inquiry at Bradford City,
that as well as using all possible ingenuity in taking          but does the Home Secretary agree that it is not inquiries
immediate practical measures we must bear in mind that          but cash that is needed to improve the football grounds o f
these really just buy time and that much more energy must       this country?
be devoted to discovering why lawlessness and anti-social
behaviour are so rife in the 1980s? Does he agree that none        M r. Brittan: I thank the hon. Gentleman for drawing
o f us should accept that this is some kind o f inevitable,     attention to the early-day motion, which my right hon.
malign evolution and that deeper research is needed into        Friend the Chancellor will not have failed to notice.
the underlying causes?                                            M r. John Carlisle (Luton, North): May I endorse the
  M r. Brittan: The hon. Gentleman is entirely right. The       comments o f the right hon. Member for Manchester,
underlying factors must be much more profound. He is            Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) about the Football Association’s

   27
35                    Football Grounds                   13 MAY 1985                    Football Grounds                    36

[Mr. John Carlisle]                                              Office and local authorities? Will he also take seriously the
                                                                 question o f money and consider whether arrangements can
recommendation for a perimeter fence around the Luton            be made analogous with those in the racing industry?
football ground? Does my right hon. and learned Friend              Finally, is my right hon. and learned Friend aware that
agree that in the light o f the recent trouble such a            a number o f police officers plunged into the fire to pull out
recommendation is nonsense, and w ill he ask the Football        fans who in other circumstances would have been pelting
Association to withdraw its instruction?                         them with rocks? Is he aware that the police have had more
    Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that there       than enough casualties as a result o f football games and
is some correlation between hooliganism and safety? Does         that they look to his new arrangements for public order to
he agree that, but for hooliganism, the doors would not          give a chief officer the power to ban a match if he believes
have been locked, more fire extinguishers might have been        that it would constitute a threat to public order?
available and there would be no need to fence pitches?
                                                                    M r. Brittan: My hon. Friend has considerable
Will he spare no effort in introducing measures to correct
                                                                 experience in this area, having had to deal with the
and deter the hooligans so that once again the game can
                                                                 aftermath o f the Ibrox disaster, and I note his comments.
be played and watched in peace?
                                                                    As for relations between the two Departments and the
    M r. Brittan: I agree with the latter part o f my hon.       football authorities, I think that my hon. Friend the
Friend’s question, but I shall not be asking the Football        Parliamentary Under-Secretary o f State for the
Association to withdraw its recommendation, because              Environment, who has responsibility for sport, would
such recommendations are not absolute. The green guide           agree, as would the football authorities, that we try to keep
makes it clear that the perimeter fence is desirable, but that   in close touch. As for the public order review, I shall be
it must be considered in the context o f security and safety     announcing to the House very shortly the conclusions that
as a whole, and in the context o f arrangements for exits        I have reached, which certainly include recommendations
from the ground and for getting through the fence in times       relevant to football safety and security.
o f emergency.
                                                                     M r. Tony Banks (Newham, North-West): This has
   M r. Tony Lloyd (Stretford): The Home Secretary is            been the most tragic football season that I can remember
right to emphasise, as he has done on previous occasions,        in more than 30 years as a regular football supporter. I
the need to consider perimeter fences in the broader             welcome the Home Secretary’s statement about designat­
context o f safety generally, but in seeking to extend crowd     ing third and fourth division grounds. Is the right hon. and
safety measures to third and fourth division grounds will        learned Gentleman aware that this w ill cost tens of
he ensure that there is also proper examination o f the first    millions o f pounds and that, despite the grants available,
division grounds at Manchester and Liverpool, for                it could force a number o f professional football clubs out
example, where it takes a considerable time to clear the         o f business? Surely the right hon. and learned Gentleman
crowd at the end o f the game in the normal way? Does he         has heard enough from the Opposition to realise that what
agree that in an emergency or in a disaster in which             is really needed is an inquiry into how to get more money
emergency services need to come in we must have a                into the game to carry out the necessary crowd and ground
guarantee that that aspect has been adequately considered?       safety measures. Will the Home Secretary ask his hon.
   Is the right hon. and learned Gentleman aware that,           Friends to set up an inquiry into how to raise this additional
having put so much emphasis on control, there is now             finance? Will he investigate the possibility o f soft loans
great concern about whether sufficient attention has been        or grants from the Government being made for ground
given to the crowd safety aspect?                                improvements? Will he consider dropping VAT and police
   Does the right hon. and learned Gentleman also                charges? These are all measures which could put money
agree------                                                      back into the game. That is sadly needed, because, in the
                                                                 end, money counts, not pious thoughts.
    M r. Speaker: Order. I hope that the hon. Gentleman
                                                                    M r. Brittan: I note the hon. Gentleman’s suggestions.
w ill be brief.
                                                                 I am not disregarding them, but it is not just a question of
   M r. Lloyd: Y es, Mr. Speaker. Finally, does the right        money. The hon. Gentleman would be greatly mistaken if
hon. and learned Gentleman agree that all these                  he denigrated or played down the valuable part that can be
investigations w ill be irrelevant unless sufficient money       played in deciding exactly what is to be done. Certainly,
can be put back into the game to ensure that the necessary       money alone will not solve the hooliganism aspect.
improvements are carried out? '                                      M r. Peter Bruinvels (Leicester, East): W ill my right
   M r. Brittan: On the new point made by the hon.               hon. and learned Friend issue strict instructions to all
Gentleman, I entirely agree to the extent that it would be       football grounds, cinemas and all other places of
thoroughly wrong if the anxiety naturally being expressed        entertainment that they should never again lock emergency
about third and fourth division grounds and other non­           exits? They should remind themselves that it does not
designated grounds were to detract from the effort to            matter if a few people come in without paying. What
ensure that proper arrangements operate at designated            matters is that the majority o f people who want to get out
grounds.                                                         o f the premises should be able to do so.
                                                                   M r. Brittan: The problem would not arise if the exits
   M r. Eldon Griffiths (Bury St. Edmunds): Having had
                                                                 were manned. I note my hon. Friend’s point.
to deal with the no less terrible aftermath at Ibrox, may I
ask my right hon. and learned Friend to take seriously the           M r. Harry Greenway (Ealing, North): I speak as a
point made by the right hon. Member for Horley and               life-long soccer supporter. I think that no hon. Member
Leeds, South (Mr. Rees) about problems o f liaison               would cavil at the earnings o f soccer players. Those who
between the Department o f the Environment and the Home          have followed the game for a number o f years w ill note
37                  Football Grounds                     13 MAY 1985                      Football Grounds

that violence on and off the field began when big bonuses          Popplewell’s recommendations, which are bound to be
were given for winning. Would it not be right to examine           costly, are to be put into effect in time for the beginning
this aspect in the inquiry? Is it not worth considering            o f the next football season.
imposing a levy on transfer fees, because high transfer fees           Like the Scarman inquiry, w ill the Popplewell inquiry
add to the financial tensions in the game? That measure            have available to it specialist advisers to consider the
would be helpful.                                                  questions that need to be examined including how advance
                                                                   inform ation and intelligence are obtained, the use to which
   M r. Brittan: I am grateful to my hon. Friend for those         they are put, how these incidents are exploited and how
further suggestions.                                               they can be prevented. Most importantly, will Mr. Justice
                                                                   Popplewell examine the deeper social significance o f an
   M r. D enis Howell (Birmingham, Small Heath): It is             occasion when so many hundreds o f people go to a game
understandable that most o f the questions have been               bent on trouble? W ill he consider why these difficulties
concerned with the great tragedy at Bradford, but it would         persist in arising in our society?
be unworthy o f the House if hon. Members did not spend                W ill the Government again look at the Chester
a little time on the serious law breaking at St. Andrew’s          committee’s report, which recommended the creation of
on Saturday, which I witnessed. On that occasion, 96               a football levy board? This is essential. The Home
policemen were injured and at least 1,500 people were on           Secretary has said that the trust provides 75 per cent, o f
the pitch making a deliberate assault on the peace o f the         the cost o f designation, but that is inadequate in view o f
realm and the good order o f our society — a serious               the cost o f the major structural alterations that will be
situation which one never thought one would see in British         required.
sport. I therefore ask the Home Secretary to consider some             The right hon. and learned Gentleman referred to
matters arising from that incident.                                 perimeter fencing. There is a dilemma between ensuring
    The police were grossly outnumbered by between 600              that those whom one does not want to be on the pitch are
and 700 law breakers on each side. The police deserve the           kept off and allowing thousands o f people to use the pitch
highest praise for keeping the opposing armies apart and            in an emergency as the only reasonable point o f
for preventing a general conflagration. We must ensure              evacuation. Some o f the gates in some perimeter fences
that two sets o f sportsmen are never allowed again to              do not match the requirements. The right hon. and learned
create a situation------                                            Gentleman probably realises that and will do something
                                                                    about it.
     M r. Brittan: They were not sportsmen.                             Finally     [Interruption.]
    M r. Howell: So-called sportsmen. Two separate and                 M r. Speaker: Order.
 repeated baton charges by the police were required at both
 ends o f the ground simultaneously over a period o f 35              M r. Howell: These are very important matters o f law
 minutes. That was the extent o f the disorder that occurred       and order. They are distinct from questions o f safety, and
 in Birm ingham on Saturday, which I had the misfortune            they justify our view that there should have been two
 to witness, along with many other decent people, who              statements.
 were horribly sickened by it all.                                     Finally, w ill the Home Secretary convey our concern
    W ill the Home Secretary consider the concerted action         to the football authorities? W ill he ask them to consider
 by some o f these league troublemakers, which was well            whether, where necessary the kick-off for important
 planned and known in advance? There was excellent co­             matches should be in the morning, and whether clubs
 operation between the Leeds and the West Midlands police          whose travelling supporters have bad records should have
 forces, but that was not enough to deal with the problem.         all-ticket away matches? Most importantly, w ill he ensure
 We must ensure that, in such circumstances, people bent           that the licences are withdrawn from those proprietors o f
 on disorder are not allowed to travel this country to break       minibuses and coaches carrying football supporters who
 the law. I hope that the inquiry w ill take account o f that      are seen— I understand that this happened on Saturday
                                                                   — to stop at supermarkets and pubs to load up with
 point.
                                                                   drinks?
    My right hon. Friends and I are concerned about the fact
 that there is to be only one inquiry. The Home Secretary              M r. Brittan: The right hon. Gentleman will be aware
 is wrong to limit the terms o f reference to the Bradford and      o f the announcement that has been made about the
 Birmingham occurrences. [Interruption.] The terms o f              Government’s notices o f intentions.
 reference o f the inquiry refer to Bradford City and                  I take note o f what the right hon. Gentleman said about
 Birmingham City football grounds, unless the terms have            the Chester committee’s recommendations.
■ been changed since I received a copy. During the past two            The most significant points made by the right hon.
 months there have been similar incidents on the Notts              Gentleman relates to the events at Birmingham. He was
 County, Luton and Chelsea grounds. W ill the inquiry take          right to draw attention in a very vivid way, in his accurate
 all o f those disorders into account, as it should, although       account o f events, to the magnitude and horror o f what
 they are not within its terms or reference?                        occurred there.
    The right hon. and learned Gentleman’s statement did                As for the right hon. Gentleman’s comments on the
 not refer to the Prime Minister’s ministerial committee. I         announcement, if he has time to look more closely at my
 hope that that committee has not been superseded. How              statement he w ill see that the terms o f reference o f the
 does the Home Secretary see the relationship between the           inquiry are wider than he perhaps realised. Although the
 two inquiries?                                                     inquiry is invited to consider matters with particular
     In view o f the serious issues o f law and order and public    reference to the events at Bradford City and Birmingham,
 safety, how long will it be before Mr. Justice Popplewell          that is not all that it is entitled to do. It is invited to look
 reports? This is o f the greatest importance if Mr. Justice        at the matter very much more broadly.
39                    Football Grounds                       13 MAY 1985                    British Aerospace                   40

[Mr. Brittan]
                                                                                      British Aerospace
   The right hon. Gentleman asked about the inquiry                   4.51 pm
having technical assistance. At a later stage in my
statement I said:                                                         The M inister for Inform ation Technology (Mr.
   “I shall arrange for the chairman to be assisted by                Geoffrey Pattie): With permission, Mr. Speaker, I should
appropriately qualified assessors . . . and to have available such    like to make a statement about the outcome of the joint
technical advice and support as he requires.”                         offer o f shares in British Aerospace by the Government
   As for the relationship between this inquiry and the               and the company.
measures agreed between the football authorities and the                  Approximately 264,000 applications were received
Government at No. 10 Downing street, I stressed towards               from the general public, excluding institutional priority
the conclusion o f my statement that the measures                     applications, for a total o f approximately 790 million
announced were                                                        ordinary shares.
“additional to those announced on 1 April after the meeting at           Preferential    applications     were    received     from
No. 10 Downing street with the football authorities”
                                                                      shareholders for approximately 23 million shares and from
and that the programme o f measures agreed there must go
                                                                      employees for approximately 3 million shares. All such
ahead with renewed urgency.
                                                                      valid applications will be allocated in full.
                                                                         Valid applications from the general public for up to
                                                                     20,000 shares w ill be allocated a minimum o f 100 shares
                                                                     and a maximum o f 275 shares, depending on the number
                                                                     o f shares applied for. N o allocation will be made in respect
                                                                     o f public applications for more than 20,000 shares. On this
                                                                     basis, allocations w ill be made to some 260,000 applicants
                                                                     for a total o f some 40 million shares.
                                                                         As announced on 1 M ay, approximately 80-8 million
                                                                     shares, 55 per cent, o f the total offered shares, have been
                                                                     allocated to institutional priority applicants.
                                                                         It is expected that dealings in renounceable letters of
                                                                     acceptance in respect o f the offered shares will commence
                                                                     tomorrow.
                                                                        M r. John Sm ith (Monklands, East): Why is the
                                                                     language o f the Minister’s statement so contorted and
                                                                     convoluted that it is not possible to discover from it the
                                                                     amount that was raised in the sale? Was not the amount
                                                                     £550 million, and did not 55 per cent, o f that go to the
                                                                     preferential institutions, with apparently only 2 per cent,
                                                                     finding its way to the employees, despite the
                                                                     Government’s often-professed intention that shares should
                                                                     go to employees?
                                                                        Are the Government somehow ashamed to reveal the
                                                                     total amount raised in the sale because o f the increasing
                                                                     public perception that this is an exercise in selling off the
                                                                     furniture to pay the rent— that the money goes into the
                                                                     maw o f the Treasury and is squandered by the Government
                                                                     while the public lose the prospect o f future profits from a
                                                                     shareholding?
                                                                        Have not the Government yet realised that they have
                                                                     finally betrayed the promise which they gave the House of
                                                                     Commons during the passage o f the legislation that they
                                                                     would retain 25 per cent, o f the shareholding?
                                                                       The Secretary o f State for Trdde and Industry (M r.
                                                                     Norm an Tebbit): Not again.
                                                                        M r. Sm ith: The Secretary o f State for Trade and
                                                                     Industry shakes his head and says, “Not again.” It is not
                                                                     surprising that the House o f Commons should remind
                                                                     Ministers about their breaches o f promises to the House.
                                                                     We shall continue to remind the Government that they
                                                                     gave a solemn undertaking to retain 25 per cent, o f the
                                                                     shareholding to preserve the British national interest and
                                                                     that they have evacuated and abandoned that commitment.
                                                                        M r. Pattie: On that last point, the right hon. and
                                                                     learned Gentleman asked a similar question on 1 May. The
                                                                     answer that he was given then, he will not be surprised to
                                                                     know, has not changed since. The undertaking given by
                                                                     the Government in 1981 was to safeguard the national
                                                                                                                 -f&'zji'U
             South Yorkshire Police                                                                        CCO/RAN/TT


                   MINUTE SHEET

                   Subject   e m e r g e n c y p r o c e d u r e s a t f o o t b a l l g r o u n d s ...


¥
To:-

ACC (OPS)           Sir

                    In reply to your request for research I have obtained a random
                    sample of operational orders issued during this season, one for
                    each of the footbal clubs in the South Yorkshire Police area.

                    Surprisingly, all but 'A' Division - Doncaster Rovers, and 'B'
                    Division - Barnsley, include sections on emergencies such as
                    fires.

                    The 'C' Division order - Rotherham United v Lincoln City,
                    includes a paragraph (A) informing officers of the procedure for
                    an emergency situation, and interestingly instructs that on a
                    message from the ground commander, police officers on the
                    perimeter of the field will open the wall gates and evacuate the
                    crowd on to the pitch.

                    The Sheffield United operational order contains an appendix (B),
                    dealing with emergency procedures. This makes the point that
                    the public address system will be used to pay a discreet message
                    to stewards and police officers, and that officers should check
                    that stewards are in a position to open gates if necessary.

                    Similar instructions are contained in the Sheffield Wednesday
                    operational order. Perhaps this is a matter for discussion at
                    the next Chief Superintendents' Conference, in order that a
                    Forcewide policy could be formulated.

                    I have attached the sample orders for your perusal.




                    PS 22^661
                        is r S n ix Staff Officer
                    Assisi?

                                                                                         {j?          V w «o
                                               'QO         -

                                                                                          VD               yc—




    GEN/52
r




                                  SOUTH      YORKSHIRE     POLICE


                                          •A*   DIVISION



                 OPERATIONAL ORDER: k^/8¥'                 MATCH CATEGORY 'C'


                 DONCASTER ROVERS v BURNLEY


                  Friday y\ August 198^                    KICK OFF: 7.30 pm.


      1.         INFORMATION

    ! 1 .1.      On Friday-31 .August 198^ , Doncaster Rovers will play Burnley
                 at Belle Vue Football Ground.
                 Kick Off: 7.30 pm.            ,

      1.2 .      A total of 3 ,000 supporters are expected at this game.

                 There is no information available at this time as to the number of
                 visiting supporters attending the Hatch, or the mode of transport
                 to be used, but details will be announced at the briefing.

                 Any visiting supporters will be directed to the Rossington E-id of the
                 Ground. It is probably that some visiting supporters may wish to use
                 the Grandstand, in which case they will be suitably advised how to
                 gain access.

                 The away team colours are claret and, sky blue* .


      2.         INTENTION                                  ’

      2.1.'     It is the intention of the Police to allow this match to take place
                 and to ensure public, order and safety both inside and outside the
                 Ground; to separate and control opposing fans and prevent unnecessary
                 obstruction of the highway and damage to property. This will be
      -         attained and displayed with a high standard of smartness and
                 professionalism.


      3.         METHOD

      3.1.       A/Superintendent Lowe    - will    be in overall command of Police Operations
                 Inspector Quinton        - will    bein charge of Offiqers at the Ground;.
                 Inspector Froud          - will    be in charge of Officers in the town.


     ■3 .2 .    .OPERATIONAL PHASES

                 The operation will be in three phases, viz:-

    - 3.2.1.   •- Phase 1 - from briefing until ten minutes before kick off.



                                                                        Contd
Phase 2 - from ten minutes before kick-off to ten minutes before the
          end of the game.

Phase 3 ~ from ten minutes before the end of the game until walking
          spectators and,traffic have dispersed.

Duties to be performed are as shown in the Appendices.


PARADING ON DUTY                                                            ;

All Officers will parade in Serial Order at the Football Ground for •
briefing at 6 .0 0 pm.

BRIEFING                                                            . .

A general briefing as to the requirements of the event and the
intelligence received will be taken by A/Superintendent Lowe
at      pm. All Supervisory Officers will acquaint themselves
with the contents of the Order, prior to attending the football
ground.                          ^    -

SPECIAL CONSTABULARY

Officers of the Special Constabulary will report to the Police Room
at the Ground where they will be briefed by the Officer in charge of
the Police Room. They will be employed on the duties shown at
Appendix 5 in the order of priority shown.

DOGS SECTION                          •     '

Members of the Dogs Section will be on duty. They will mainly be
used as a deterrent before and after the match' from town to the
ground, at the visiting coach park and at the railway station if
necessary, to escort supporters to and from the ground. They will
not normally be used in public order situations,but the Officer in
command has the overriding discretion to use dogs in such
circumstances if he feels a serious public order situation may occur.

POLICE ROOM

Officers will be on duty at the Police Room in accordance with details
shown in Appendix     The Sergeant will be responsible for the
acceptance of charges relating to any offences committed in or near
the ground.

This office will also be used as*match control.

PRISONERS

All arrested persons and those it is proposed to eject will be taken
by the shortest available route to the Police Room at the Ground,
where the Officer in charge will enquire in to the circumstances and
decide if the evidence substantiates an offence. Details will be
recorded of all persons go t a k e n and v/here a charge is accepted, the
arresting Officer and the prisoner will be-photographed together.



                                                     Contd
                                                                     Page 3




3.8.2.       Details of the prisoners and the alleged offence will be recorded on
              the Pro Forma provided for that purpose and the prisoner will be
              transported by Police van to Divisional Charge Office, Doncaster.

3.8.3.       The arresting Officer will return to his duty at the Ground until the
              match is over, at which time he will ensure he reports to the charge
              office.                                                  .

3.8.^.       Adults arrested will be placed before the next available Court at    the
              discretion of A/Superintendent Lowe

3.8.5.       All offence reports will be submitted to Inspector Quinton before
              the arresting Officer retires from duty.

3.9.         TRAFFIC CONTROL

3 .9 .1.     Traffic Points will be manned as shown, in Appendix 3, Detail ’D*.

3.9.2.       Traffic Division members of the motor cycle wing will be on duty to
              ensure free passage on main roads leading to and from the ground and .
              assist with escorting visiting supporters coaches. It will be their
              responsibility to escort the away Club coach safely to and from the
              ground.

3.9.3.        PARKING ARRANGEMENTS
            ‘\    1                              '
3.9.^.        Private cars will park on the football club car park, inthe event   of
               this car park becoming full additional parking space will be available
           ' at B & C car parks at the Racecourse.

3.9.5.      .; COACHES

              All coaches carrying visting supporters v/ill be unloaded in the
              roadway leading to the Airport entrance. They will then be parked
              during the game at the SYPTE garage, Leicester Avenue. Fifteen
              minutes before the end of the game the coaches will return to the
              Airport entrance to await their passengers.

3.9.6.       PSV.s

              PSV.s carrying visiting supporters from the railway station will
              operate in the same manner as visiting coaches. PSV.s carrying non­
              supporters into town will operate from 'bus stops outside the
              Woodborough Hotel, Carr House Road and Belle Vue House, Bennetthorpe.

3.10.         OBSTRUCTION OF THE HIGHWAY

3.10.1.       Persons selling badges orgoods and obstructing thehighway should be
              moved on but if they persist they should be arrested and dealt with
              accordingly. The driver of any car causing unnecessary obstruction
              will be reported and if the obstruction is serious the vehicle will be
              moved by Traffic Division where the obstruction is so serious as to
              warrant the vehicle's removal the consent of an Inspector or above
              must be obtained before this is dene.


K             ADMINISTRATION



                                                                 Contd..
Dress

All male Officers on duty will wear full uniform, including helmets
with chin straps down. Female Officers will wear trousers, all
Officers will be in possession of a top coat in case of inclement
weather. Constables performing any traffic duty will wear a
fluorescent jacket over their uniform. Staff and handcuffs will be
carried.■

Transport                                                          j

Where Officers attend in Police vehicles, they will be parked on the:
hard standing adjacent to the Police Boom and the keys handed to the
Officer in charge of the Police Room.

Searching and Property Seized

Where searches are carried out at the turnstiles or elsewhere, and
property temporarily seized, the person from whom the property is
taken should be informed of the seizing officer's collar number and
the location of the Police Room where the property may be collected       •
at the end of the game. The Officer taking possession of the property
must affix a label with the n a m e > f the owner thereon, before leaving
it in the Police Room. It will be the responsibility of the Officer in
charge of the Police Room to list property so deposited and return to
the lowner against signature. Any property not claimed will be taken to
Doncaster Police Station and treated as Found Property.

Refreshments

Refreshments will be available during inclement, weather in the Police
Room. Sergeants will ensure that members of tneir serial stagger their
refreshments break to not more than two at any.time. This facility is
subject to the exigencies of duty.   .

Cones

-All 'on-street* parking in- the vicinity,of the Football.Ground will be
 restricted by the strategic placing of 'No Waiting1 cones. The Duty
 Inspector on 6—2pm this date will be responsiole for the placing of
 these cones.

Once the match has commenced and Serial 'C' has been deloyed inside
the Ground. Pc.2?ll and Pc . 1 9 6 5 will be responsible for the collection
of these cones and their subsequent return to DHQ.

HAPS

A plan of the Ground is attached to each copy of the Operational Order.

Reporting Off Duty

It will be the responsibility of each Serial Sergeant to account for the
whole of his Serial before that Serial retires from duty. Officers will
not retire fron? cut~' until so instructed by Inspector 'cvuinton*
All Officers will retire from duty at DHQ.



                                                    Contd
5      COMMUNICATIONS

5.1.   Radio Communications inside the Ground will be available via Ground
       Control at the Police Room. Channel 25 will be utilised.
       Communications in the town will be available from A 1 Control Room on
       the VHF and UHF channels.

5.2.   All supervisory and certain other Officers will be issued with radios.

5.3.   A log will be maintained at Ground Control at the Police Room covering
       incidents involving football supporters at the game.


6*     UNCONNECTED PUBLIC DEMONSTRATION

6.1.   It is conceivable that some public demonstration unconnected with
       football may occur during this match. All ranks should be mindful of
       the possibility and bring any information to the notice of Officers
       commanding forthwith so that necessary timely deployment and reaction
       consistent with circumstances may be taken.                         -




         /erxntendent


                                 -   0 O0 O0 O0



       DISTRIBUTION ■

       Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
       Chief Superintendent Carlin
       Superintendent Q.ven
       Superintendent Fell
       Superintendent Hinchcliffe
       Superintendent Barrowclough
       All A 1 Inspectors
       All Supervisory Officers
       All A1 Section Stations


                                —    0 O0 O0 O0
                                SERIAL 'A'            MISCELLANEOUS DUTIES
g£.■.m*.   ■                           ...       -        -                                        .



APPENDIX 2                      SERIAL. »£'      - OUTSIDE GROUND DUTIES

                       V     SEBI1L- 'O'                                        ■
APPENDIX 3                 . SERIAL *D1          - GROUND DUTIES            •

                            ■SERIAL-
                                SERIAL. •F' .■                                             '■*.

APPENDIX b                      SERIAL «G 1   '-1- DETENTION ROOM STAFF & DRIVERS

 APPENDIX 5                                   . - SPECIAL CONSTABULARY DUTIES                 ...

 APPENDIX 6                                          - GROUND PLAN                                i-

                                                     - GROUND REGULATIONS       .   . :_
 APPENDIX 7

 APPENDIX 8                                      •- NOMINAL ROLL

                           --




                                                         *
’■             ‘   ’




                                       - oOoOo -
SERIAL ‘A*    -   MISCELLANEOUS DETAIL



The Officers from Dog Sec.tion will parade at the Ground at 6.00pm,
when specific instructions will be given for their duties.




DOG SECTION


Four officers to be nominated
                                                        APPENDIX 2


SERIAL *B*   -   BENNETTHOKPE DETAIL



All Officers in this Appendix will take up positions in_Bennetthorpe
from the Cenotaph to the Ground after briefing. They will supervise
supporters walking to the Ground and prevent parking m Bennetthorpe
Green. / Return to Ground at kick off. During the game two Officers
will remain in the car park to prevent damage to and thefts from   i
motor vehicles.

•The remaining Officers will perform duty at the Rossington End o f t h e
 Ground 10 minutes before the end of the game, redeploy to Bennetthorpe.
 Return to DUO on foot after the supporters have passed by way of
Parade, Waterdale,             — ;v , :.   •   -> '         ■:
4                                                           APPENDIX’2


    SERIAL »C* - TOWN MOBILE DETAIL


                                     '/
    After briefing, the Officers in/this detail will take up mobile
    patrol in Transit Van ‘AT*.          ‘            •   .L/,.-.-’


     1 0 minutes before kick off they will return to the ground and work   .
    ■ in pairs in the Popular Stand, on the terraces,                ■ .   ■- -

     10 minutes before final whistle Pc._________    -will ensure that his
     Van is parked at the main entrance. At this time, the personnel     ^
    • in this Serial will position themselves in the car park at the Rossington
     End, together with the              "       Dog Handlers, awaiting the
     emergance from the ground of the visiting supporters. Once these
     supporters hive left the ground and have made their way to their^
     transport and it is clear that the situation is in hand, then this
    ’Serial will return to their Van at the main entrance and resume
     mobile patrol.                                                     V ••




     Ps.
       V
       •>
     Pc.^
     Pc.
     ?c.
     Pc.
                                                          APPENDIX 3



 SERIAL 'D' - GROUND DETAIL


 All Officers in this detail will, perform duty as shown on the
 following list.          '      '/   .

 The Officers on traffic points will take up their respective point
 after the briefing and remain in position until 1 0 minutes after the
 match begins. Ten minutes before end of play they will return to their
 points until all vehicular traffic has cleared. During the game the
 Officers will perform duty on the Grandstand terrace. '

 The remaining Officers will remain at their points until the final
 whistle when they will assist in escorting players and Officials from
 the pitch. They will also assist in escorting visiting supporters to
 their transport. Once the visiting supporters are on their transport
 this detail will assist in clearing traffic from the car park.


 All Officers v/ill be in possession-of a.radio and will wear fluorescent
 jackets during traffic duties.    ,                              ;


 Pc.                -Players Tunnel at perimeter track.   Escort Officials
                      from pitch at final whistle.

 Pc.                - Gar Park, Main Entrance.   Ensure North Entrance’
                      closed.

, Pc.               -Racecourse roundabout.                     .         '

 Pc.                - North Stand/Grandstand Corner. *
                      Prevent movement between enclosures. Assist
                      with any prisoners if required.
                                        J
 Pc.                - Grandstand/Rossington End Corner, prevent
                      movement'between Enclosures. '

Pc '                ■ North Stand/Popular side corner.Prevent
                      • movement between enclosures0
                                                                   ‘ Y ,,\'    '•   APPENDIX 5


:- ^    SERIAL- »E»     -   VISITING SUPPORTERS             . ..                                 •




        After briefing, the Officers in this detail will be responsible for
        meeting visiting supporters from their transport. Escort them to the
        Rossington End and remain with them throughout the game.

        At the final-whistle escort visiting supporters to their transport
        and if. not required elsewhere, return to DHQ on foot by way of
        Bennetthorpe, South Parade.

        In the event of visiting supporters travelling to the match by way
        of British Rail, then Officers from this Serial v/ill be responsible
        for Policing them from the Ground to the Railway Station, by travelling
        with them on the 'Special* 'buses provided.

       When these supporters have left the Railway Station, these Officers will
       make their way back to DHQ by way of the Town Centre.              •.

       H.3.       The terracing area containing the floodlight between the Popular
                . Side and the first fence on the'Rossington End must be kept clear
                  of all spectators.            -;       .      --       . •




       Pc1,                              .   v          •    ' Gate in fence at Popular Side of
       , ....                   ./               ;W-.          the Rossington End.

       Pc.                                                  ■' Top of terracing at the fence.

       Pc.                                                         Terracing, Perimeter Track.

       'Pc.                          .              .
V-
                                                                             ... APPENDIX ?


          ' • SERIAL *F»   -   POPULAR SID5



             After briefing, the Officers in this detail will perform duty along the
             Perimeter Track at the Popular Side of the Ground and also pay attention
             to the turnstiles there.                                      .

             At the final' whistle, Officers will go with all   dispatch to the car park
             via Rossington End to keep home supporters away    from visitors. Once the
             visiting supporters are on .their transport this   Detail will return to DHQ
            •'on foot via South Parade,.Bennetthorpe with the   main body of supporters.



                                     *          In charge of detail      ■     ’. '

                                                ( Popular Side/Rossington End.        Prevent
                                                  movement between enclosures.
     !-

             Pc.
             Pc,                                ("Perimeter Track.
             Pc.                                ('
             Pc
             Pc




                                                   'V '.i.:
V
                                                                  APPENDIX k



    SERIAL *G'       DETENTION ROOM •& DRIVERS'



    DETENTION ROOM


    Ps.                               In Charge. Supervise the documentation
                                      of all prisoners and ejected persons.
                                      Issue and collect all radios.




    VAN DRIVERS



                                  -   Parade at DKQ and collect vehicles.
          \\

    Pc.                               Van ’A 1



    Pc.                               -To'be responsible" for visiting coaches,
                                       drivers and prisoners. "




    All Officers to be available in the Police Room throughout the match to
    transport prisoners.
                                                                               APPENDIX g



      SPECIAL CONSTABULARY DUTIES



      Duties will be allocated to members of the Special Constabulary vrho
      attend for Duty in connection with this event in accordance wife the
      below schedule. They will cover the duties in the numerical priority
      shown.



      1.   Patrol wall at the rear of Popular Side on outside of Ground to
           prevent persons climbing in.

      2.   Patrol wall at the rear of Rossington End on outside of Ground to
           prevent persons climbing in.

      3.   Patrol parked vehicles on main car park.

           Patrol parked vehicles on Sheffield car park.
0 )
      5.   Duty on perimeter track North Stand end.

      6.   Duty on perimeter track Popular Side.
                    Doncaster eRovers Groyne
IO                        .




                                                   C iQ.r   n   'D




                               ^UfluK Ufif Epg
                                 ^So^eRS                                      x-<x«>.N<><j<^xy^K>-:---»<
                                                                                ^.oss^crroNi




 d£i - ^ e .
 £ 2 } - Q.S F"&c£>^tAe,r^T<
                                                                              ■i!<X><x^<xXX><X-«X>: < • -:>X
     T   - ~ro\u.<?.TS.




                                                 P b P uuA O .       S (b e
                        DONCASTER ROYERS FOOTBALL CLUB


                           BELLS VUE, DONCASTER



         OFFICIAL NOTICE - GROUND REGULATIONS


1.       All matches are played in accordance with the Rules and Regulations
         of the Football Association and The Football League.

2    .   Play cannot be guaranteed to take place on any particular day at any^
         particular time and the Club reserves the right to change its advertised
         fixtures without notice and without liability.

3-       No refund of any cash admission charge paid at the turnstile will be made.

4.       Refunds will be made in respect of seats booked in advance and paid for^
         where a match is postponed, subject to a time limitation, details of which
         can be;obtained from the office.

5-       Unauthorised persons are not permitted to enter upon the field of play.

6.       With the exception of authorised Press representatives holding official
         passes, the talcing of photographs or cine photography inside the Ground
         is prohibited. In addition, no recording whether for Radio or Television
         and whether for transmission or otherwise is permitted save with a special
         authorisation in writing by the Club.

7.       Only persons specifically authorised in writing by the Club are permitted
         to offer Newspapers, Periodicals or any other Articles for sale in the Ground.

8.       Unnecessary noise such as that from the use of radio sets and behaviour
         likely to cause confusion or nuisance of any kind including foul and
         abusive language is not permitted in any part of the Ground.

9    .   The climbing of floodlight pylons, stands or other buildings in the Ground
         is forbidden.

10   .   The consumption of intoxicating liquors is permitted only in the bars or
         other authorised places.

11   .   Bottles, glasses, flags, banners and other similar articles including anything
         which could or might be used as a weapon are not permitted within the Ground.

12   .   Under no circumstances is it permitted to throw any object on to the pitch.

13   -   In general the right of admission is reserved to the Club management.




         continued...
All persons entering this Ground are admitted only subject to the
above Ground Regulations and to the Rules and Regulations of the
Football Association and of the Football League. Entry to the Ground
shall be deemed to constitute unqualified acceptance of all these
Rules and Regulations.

The Club reserves the right for its servants and agents and for
members of the Police Forces to remove from this Ground any person
who does not comply with Ground Regulations and with the Rules and
Regulations of the Football Association and the Football League or
whose presence on the Ground is or could reasonably be construed as
constituting a source of danger, nuisance or annoyance to other spectators.


                     By Order
                                 (sgd)

                     Secretary
                     Doncaster Rovers Football Club
                                                                Appendix 8




                         NOMINAL ROLL



                DONCASTER ROVERS       v BURNLEY



A/Superintendent Lowe
Inspector Quinton


OFFICER                       DETAIL               DUTY STATE

Sergeant

                                   G                  0T
                                   F                  OT
                                   C                  D
                                   B                  D

Constable

                                   D                  D
                                   C                  ED
                                   E                  D
                                   C                  ED
                                   D                  D
                                   D                  D
                                   E                  D
                                   C                  ED
                                   C           '       ED
                                   B                  D
                                   G                  D
                                   F                  ED
                                   F                  ED
                                   B                  D
                                   D                  D
                                   F                  D
                                   D                  D
                                   G                  D
                                   F                  ED
                                   E                  D
                                   B                  D
                                   E                  D
                                   F                  ED
                                   D                  D /
                                   B                  D
                                   E                  D
                                   F                  ED
           SUPERVISORY OFFICERS PERFORMING DUTY IN CONNECTION
           WITH THIS MATCH WILL ACQUAINT THEMSELVES WITH THE
           CONTENTS OF THIS ORDER BEFORE PARADING FOR DUTY

                      SOUTH     YORKSHIRE POLICE
                              >Bt DIVISION
            DIVISIONAL HEADQUARTERS, CHURCHFIELD, BARNSLEY
            BARNSLEY F.C.         -   v   -   CARLISLE UNITED
            MONDAY, 2? AUGUST 1984_______ KICK OFF 3.00 PM




CIRCULATION:




                                                                rH rH rH rH rH -3" H H H H H H H O J
Divisional Officer                                    'B*
Deputy Divisional Officer                             TB*
Sub-Divisional Officer                                B.l
Deputy Sub-Divisional Officer                         B.l
Detective Inspector                                   B.l
Section Inspectors                                    B.l
Control Room                                          B.1
Staff Officer                                         B.l
Royston Office                                        B.l
Parade Room Notice Board                              B.l
Officer i/c Match Radio Control                       B.l
Officer i/c Police   Room                             B.l
Charge Office Sergeant                                B.l
Serial Inspectors
                                                                V£) i—| VjD rH K'N rH rH rH rH rH
Serial Sergeants
Detective Superintendent                              'B*
Sub-Divisional Officer                                B. 2
Detective Chief Inspector                             ,B t
Football Liaison Operations Division (P.S. Baker)
Inspector Phenix    Dogs.
Inspector Tuska     Mounted.
Force Catering Officer
Canteen Manageress                                    1B*
Secretary, Barnsley F.C.



                                                    TOTAL       ifO
                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                  BARNSLEY      DIVISION


£   F00TBALL OPERATION ORDER NO.      1                              MATCH CATEGORY 'C*

                      BARNSLEY F.C.            v.   CARLISLE UNITED F.C.
                      MONDAY, 27 AUGUST 1984        KICK   OFF   3.00 P.M.

             INFORMATION

             On Monday 27 August 1984, Barnsley F.C. will play Carlisle United F.C.

             at Oakwell Football Ground, Barnsley, in a League 2 match, kick off 3 J»u

             The gates will open at 1.30 pm.


    1.2      It is anticipated that the game will attract a gate of approximately

             7,000.     Access to the ground by spectators will be by payment at the

             turnstiles at the ground at Spion Kop, Grove Street and Pontefract

             Road end.     The two clubs last met at Oakwell on Saturday, 12 May 1984,

             when there was a crowd of 4,512.       Barnsley won 2 - 1 .


    1.3      There is no information as to the number of Carlisle United supporters

             attending the match or the mode of transport to be used.        When the teams

             last met approximately 200 Carlisle United supporters attended.        There

             were two ejections and no arrests.       Any items of interest in connection

             with this will be announced at briefing.


             Any visiting Carlisle United supporters can be expected to park their

             vehicles in Queens Ground car park and in response to enquiries from them

             should be directed to the Spion Kop end of the ground which will be

             reserved exclusively for their use.       It is probable that some will

            wish to use the main stand,in which case they will be suitably advised

            how to gain access.

            INTENTION

            It will be the intention of the Police to allow this match to take place

            and to ensure order and safety both inside and outside the ground, to

            prevent unnecessary obstruction of the highway and damage to property.

            These objectives will be achieved with a high standard of smartness and
professionalism.

From the time the Police take control of the ground until the time of

our departure, unauthorised persons will not be allowed on the perimeter

track at any time and it will not be used as a means of access from one

part of the ground to another.


METHOD


Operational Command

Superintendent Williams will be in overall command.            Chief Inspector Dixon

will command the operation outside the ground.          Two Inspectors will command

serials as shown in the Appendices.


The Operation will be divided into three phases :-

Phase 1   -    Before kick off   -   1.15 pm     to      pm.

Phase 2   -   During the match -     3*00 pm to k.kO pm.

Phase 3   -   After the match    -   4.40 pm until spectators have dispersed


PARADING ON DUTY

Sergeants of Serials 1 to 5 will ensure that Officers of their respective

Serials parade for briefing at the ground in the main stand terrace at

1.00 pm, along with Officers of the Dog Section.          Serials from elsewhere

than B.l Sub-Division who are to parade at the ground will travel to the

ground in their Divisional Transport.          After the.briefing all transport

will then be returned to Barnsley Divisional Headquarters.


Public Order Patrols in the town centre will be the responsibility of

Serial 6 .    Officers in this Serial will parade for briefing by the Duty

Inspector at Barnsley Divisional Headquarters at 1.30 pm.


Briefing by Superintendent Williams for all officers on duty at the

ground will commence at the ground at 1 . 0 0 pm.       This will be followed

by a separate detached briefing by the Sergeants of their Serials.
Criminal Investigation Department

Officers will be on duty at the ground and be readily available via

contact with the Police Room throughout the match.   They will deal with

all complaints of crime.


Special Constabulary


Officers of the Special Constabulary will report to the Police Room

where they will be briefed and allocated duties.


Police Room


Police Officers will be on duty at the Police Room in accordance with

details shown in Appendix 6 .

A Sergeant will be responsible for the acceptance of charges relating

to offences committed in or near the ground.


Prisoners

All persons arrested in or near the ground will be taken to the Poli*e

Room where a Sergeant will enquire into the circumstances of the

arrest.   Where he decides a charge will be accepted, the Arresting

Officer and the prisoner will be photographed together.   Details of

the prisoner and the alleged offence will be recorded on Form GEN/104

provided for that purpose.   The form should be completed as soon as

possible after the arrest, the original being the basis of a ’short

form* file.   The second copy will remain with the detention record

GEN/29, the third copy being retained by the Arresting Officer.


Where a Sergeant has enquired into the circumstances and decides it is

appropriate to deal with the person under the provisions of the Football

Club Ground Rules, details will be entered in the register provided for

that purpose and the person will be ejected from the ground.
Prisoners will be detained in the Police Room and as soon as reasonably

practicable transferred to B.l Charge Room with the Form GEN/lO^f,

photograph and the prisoner's property.     Personnel Carriers will be

available at the ground for this purpose.


Prisoners transferred to the Charge Room will there be fully processed.

The identity of each prisoner will be verified and he or she will be

charged with the offence recorded on the Form GEN/lO^f.   Where appropriate

fingerprints and antecedents will be obtained.


Juvenile Offenders arrested in or near the ground will be dealt with

in accordance with the instructions in the previous paragraphs, but

unless the charge is of a very serious nature, will be reported for

summons and handed over to the custody of their parent Or guardian.


Persons arrested away from the ground may be taken either to the Police

Room or the B„1 Charge Room, whichever is the more convenient, and be

dealt with as in the preceding paragraphs.


A C.J.A. statement will not be required from the Arresting Officer at

this stage.


TRAFFIC CONTROL

Traffic points will be worked before and after the match in accordance

with details in Appendix 3»


All Officers engaged on point duty will wear fluorescent jackets.


Cones will be distributed in accordance with instructions received from

Inspector Gray.   They will be placed in position by a Civilian Driver

on the day of the match, and collected midway through the second half.
Any visiting coaches will be directed to the Queens Ground car park,

access being gained via Eastern Relief Road arid Queens Road.             Other

visitors’ vehicles should also be directed to park on Queens Ground

car park.   Sufficient space must be left clear for pedestrians to

pass through the car park.


ADMINISTRATION


Uniform


All officers will wear full uniform with helmet chin straps down.

They will be in possession of an anorak.               Female officers will wear

slacks and hard hats.          All officers should be prepared to perform

duty in shirt sleeve order.


Meals


Meals will be supplied in accordance with those details shown in

Appendix 7-     Where meals are to be provided, tickets will be issued

at Barnsley Police Station by the Staff Officer.


Refreshments

Refreshments in the form of hot drinks will be available in the tea

room inside the main stand at the following times :

Serial 4    -   1*20 pa    -    1.30 pm.

Remaining Serials :

Serial Sergeants to arrange for each officer to have ONE "break of ten

minutes, at the rate of two officers from each Serial at any one time,

between :

                          1 .3 0 pm   -    2 .0 0 pm

                          3 .1 0 pm   -    3 .40pm

                          4.00pm      -    4.20pm

Officers must not visit the tea room at any other times.
               APPENDICES



APPENDIX 1                  Command Responsibilities


APPENDIX 2                  Manpower Commitment


APPENDIX 3                  Serial Duties


APPENDIX   k                Track Duties


APPENDIX 5                  Turnstile Duties


APPENDIX 6                  Miscellaneous Duties


APPENDIX 7                  List of Officers attending


APPENDIX 8                  Plan of Ground


APPENDIX 9                  Ground Rules
                                  APPENDIX    1


                        COMMAND    RESPONSIBILITIES




Superintendent Williams                Call Sign SIERRA. 2, in overall

                                       command and in charge of the

                                       operation inside the ground.



Chief Inspector Dixon                  Call Sign SIERRA 3» in charge

                                       of the operation outside the

                                       ground„




                    INSPECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES


                    Call Sign            Phase I        Phase IX       Phase III


Inspector Purdy     SIERRA k/1          1,2,5»6         2,5»6         1,2,5*6


Inspector Gray      SIERRA 4/2          3,4             1,3,^         3,^
                       APPENDIX 2



Superintendent


Chief Inspector


Inspectors


Sergeants                               7


Constables                              63


Mounted Officers                         ^


Dog Handlers                             ^


Detective Constables                     2



                                TOTAL   84
                             .APPENDIX   5


                            SERIAL   DUTIES




SERIAL     1                                  - Parade at Oakwell at 1.00 pm

1 Police Sergeant, Call Sign SIERRA 5 A       -   10 Police Constables

Sergeant and Members of Serial, and entitlement to meals shown on Appendix 7•



Phase     I


Public Order Duties*



Patrol (in pairs) Langdale Road from Jumble Lane Crossing to the junction
of Langdale Road/Bala Street,

2   x    P.C.       Jumble Lane.

2   x    P.C.   -   Langdale Road„

k   x    P.C.       Eastern Relief Road Junction.

2   x    P.C.   -   Langdale Road/Bala Street Junction,


Phase     II

Reserve duty - report to 'No Go' area.


Phase     III

As at Phase I.   When crowd dispersed, to Jumble Lane Crossing for re­
deployment or dismissal.
          — —                                    - Parade at Oakwell at 1.00 pm
1 Police Sergeant,     Call Sign SIERRA 5/2      - 10 Police Constables

Sergeant, Members of Serial and entitlement to meals shown on Appendix 7-


Phase      I

Public Order duties in Queens Ground car park.

Supervise Spion Kop turnstiles.

k       x P.C.   - To patrol in Queens Ground.

2       x P.C.   - To patrol Queens Road.

2       x P.C.   - Top of Queens Ground.

2       x P.C.   - Turnstile duty.

Supervise spectators arriving by car and coach in Queens Ground car park.

Coaches should be directed to the bottom left side of the car park next to
the fencing.

Sergeant to arrange with car park attendants for a wide path to be left
between the parked cars to facilitate accessfor supporters through Queens
Ground.

No parking to be allowed in the restricted area at the bottom of Queens
Ground between the fence of the practise pitches and the stone wall at the
rear of Belgrave Road.

Turnstile duty - P.C.'s to be briefed in accordance with Appendix 5-

Be aware of possible attempts to steal cash from turnstiles.

Local residents in possession of a residents' permit (see attached) are
permitted to park their vehicles on the Queens Ground car park during
the game.

Phase II

Patrols in Queens Ground and supervision of turnstiles to be maintained, and
supervised by Serial Sergeant until all spectators have entered ground.
Only then Serial to go to the rear of Spion Kop to supervise spectators.
Phase III
Supervise spectators in Queens Ground car park - present disorder.

2   X     P.C.       To patrol   embankment to prevent stone throwing.
2   X     P.C.       Attention   to coaches in Queens Ground.
k   X     P.C.       To patrol   (in pairs) in Queens Ground.
2   X     P.C.       Patrol Grove Street from Queens Ground to Belgrave Road.
No vehicles to move off until crowd has dispersed.

When crowd has dispersed to follow (in pairs) to Granada Bingo car park
(entrance furthest from Jumble Lane) for redeployment or dismissal.
SERIAL       5                                          - Parade at Oakwell at 1,00 pm

1   Police Sergeant,           Call Sign SIERRA 5/3    - 10 Police Constables

Sergeant, Members of Serial and entitlement to meals shown on Appendix ?•


Phase     I

Responsible for publicsorder at Pontefract Road end and Grove Street
turnstiles. Supervision outside Football" Club Social Club.

3   x P.O.           -   ' 'Turnstiles duty at Pontefract Road end - P.C.s
    ''                    to be briefed in accordance with Appendix 5»

3   x P.C.           -   Turnstiles duty at Grove Street - P.C.s to    be
                         briefed in accordance with Appendix 5«

Particular attention to be paid to juvenile turnstiles.
Be aware of possible attempts to steal cash from the turnstiles.


2   x    P.C.        -   Patrol outside Social Club.

2   x    P.C,        -   Patrol Grove Street car park.

Permitted hours at Social Club are from 11*00 am to 3»00 pm with an
extension from 3»50 pm to 4.00 pm.
                    ‘

Phase    U       '

Supervision of turnstiles to be maintained and supervised by Serial
Sergeant until all spectators have entered ground.

Only then Serial to take up position at rear of terracing at junction
with Pontefract Road end and the main stand. There maintain public
order.

Attention to be given to Social Club,


Phase III

2        P.C,                  patrol
                           O
                     1




    X

2   X   P.C,         -   To patrol

2   X   P.C,             To patrol

2   X   P.C,         -   To patrol

2   X   P.C.         -   To patrol
                         78 Grove 1

When crowd has dispersed to report outside Football Club Social Club for
further deployment or dismissal.
SERIAL        k                                       - Parade at Oakwell at 1.00

1 Police Sergeant,           Call Sign   SIERRA 5/4   - 10 Police Constables

Sergeant, Members of Serial and entitlement to meal shown on Appendix 7*


Phase     I       and   II

Security of the track aad playing area,

Prevent       unauthorised persons entering ou the track at any time,.

Prevent the track being used as unauthorised access from oee part
of the ground to another.                  <

Serial Sergeant will brief Constables ip detail as shown on Appendix 4.

Sergeant to space out Officers along the full perimeter of the track.

The three gates ia the Spion Kop fence to be contiguously manned*


Phase    III

Two minutes from end turn and face crowd.

At full time whistle prevent access by spectators onto track.

When crowd has dispersed, report to Ground Inspector for redeployment
or dismissal.
SERIAL   5
TRAFFIC DETAIL

1 Police Sergeant, Call Sign SIERRA 5/5-

Sergeant , Members of Serial and entitlement to meals shown on Appendix 7.

All Officers shown in this Appendix will report to Oakwell for briefing at
1 pm. Following the briefing they will take up their respective traffic
points and remain in position until 1 5 minutes after the match begins, unless
directed otherwise.
Officers to take up their respective traffic points 1 0 minutes before the
final whistle and remain on their points until all vehicular traffic has
cleared.
FLUORESCENT JACKETS WILL BE WORN BY ALL OFFICERS ENGAGED ON TRAFFIC DUTY.
During the game Police engaged on traffic details are to report: to the Serial
Sergeant at the rear of the Invalids Enclosure. The Serial Sergeant will
detail two Traffic Detail Officers to patrol streets in the vicinity of
Oakwell to enforce the parking restrictions and the other four Traffic Detail
Officers to remain on reserve at the ground. The Sergeant will also be
responsible for finding a replacement should a Traffic Detail Officer be
detained.

SERIAL    SERGEANT
To detail Officer for traffic points ’A* to 'J*.
             Before Match                            After Match


’A*    Pontefract Road/Grove Street.       Pontefract Road/Grove Street, no
       General Traffic Duty.               traffic to turn right into Pontefract
                                           Road.

’B ’   Pontefract Road/Oakwell Lane        Pontefract Road/Oakwell Lane - no
       General Traffic Duty*               traffic to turn right into Oakwell
                                           Lane. Also ensure all vehicles
                                           leaving second exit from Grove Street
                                           car park turn left down Pontefract
                                           Road.
*C’    Grove Street car park - top         Grove Street car park, bottom exit.
       entrance. No traffic to pass        All vehicles towards Pontefract Road.
       that point unless Officer
       satisfied as to need.
*D *   Grove Street/Coniston Road -        Assist Officer fA* at Pontefract
       prevent vehicles entering           Road/Grove Street.
       Coniston Road.

•E*    Belgrave Road/Windermere Road-      Queens Road/Eastern Relief Road.
       all unauthorised vehicles           Prevent vehicles leaving car park
       towards Queens Road.                until all pedestrian spectators
                                           have dispersed.

*F*    Queens Road top- all vehicles       Top exit from Queens Ground car park.
       into Queens Ground car park.        Prevent vehicles leaving car park
                                           until all pedestrian spectators
                                           have dispersed.
                                                                          *
        Before Match                          After Match


«a*                                   Eastern Relief Road/Old Mill Lane     ^j|
                                      (B & Q). Prevent congestion and       ™
                                      facilitate easy dispersal of
                                      football traffic.

'H*    Road Traffic.                  Cundy Cross roundabout. Prevent
                                      traffic congestion and facilitate
                                      easy dispersal of football traffic.
                                      To visit Beever Bridge where double
                                      white line system is in operation
                                      and report any offenders parking
                                      vehicles.

*I *   Patrol street in vicinity of   Langdale Road/Eastern Relief Road
       ground to enforce parking      slip road. All football traffic to
       restrictions.                  be directed across Langdale Road
                                      onto Eastern Relief Road to disperse
                                      at will. (Direction signs to be used)

'J'    Patrol street in vicinity of   Sheffield Road/Eastern Relief Road.
       ground to enforce parking      To allow traffic from Eastern Relief
       restrictions.                  Road to gain access to the roundabout.
                              PUBLIC ORDER PATROL


SERIAL   6                                     - Parade at Barnsley DHQ at 1.30 pm

1 Police Sergeant, Call Sign SIERRA 5/6    -    10 Police Constables

Sergeant, Members of Serial and entitlement to meal shown on Appendix 7«


Phase I, II    and   II

Public Order duties

Patrol (in pairs) as follows :


2   x P.C.    - Bus Station/Midland Street/Kendray Street.

2   x P.C.    - May Day Green Precinct/Market Complex.

2   x P.Co    - Queen Street/Cheapside Precinct/New Street.

2   x P.C.    - Market Street/Peel Square/Wellington Street.

2   x P.C.    - Eldon Street (full length)/ The Arcade/Market Hill.


At 5.30 pm    -   To be dismissed by Serial Sergeant at Phase III
                  locations on instructions from Chief Inspector
                  on duty.
                    APPENDIX    b

                    TRACK   DUTIES


on the Playing Area Track


Prevent spectators sitting or standing on the boundary
walls or fencing; or climbing any structure; no one
must be allowed to have legs on the playing area side
of the track perimeter wall.


Officers will be spaced evenly on the perimeter track.
Where applicable, such officers will be in close
proximity to any gates/openings separating the
playing area and track from the spectators' enclosures.


No unauthorised person must be permitted to encroach
upon the pitch/perimeter track before, during or after
the match. Any person doing so will be detained and
taken to the Police Room. Officers will not pursue
such offenders but will wait until they return to re­
enter the spectators* enclosures. In the event of anyone
persisting in remaining on the playing area, the nearest
senior officer will authorise the action to be taken.
Only in the case of extreme urgency to prevent injury
or grave disorder will spectators be transferred from
one part of the ground to another via the track.


Spectators will not be allowed to remain in passageways
adjacent to entrances and exits, or to be in terrace or
stand gangways. Persons seen to be so remaining will be
directed to move.


Officers will face the crowd :

   Until kick off                      This will be indicated
                                       by the Senior Officer
   Whenever a goal is scored           at the entrance to the
                                       players1 tunnel,
   Whenever there is a                 stepping onto the
   serious stoppage of                 track.
   play

   Two minutes before half-
   time and two minutes
   before the final whistle


In the event of a localised disorder in the crowd - only
officers at the section concerned will face the crowd.
                            APPENDIX   5

DUTIES OF OFFICERS ON TURNSTILE DUTIES


(l)     Maintain order, ensure that orderly queues form. Be aware
        of the need to prevent theft of cash from turnstile attendants.


(2)     Vigilant watch to be kept on all persons entering the ground
        to prevent visiting supporters entering those parts of ground
        reserved for home supporters and in no circumstances should
        Barnsley supporters be allowed access to the Kop. Visitors
        may try to hide scarves and favours until access gained.
        Random checks should be made, supporters searched and
        spoken to with a view to identifying 'foreign accents*.


(3 )    Under no circumstances must any person be allowed to take
        bottles, cans, toilet rolls, or other potential missiles
        or banners, flags or other devices fastened to sticks into
        the ground.


(k)     An Officer who confiscates any article because of this
        prohibition, will do so on the understanding that it may
        be reclaimed after the match and he must therefore ;

        (a)   Obtain the owner's name and address.

        (b)    Ensure that the owner is aware of the location
              of the Police Room.

        (c)   Hand the item into the Police Room (and nowhere
              else) where it will be labelled with the name
              and address of its owner and the detail of the
              Officer.*

        (d)   Any property not collected by its owner after
              the match will be dealt with as found property.


(5)     Security of cash

        Sergeants in charge of Serials on turnstile duties will each
        detail two Officers to be responsible for escorting attendants
        with cash from the turnstiles to the cash office AND WILL
        IDENTIFY THE OFFICERS CARRYING OUT THIS DUTY ON THE SERIAL
        PRO-FORMA. This duty will take place at 3*15 PM for an
        afternoon match and 7.^5 pm for an evening match. The same
        Officers will return to the 'late entry* turnstiles and
        similarly escort those attendants to the cash office. On
        completion of this the Officers will take up duty with
        their respective Serials. They will be issued with match
        control personal radios, call signs to be the Serial number
        followed by the Officer's collar number.
                                    APPENDIX 6


MISCELLANEOUS

Mounted Department
Four Mounted Department Officers will report to Barnsley Football Club at l.JJ pm,
for briefing by Chief Inspector Dixon*

Dog Section

Four Officers will parade at Oakwell for the main briefing at 1,00 pm., where
specific instruction will be given for their duties. One Officer to be on duty
at all times at the cash office from 3 * 0 0 pm., to when cash is collected at
approximately 5 * 1 5 pro*

Match Control

P.S.             assisted by P.C,

Match Control will be from the Police Radio Room adjacent to entrance ’A* behind
the main stand.

Radios will be issued to those Officers specified in Appendix 7 and P.C.----------
will cause a record of the issue and return to be kept.

All radios to be returned to Barnsley Divisional Headquarters. Match Control will
open immediately after the briefing and will close when Chief Inspector Dixon
has no further use for the control.

Police Room

P.S.               - Officer in Charge and will attend the briefing at 1.00 pm. He
will1 oe assisted oy P.CJ          kho will report to the Police Room at 1.00 pm.

C.E. Topliffe to be in the Sub-Divisional Transit vehicle next to the Police Room
and will work under the direction of P.S»|   '       |

Charge Office - Barnsley Divisional Headquarters

P.S             the Duty Control Room Sergeant will be in charge.   He will approach
the Duty Inspector for further assistance should the need arise.

Duties are laid down in a separate instru*tion which will be available in the
Charge Office.

Duty is from 2.00 p.m., until all prisoners are dealt with.

Sub-Divisional CID

D.C.
D.C,

To parade at ground at 2.00 pm., and report to Duty Inspector.

Will deal with reports of crime and be readily available throughout. To report
to P.S.|----'------^t the Police Room at the final whistle, and travel back to
Divisional Headquarters in the P*lice transit.
#
                              APPENDIX 7

    SERIAL   RANK NO, NAME   DIVISION      RADIO CALL SIGN   MEAL TIME

    1   .    P*S«
             P.C,
                                           SIERRA 5/1

             P.C.
             P.C,
             P.C.
             P.C,                                            ALL NO
             P.CJ            ALL                             MEAL
             P.C,            B.2
             P.C.            DIV
             P.C,
             P.C,

    2   .    P.S                           SIERRA 5/2
             P.C

             P»C
             P.C
             P.C             ALT.
                                                             ALL NO
             P.C             B.
                                                             MEAL
             P.C             DIV.
             P.C
             P.C
             P.C

             P.S                           SIERRA 5/3
             P.C
             P.C
             P.C
             P.C                                             ALL
             P.C             ALL                             MEAL
             P.C             No. 2                           12 NOON
             P.C             PSU
             P.C
             P.C
             P.C

             P.S.                          SIERRA 5/k
             P.C.
             P.C.
             P.C.
             P.C.            ALL                             ALL
             P.C.            No. 2                           MEAL
             P.C.            PSU                             12 NOON
             P.C.
             P.C.
             P.C.

             P.S.                          SIERRA 5/5        NO MEAL
             P.C.                                            NO MEAL
             P.C.                                            NO MEAL
             P.C.                                            NO MEAL
             P.C.            ALL                             NO MEAL
             P.C.            B.                              MEAL 12   NOON
             P.C.            DIV                             MEAL 12   NOON
             P.C.                                            MEAL 12   NOON
             P.C.                                            MEAL 12   NOON
             P.C.                                            MEAL 12   NOON
                                                                                       #

SERIAL     BANK NO. NAME             DIVISION      RADIO CALL SIGN             MEAL TIME

6.         p.s                                     SIERRA 5/6            )
           P.C
           P.C
           P.C
           P.C                                                       0
           P.C                       ALL                                 )     ALL
           P.C                                                                 NO
                                     B.l                                 )
           P.C                       DIV                                 )     MEAL
           P.C
           P.C
           P.C

MISCELLANEOUS

Mounted Department

           P.C.                                                       )
           P.C.                                                       )      ALL
           P.C.                                                       ) .    NO MEAL
           P.C.                                                       )•

Dog Section
           P.S                                                        ) '
           P.C                                                        )      ALL
           P.C                                                        )      NO MEAL
           P.C                                                        )

Match Control
           P.S                      B.l
           P.C                      B.l                               )      NO MEAL
                                                                      )      NO MEAL
Police Room
                                    B.l                               )      NO MEAL
                                    B.                                )      NO MEAL

Staff Officer
                                    B.                                )      NO MEAL

           To report to Superintendent Williams for specific instructions at
           Oakwell at 1 . 0 0 p.m.

Reserves

                                                                               ALL NO MEAL

           Parade, at Oakwell at 1.00 pm
To 1/VftkfftfrD




                                     _

it&A   ST.        !   1^*           £6.


                             §r9/
                            sixI
                                             0 A                    /y o T jg ,/? ^ .L                                   :;:■



                                                                  & 2 Z O & A ;




                                                                 e / / V ^ i?                   T " ^ a c /c
                                             « ss

        3
        j,
                  V / j *■</*/£
        t
        ©                         6                                                                                                            4?
                  StLPfio%f&6$                                                                                                                 /
        M                         *                                                                                                            *af
                                  iS>                                                                                                           2>
                                                                                                                                               jT
        >
                  'Sffi Of*-/     /*
        X?
        w             A?®A        J                                                                                                            A"        M * i£ >   S-T/ifiJJtz
        •j?                                                                                                                                    &
        -r'                       £                                                                                                             42.
         /                        4r
        X                                                                                                                                      #
    %
JZ      222 Z Z
3       ■ZZS5 3 ^ .

                                                                             ’Ci&Ag I
                                            ~Tds?K<,4&£                    :#ysM$ |                         T g                 c^sf
                                                                              ***?i£w*%*»ji
                                            5ftfrSG£       ^                                           £234**
               KOOM
                                        KM£LShiite
                                                                                          '-•'Y <JV" /,




                                                               <^vi
                                                                                                                                               /2/3/4L        f/fs *9 2.*
                                                                             7        9                          <? to
                                                                                                                                       *yr®              S 'rV ?££Jz.7’ M / Z T /& /Z & *
                                                       *                                                                                      >9 w    ^^r^s^wc-T
                                                                                * siH ?sssaasas^ -es^ 8 ® ir-i
t                                                                             APPENDIX 9

                                                                      GROUND R EG ULATIO NS



         A l l m a tc h e s a r e p la y e d i n a c c o rd a n c e w i t h th e                              R u le s        and R e g u la tio n s               of   th e
         F o o t b a ll A s s o c ia t io n and The F o o t b a ll L e a g u e .


2   .    P la y c a n n o t b e g u a ra n te e d t o                    ta k e p la c e on a n y p a r t i c u l a r d a y o r a t a n y
         p a r t i c u l a r t i m e a n d t h e C lu b                  r e s e r v e s th e r i g h t to change i t s a d v e r t is e d
         fix tu r e s        w ith o u t n o tic e            and w it h o u t            lia b ility .


3.       No r e f u n d        of    any      cash       a d m is s io n        c h a rg e      w ill       b e m ade.


k.       U n a u th o r is e d       p e rs o n s      a re      not     p e r m itte d         to     e n te r upon           e ith e r       th e       p la y in g
         a re a    or     th e      tra c k       s u r r o u n d in g     th e      p la y in g       a re a .


5°       W ith     th e      e x c e p tio n       o f a u th o r is e d          P re s s      r e p r e s e n ta tiv e s         h o ld in g          o ffic ia l
         p a s s e s , th e         t a k in g o f p h o to g ra p h s o r c in e p h o to g ra p h y in s id e th e g ro u n d i s
         p r o h ib it e d .          I n a d d i t i o n , n o r e c o r d i n g w h e t h e r f o r R a d io o r T e l e v i s i o n a n d
         w h e th e r     fo r      tr a n s m is s io n         or    o th e r w is e       is      .p e r m itte d       save     w it h         a s p e c ia l
         a u th o r is a t io n         in    w r itin g         by    th e     C lu b .


6.       O n ly    p e rs o n s      s p e c ific a lly           a u th o r is e d        in     w r itin g          by   th e    C lu b      a re       p e r m itte d
         to    o ffe r       N e w s p a p e rs ,      P e r io d ic a ls         o r any         o th e r A r tic le s            fo r     s a le        in     th e
         G ro u n d .


 7*      U n n e c e s s a ry n o is e su ch a s                  t h a t fr o m t h e u s e o f R a d io s e t s a n d b e h a v io u r
         l i k e l y t o c a u s e c o n fu s io n                o r n u is a n c e o f a n y k i n d i n c l u d i n g f o u l and
         a b u s iv e     la n g u a g e      is     n o t p e r m itte d            in    any p a rt            of    th e    G ro u n d *


 8.      The      c lim b in g       of      flo o d lig h t          p y lo n s ,     s ta n d s      or    o th e r b u ild in g s               in     th e     G ro u n d
         is    fo r b id d e n .


 9.      The      c o n s u m p tio n        of     in to x ic a tin g          liq u o r s       is     p e r m itte d         o n ly    in       th e     b a rs      cT
         o th e r a u th o r is e d           p la c e s .


10   .   B o ttle s ,        g la s s e s , f l a g s , b a n n e rs              and o th e r s im ila r a r t ic l e s in c lu d in g
         a n y th in g       w h ic h c o u ld o r m ig h t b e                   used a s a weapon a re n o t p e r m itte d
         w ith in       th e     G ro u n d .


11   .   U nder no           c ir c u m s ta n c e s        is    it     p e r m itte d         to     th ro w        a n y o b je c t      on       to     th e
         p itc h .


12   .   In    g e n e ra l      th e     r ig h t     of     a d m is s io n        is    re s e rv e d         to    th e     C lu b    m a n a g e m e n t.


13.      T h e C lu b r e s e r v e s t h e r i g h t f o r i t s                         s e r v a n t s a n d a g e n t s a n d f o r m e m b e rs
         o f th e p o l i c e f o r c e s t o re m o v e fr o m                           t h i s g ro u n d a n y p e r s o n w ho d o e s n o t
         c o m p ly w i t h g r o u n d r e g u l a t i o n s a n d w i t h t h e r u l e s a n d                                 r e g u la t io n s o f The
         F o o t b a ll A s s o c ia tio n and The F o o t b a ll L e a g u e o r w hose                                          p re s e n c e on th e
         g ro u n d     is     or     c o u ld      r e a s o n a b ly     be     c o n s id e r e d        as    c o n s titu tin g           a     s o u rc e       of
         d a n g e r,     n u is a n c e      o r annoyance                to     o th e r      s p e c ta to rs .


1^.      A l l p e rs o n s e n te r in g t h is                  g ro u n d a r e a d m itte d o n ly s u b je c t t o th e a b o ve
         G ro u n d R e g u la tio n s and t o                    th e R u le s a n d R e g u la t io n s o f T h e F o o t b a l l
         A s s o c ia t io n and o f The F o o t b a ll L e a g u e .         E n t r y t o th e G ro u n d s h a l l                                            be
         deem ed t o c o n s t i t u t e u n q u a l i f i e d a c c e p ta n c e o f a l l th e s e R u le s and
         R e g u la tio n s .




         O a k w e ll
         B a r n s le y .
                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                            'C   DIVISION


                  M IN STREET POLICE STATION


                            ROTHERHAM


■til OPERATION ORDER Cl/ 3                                 ' MATCH CATEGORY C


            ROTHERHAM UNITED V LINCOLN CITY


              Saturday 1 September 198 ^



                     KICK G7F _I5pq hours* __




      R o t h e ^ a ® United vill play      Lincoln City       at Millmoor,

      /; r.otal oi ^500           spoccators are expected cit this game.
      O' sr.eae c.OO^-hJO     wt >2 be nvay supporters, their team
      colony's being        ' red and white
      A.vay speoi;aeons s.:o expected to travel In the following manner:

      A.,     Coaches             Two or three ’Wings* coaches
      B»      Special   Trains    Nil
             £"'
      C.      Service   Trains    Nose expected
      D.      Other means         Private transport

      The away supporters will be accommodated in the Railway End,
      of the ground - TOTAL SEGREGATION

      Previous hastory ox avay suppcr'cers:- Gexieral3ywell, behaved

      Require cor.Bs.ant supervision before, during and after game.

      INTENTION

      It is cne xnicntion ox the Police to allow this match to take
      place end to ensure public order and safety both inside knd
      outside the ground; to segregate and control opposing fans
      and prevent unnecessary obstruction of the highway and damage
      to property, .inns v:ill be attaxnod and displayed vi th a. high
      standard of smartness and profossionalisivu
 *

                                    -   2 -

          METHOD

3.1.      '     Superintendent .         ............... will be in overall
          command.
                           Brown
          Superintendent ....................... will be in charge of all
          officers outside and inside the ground.

          fibxeScInspector ..»VfekstST .......... will be responsible for
          Police Operations outside the ground.

3°2 ‘
    >     OPERATIONAL PHASES

3.2.1.    Phase 1 Before kick off - which will include arrangements
           for public order patrols and the escorting and segregation
           of supporters until they enter into the stadium.

3.2.2.    Phase 2 During the match from kick    off to 10 minutes before
           the end of the game.

3«2o3<*   Phase 5 From 10 minutes before the end of the game until all
           the crowd and traffic have dispersed,,

          Duties to be performed are to be shown in appendices.

     3c   PARADING OM DUTY

          All officers will report for duty to the Police Room situated
          at the Railway End. Entrance to the ground is viii the
          Directors and Players entrance.

          They v.dll attend at the ground at ...               »... » ..

3.^.      BBIEFIKG

3.^.1.    Prior to going on duty all officers will be briefed generally
           by the Officer in Command of the operation as to the
           requirements of the event and intelligence received.

3.^.2.    Inspector in Charge of Sectors are toensure   that the serial
           Sergeants complete the de-briefing forms and returnthem to
          Cl Control Main Street Police Station.

3«5.'     CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION DEPARTMENT

3.5.1.    Two members of C.I.l). will be on duty at the ground. They
           will remain in radio contact with control at all time. All
           complaints of crime made in connection with this game will
          be dealt with by them, as will all prisoners arrested for
           criminal offences. They will also gather information in
           licensed premises, etc., regarding the mood of supporters
          and identify to uniform officers persons in possession of
           offensive weapons, etc.
SPECIAL CONSTABULART

Members of the Special Constabulary will be on duty at this
match. They will be employed on duties determined by the
Senior Officers.

DOG SECTION

Members of the dog section will be on duty - they will mainly
be used as a deterrent before and after the match on the route
to the ground, at the coach park and in the event of special
trains to Masborough, escort supporters to and from the
ground, also to attend at the Frederick Street Bus Station
after the game.

They will not normally be used in public order situations but
the Officer in Command has the over-riding discretion to use
dogs in such circumstances if he feels a serious public order
situation may occur.

MOUNTED SECTION

Members of the mounted section will be on duty. They will be
emi”oycd outside the ground to maintain c^der, segregate fans
and escort them to and from the Ma&’
                                   oorough Railway Station.

During the game they   will be in the ground where they can be
seen by the majority   of supporters. Their deployment will be
at the discretion of   the Officer in Command, in consultation
with the Sergeant in   charge of mounted Officers.

POLICE ROOM

An Officer will be in charge of the Police Room. He will be
assisted by a team of Officers shown in Appendix •A*.

PRISONERS

All persons arrested or detained in the ground or the vicinity
thereto will be taken to the Police Room where the Officers
in charge will enquire into the circumstances and decide
what action is to be taken.

If the evident warrants only action under the Ground Rules,
the name and address of the detained person      will be recorded
and he will be ejected from the ground (see Appendix *F* for
Gxound Rules).

Where the evidence justifies an offence for which the prisoner
wil3. be charged or reported on summons, he will be photographed
with the arresting Officer.

Hie prisoner will be searched and his property listed and
placed in a property log. Any property subject of a charge
will be listed separately.

The prisoners details will then be entered on a pro-forma FB1
and a copy given to the arresting Officer who will resume duty.
                                      - 4 -

 3*9.6.     The prisoners will be conveyed to the designated Police
             Station whd.cn is H a m Street. Ho will be accompanies! by
             pro-forraa FBI, property and photograph.

 3.9.7.     A team of officers will be on duty at the designated Police
             Station who will receive prisoners,, They will verify identity
             and, where necessary, complete antecedent history, fingerprints
             and photograph the prisoner. They will also complete form
             Gen.: 29 (record of detention and charge)*

 3*9.8.     A member of the reception squad on duty at the designated
            Station will charge the prisoner with the offence outlined
             on FBI and bail him to attend court on

             The question of bail will be considered on its merits in
             accordance with the Bail Act, 1975. No person should be
             released until his identity and residence have been
             satisfactorily verified. The Prosecution Inspector will
             advise as to suitable dates.

            The officer who charges a person will complete the pro-forma
            statement FB2 which will be attached to the file.

3.9.9.      Any juvenile arrested will be detained at Main Street Police
            Station, separate from adult prisoners. They will be
            •processed in the same method as adults and their- parents
            informed and, where possible, requested to collect them.
            They will normally be reported on summons.

3.9.10.    Arresting officers will complete short form file Gen.  28 (FB)
            which will be submitted to Cl Sub Division within 7 days,

3«9°il®     Where a ’not guilty5 plea is entered, the arresting officer
            ana witnesses will be required to submit s full CJ Act
            statement.

3-10.      MATCH CONTROL .

            Match control for this game will be in the Police Control
            Room wnich is situated in the Main Stfmd/'R.'n      Evid corner
            of the ground. Police Sergeant                       will be in
            charge, assisted by Police Constable]          17.............
            (see Appendix    ).

3.H.       TRAFFIC CONTROL

            Will be manned by members of Cl Sub Division.    The points
            are shown in Appendix 'B*.

3.11.1.    Traffic Points

            Will be manned by members of Cl Sub Division,,   The points are
            shown in Appendix 1B !,

,3.11.2.   Traff ic JDivision

            Members of the motor cycle wing will be on duty to ensure free
            passage on main roads loading to and from the ground and assist
            with escorting visiting supporters coaches, and escort the team
            coach from the Borough boundary and vice versa after the game,,

3c-11.3.   -No Parking Cones    Coach Park Signs

           'These will be placed in accordance with Appendix fB !„   It will
 be the responsibility of the Duty Inspector to ensure that
 the cones and signs are put out and. collected.

 Coaches

 Carrying away supporters will be parked in Armor Street.

OBSTRUCT!ON OF THE HIGHWAY

Persons selling badges or goods and obstructing the highway
should be moved oil, but if they persist they should be
arrested and dealt with accordingly. The driver of any car
causing obstruction etc., will be reported, and if the costruction
is serious the vehicle will be moved by Traffic Division, Whore
the obstruction is so serious as to warrant the vehicle’s removal,
blie consent of the Inspector or above must be obtained before
this is done and arrangements made by the match control.

BSiIROEMCY PHECSDHREg

In uue event of an emergency situation arising in the ground
iie fire or bomb call; which may require evaluation of all
or part of the ground., the following precedure will be followed:

On instruction xrom Ground Control Officers on the perimeter
io.ll open the wall gates and evacuate the crowd to the centre
of the-pitch.

ADMINISTRATION

BSS3S

All male Officers, except dog handlers and mounted Officers,
on duiv\ as such, -wvll wear uniform including helmets with chin
straps down. I-’emale Officers should wear slacks. All should
oe in possession of Po.li.ce. anorak raincoats in case of
inclement weather. Constables working traffic points will
wear the appropriate high visibility clothing over their
uniform.

TRmSF’OJlT

Wnere Officers attend in Poli.ce transit vehicles the keys must
be handed in to Control, whether the vehicle is to be used in
the operation or not. All such vehicles and other official
Police vehicles will be parked ini the area behind the gymnasium,

                           seised

V^ere searches are carried out at the turnstiles, or elsewhere
      proper by temporarily seised, the person frcn< whom the property
J'c .        .should be informed of the seising Officer’s collar number
an,cl ynere it Hay be collected from (the Police Room) after the
              x'2'"'.Oi-Lioi-jr acune; possession of the property i-iust affin.
t            ls-!-‘
                  -•h. one name \.onfy) of the e w e ? prior to .handing it in
            foi.iee^ koo!!^ It will bo the responsibility of the Officer
-.ii cee.o-ge o.i m e Po tice. Poor to list property so deposited and
r":Y^T:1 io t'10 »^er^ against signature, Any property not claimed
        L..^ taken co n m n Street Police Station and treated as ^Pore-e
Property.'
   REFRESHMENTS

   Liquid refreshments will be available during this duty in
   the groundsman's store adjacent to the Police Room. Sergeants
   will ensure that members of their serial stagger their
   refreshment break so only two at any time are released. This
   facility is subject to the exigencies of duty,

   MAPS

   Large scale maps are on display in the Police Room showing the
   ground and surrounding district.

   REPORTING OFF DUTY

   It will be the responsibility of each serial Sergeant to
   report the whole of his serial 1off duty1 or account for any
   person missing*.’ No one will go off duty without the consent
   of Control. The serial Sergeant must complete a Serial Return
   and submit it to the Main Street Police Station at the Lstand-
   down.1


    COMMUNICATIONS

    Radio communications inside the ground will be available via
    Ground Control which is situated on the Main Stand side of the
    Railway Stand, above the Police Room.

    Communications in the town and surrounding areas will be
    available from Cl Control Room on UHF and VHF channels.

    The collar number and name of officer to be used when
    transmitting messages via UHF or VBF channels.

    All supervisory and certain other officers will be issued with
    Ground Control radios.

    Ground Control will have UHF contact with Cl control and will
    be further equipped with a telephone link on the CPO national
    network,, Force Control have a monitoring capability of all
    VHF and UHF communications. ’C* Division Operational functions
    will continue independently of Ground Control using normal
    UHF transmissions and VHF transmissions.

    A loud hailer is available for use by Inspectors in addressing
    the crowd. This will be kept in the Ground Control Room.

    An incident log will be maintained at Ground Control Office
    covering incidents involving football supporters.




Sup erintendent
                     DISTRIBUTION LIST




Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)

Chief Inspector, Operations (Football Liaison)

Chief Superintendent, C Division

Superintendent, C Division (Deputy)

Superintendent, C1 Sub Division

Superintendent, C2 Sub Division

Superintendent, C3 Sub Division

Superintendent, Traffic Support (Operational Supervision)

Superintendent, Operations (Mounted and Dogs)

Control Room, C1 Sub Division

Inspectors I/C Sectors

Special Constabulary, Sob Di^istoruxX Of fl o w C1

C1 CID
INDEX TO APPENDICES AMI) SCHEDULE OF NUMBERS INVOLVED

APPENDIX 'A’                       DUTIES

APPENDIX »Br                 "      TRAi’FIC POINTS

APPENDIX ’C                   •    SPECIAL CONSTABULARY DUTIES

APPENDIX »D'                       MOUNTED AND DOG SECTION

APPENDIX «E'                       MAPS

APPENDIX !F<             .         GROUND RULES

APPENDIX SG 1                      MEAL ARRANGEMENTS


SCHEDULE SHOWING NUMBERS OF OFFICERS INVOLVED

                                 CH/SUPT    SUPT      CI-I/INSP   INSP   SGT          PC

GROUND (INCLUDING RESERVE)                   1                     1         if       i+O

PUBLIC ORDER

MOBILE           '                                                           1    2

CONTROL   &POLICE ROOM                                                       1         2

ADMINISTRATION (INCLUDING
  TRAFFIC POINTS)

C.IoD.                                                             2 (if availab

DOG SECTION                                                              2

PRISONER RECEPTION AT
  MAIN STREET


MOUNTED BRANCH                                                           -             k
                                                                                           APPENDIX ’A ’                                   '                                t
                                                                                                                                                                                      V     _       ’ .




OVERALL'COMMAND                                                                              CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT............. ... .> » f
                                                                                                                                 V J
GROUND COMMAND                                                                               SUPERINTENDENT . _ ???«?. »              ..

                                                                                            342&ESB INSPECTOR .. )£}>?$??.,.. . .. . .

PUBLIC ORDER COMMA!'©                                                                        SUPERINTENDENT                                                                                                      .

ADMINISTRATION                                                                               INSPECTOR ........ .
                                                                                                                W fKs.b.
                                                                                                                       eor.

CATERING                                                                                     INSPECTOR ............................*..■

POLICE ROOM                                                                                  INSPECTOR

                                                                                             SERGEANT .........                                                                       >« O O •             1

                                                                                             PCs             ,

PRISONER SUPERVISION & TRANSPORT                                                             PC                                PC oe.ao..0o PC ooo.is.oaeo

                                                                                             PC ......                         PC ......... PC ..........

GROUND CONTROL ROOM                                                                          SERGEANT

                                                                                             PC's ....

PRISONER PROCESS

Main Street Police Station                                                                   SERGEANT                                     > 0 0 . 0 0 0 0



                                                                                             PC
                                                                                             J*      ^ o c . o e          .0   PC 0 0. 000000 PC                       X.,




                                                                                             PC .......                   .. PC ......... PC ..

C.I.D.




                                      J 9 UO OOOO            DO
                                                             —'       «< O O 0                                     0.0 DC                   o a o o o o e j o d


T'P 0000000 000                       s e o o o * © ©        XJ J     t, O f>C                                     .•00 DC ...                                              o o » o . « o . <



                              Vet
INSPECTOR                             lTeo sc e o o ^ o w tv
                                                          JV‘
                                                            Jnr
                                                             *.V                                                          . SERIALS                       A11 serial®
                                                                                                                                                   OUC O « O O C O C |


INSPECTOR                 0 0 ©       i t O Q C O O O U O O
                                                                     T'T1r
                                                                     UJ^'J                        c , o oe. « 0 o 0 0 c        S E R IA L S        o


T      T3TV’/~,ri‘OT)     C C C'      •ooowoooroo TD;                                             . . . . . . . . . .          S E R IA L S -..


I INd P1-jC xQ R                      s a «>•    a » c     a a o     33.L.V                       *000000000 SiiuilALS                             a a a © ©© o o » o ©             0 © e> e        » ©o


INSPECTOR                 . . 0       j o o c . o o o o ^ o o        D _ {J      o c - e o t ' o c o o T o                     SERIALS
 M QurliA^
Txi
_L
     ppp n vv-jyin
          .1     <                    joc-oaoooroo I.i.i/                                              r wQO*noD               SiiiRlAjjS          » o o c o e o o o c o a o o ^ o e a


T K TQ ' p V P ‘T-.'-jp
          i/w'.LUA        0 0 0       »cooooop»-*o                   T'TVVr
                                                                                                       oot>«oci>o              S i!jR .i_ A L o    o o o b p o o o o o -o V f o o o » «


I IvSi’
      HjL/Tu R            0 <3. <»    *^0000000               •>«*
                                                                     PTU
                                                                     -i>... v                          ■ -..eoeoo SERIALS                                              >o   o a »     e,»       o *s & t




INSPECTOS                 ©   0   0   •   00004      r.< c o o t *                                     COOOOOO*                SERIALS             O         i ? 0 OOOBOO« O« <- <<» O


INSPECTOR 0 0 e                       ■ *   k*   a o -        - *    J'!JV                             e o |0 o i j a 9   u    oHiRIi'i.XjS        0 0   & o © o   ® «s» t* o   o «   0 0       o   ^     «• «
                           GROUND - PERIMETER TRACK

                    PHASES 1, 2 & 3 (THROUGHOUT THE DUTY)

   SERIAL 1

   Sergeant                      I/C of serial.

   Constable                     This unit will be responsible for policing
                                 the playing pitch area, the passageway at
   Constable                     the junction formed by the Main Stand and
                                 Tivoli Stand and the wall on Millmoor Lane
   Constable                     Stand which overlooks Millmoor Lane.

   Constable                     Officers will be positioned as shown on the
                                 map below and will take up their positions
    Constable                    as soon as the ground is open to the public„

   Constable                     Just before half time and shortly before the
                                 final whistle officer No, 8 will join officer
    Constable                    No. 7 at. the Players and Officials entrance
                                 onto the pitch and guarantee them uninterrupted
    Constable                    passage.,
                                 Before the commencement of the game and
    Constable
                                 immediately upon completion, officer No. 10
                                 will be positioned on the high ground behind.
    Constable
                                 Millxioor Stand looking dov/n onto Millmoor
                                 Lane. His duty will be to prevent spectators
                                 from throwing, spitting etc onto persons
                                 using Millmoor Lane below, During the actual
                                 game he will patrol Millmoor Lane Stand and
                                 prevent spectators climbing on the floodlight
                                 pylon.
                                 Officer No. 9 will police the narrow entrance
                                 and steps at the corner formed by the Main Stand
                                 and Tivoli Stand and prevent spectators from
                                 blocking this route* He will also prevent
                                 persons from climbing on the nearby floodlight
                                 pylon-

                                 Following the match Serial No. 1 should
                                 remain in position until the ground has
                                 cleared.


                        MILLMOOK LANE STAND
                      10




TIVOLI                                                                  RAILWAY
END                                                                     END



                8
         9
                              main stand
                                                                 | POLICE OFfe’lCJ
 SERIAL 2

 Sergeant                        I/C Serial.

   notable                       jQ police main entrance paying particular
                                  attention to turnstiles. The officers to
                                  remain at turnstiles until all cash has
                                  been counted and taken to ground general
                                  office,,

 Constable
                                 To be positioned at the corner of Masbrough
                                 Street/Victoria Street,,

 Constable
                                 To be positioned on Coronation Bridge, on
                                 the side overlooking station approach.
                                 Prevent persons throwing, etc. onto others
                                 below*  The away team coach is parked on
                                 land over Coronation Bridge. Particular
                                 attention to be given to this vehicle before
                                 and after the match to prevent damage.

              2 on co®ffl©nceraent of the game, except those two officers on
 T otT rH T CT \        y!> W X U rep°rt to eround Police 0ffice to act as reserve,
 o "       " • bef°r e .«ie end of the game they will take up the positions they
 o c c u p y prior t o x h e match. As soon as cash has been counted and taken to
                two oilicers on turnstile duty to rejoin the serial-..


SERIAL 5

Sergeant                         j/c Serial.

Con.-tacieo                      To be positioned on the spare land at the
                                 iear Ox Armer Street to meet coaches bringing
                                 supporters from away.

Constables
                                 To patrol the narrow public footpath leading
                                 from the coach park to the Railway End Stand.
                                 ■They^ should prevent damage and the throwing
                ______________     °~      missiles and anyone suspected of picking
                                 up/carrying stones etc. should be searched"
                                 before being allowed into the ground.

Constables
             _____________________ To be positioned in Millmoor Lane at the
                                 entrance to the Railway End Stand to ensure
                                 that all away supporters off the coaches are
                                 directed into that stand. Under no circumstances
                                 should they be allowed up M il l m o o r lane into
                                 the stands^occupied by supporters of the home
                                 team. Similarly, Rotherham supporters should
                                 not be allowed down Millmoor Lane into the
                                 Railway Stand.
On commencement of the game Serial No. 3 will take up duties in the Railway
toke°^     H   '' T        °re the end °f the Same they will leave that stand
V                tney occupied prior to the game and ensure that awav
supporters are directed and escorted back to the coaches by the same”route.
SERIAL   k
Sergeant                  l/C Serial

Coastabl<                 To be positioned at junction of Station Road/
                          Victoria Street
Constabl<                 To be positioned at junction Station Road/
                          Princess Street
Constable                 To be positioned at junction of Princess
                          Street/College Road (cover nearby railway
                          bridge) to junction with James Street
Constable    ~            To be positioned at the junction of Victor-ia
                          Street/College Road
Constable    -       '    To be positioned at the junction of Albert
                          Street/College Road and patrol to James
                          Street junction

On commencement of the game Serial No. k will report to Ground Police
Office to be deployed as directed. Ten minutes before the end of the game
they will leave their deployment and take up the positions they
ocrapic d prior to the game*


SERIAL 3

Sergeant                  l/C   Serial

Constable                 This serial will be responsible for policing
Constable                 the Railway End Stand.
Constable
Constable
Constable
Constable
Constable
Constable
Constable
Constable
SERIAL 6

Sergecnt                     l/C Serial.

Constabl                     This serial will be responsible for policing
                             the Tivoli Stand.
Constabl
Constabl
Constabl
Constabl
Constabl
Constabl
Constabl
Constabl
Constable
Serial No. 6 should remain in the Tivoli Stand until it is clear of
spectators following the game. They should then assist officers at the
front of the ground until the crowd has dispersed.




Sergeant      Kot raanM!a    I/O Serial.

Constables                   To be positioned at College Road Traffic
                             Island

C G ;'3 CrW J_CS             To be positioned at junction Main Street/
                             Westgate.
Constables                   To be positioned at Tiffanys Island.

This serial to remain outside the ground throughout the game, patrolling
the side street unless called into the ground to give assistance* They will
resume their pre-match points 20 minutes before the end of the game.


SERIAL 6

Sergeant                     l/C Serial.

Const able:                  To patrol in Transit - town area and
                             central bus station.
Constable
Constable
Constable
Constable
During the match, v;hen the streets have cleared of football supporters, the
above personnel will form a reserve and give assistance at Millmoor if
required.  They will resume their pre-match points 20.minutes before the
end of the gs/.ie..
                                APPENDIX 'B'


                               TRAFFIC CONTROL




BEFORE AND AFTER THE MATCH

1.           Station Road junction with Masborough Street

2.           Victoria Street junction with College Road.

3.           Princess Street junction with College Road

if.          Pool Green Traffic Island (Tiffany’s)

5.           College Road Traffic Island

6.           Coronation Bridge junction with Victoria Street

 „           Victoria Street junction with Ftation Road



      WAITING CONES AND COACH PARK SIGNS

No waiting'cones and coach park signs will be placed as follows three
hours prior to a football game being played at Millmoor Football Ground.

No-Waiting Cones - Masbrough' Street on both sides from Millmoor Football
Ground to the Telecommunications Buildings, St. Bedes Road, Ferham Road
from Sarah. Street to Devonshire Street, Princess Street, Station Road,
Victoria Street and Masbrough Street surrounding the Tivoli Block.

Coach Park Signs will be placed at Tiffany13 traffic island and points
leading to Armer Street.

These cones and signs vd.ll be collected immediately after half time of
the football match.

Duty Group Inspectors will ensure that there is a sufficient number of
No Waiting Cones for each particular football game.
                               APPENDIX 'C'




SPECIAL CONSTABULARY DUTIES

Duties will be allocated to members of the Special Constabulary,

who attend for duty in connection with this event in accordance

with the below schedule.   They will cover the duties in the

numerical priority shown, and will be briefed accordingly by the

Superintendent.



1.         Patrolwall of Millmoor Lane and preventspectators   from
           interfering with visiting supporters in Millmoor Lane.

2.         Patrol parked vehicles in vicinity ofFootball Ground.

           Pay particular attention to turnstiles in Millmoor Lane
           prevent any interference with turnstile operators.

4.         Patrol   area of Team Coach Car Park.

5.         Plascut yard to be pa.troll.od anH
           ground prevented.
                                   APPENDIX »D'


                      doc ; a n d m o u n t e d   section   duties



Mounted Section Duties:

Units •- one - two


Phase 1              Unit one will cover the Masborough Railway
                     Station and escort visiting supporters
                     arriving by train to the ground, on this
                     occasion there , are no-   Special Trains
                     arriving.

                     Unit two will cover the Armer Street coach park,
                     there are a total of four        coaches arriving
                     being escorted to Armer Street by members of
                     Road Traffic c.

Phase ?              During the game both units will station
                     themselves at the Millmoor Lane end of the
                     Rai]way End Stand.

Phase 3              After the game:

                     Unit one to escort the visiting supporters
                     from the Railway End along Millmoor Lane
                     into Kasborough Street and to the Railway
                     Station, where they will maintain order
                     until the Special Train departs.

                     Unit two will cover the return of the
                     visiting supporters to their coaches in
                     Armer Street.




NOTE*     Unit One - 2 horses                Unit T.v;o - 2. liorscs
i}OG AjnDJ40UI\TE]) SECTION DUTIES (Cont)




    Unit one arid two to police Armor Street Coach Park and
    lane to roar of Kailway End Stand.

    Unit three and four to police the frontage of the
    hasoorougrx Railway .8tation and to escort the visiting'
    supporters to the MiHinnoT- Football Ground, and b?»
    avaxisble for deployment by .grcs'an'd control*. : -■

    Unic one and tv.;o to station themselves at the Millmoor
    Lane end oi the Railway End Stand and to bo prepared
    i.t directed by the Ground Control to icovo onto the
    playing area perimeter„




   Unit one and two to escort the visiting supporters back
   Co the Armer Street Coach Park and remain there until
   the coaches depart.
«f!i I                 •
                       ’>’Hjiborouc-'
              r              S u tio ;i         i SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
    '       *?’
                                   </
            /•                    'O •
                                                             R o th e r h a m                U n i f e d F. C
                                                     \ / J                             °'V                             c           * / s i ! / 77^—                      **** / /

                                                     v;           p /V             /         -     'C - } ,                                                           7/         f h
                                                                                                 i»ii /"7/'^ •*                           •
                                                                                                     / / • ° //
                                                                                                   ■■///*                   / . / *jn
                                                                 /W       yPcArecosuI Church// / ~ / ,“v > ^                   U U        \          ;'v . KV':-.                    '                    '‘f
                                                              }'^jf /                              I,**        *                     ^ *                                                          ;* --1
                                                              </'S                                         /^te' ^ T r V r                                        ° -r-«^.
                                                                                                                                                                       < ^ rw
                                                                                                                                                                            ~w                    i r i «j
                                                                                                                                                                                                  *

                                                                                                                                                                             •'                   ! *1
                                                                                                                                                     L                            ..... 1

                                                                                                                                                ;1                     I f ’o iic e T r ? f
                  c v y .-                                                                                                                                             iC c ^ tr o ! H
                                                                                                                                                 i i                   «
                                                                w,                                                                                               ---   1        .. - - -t!
                                                                                                                                                                                         V
                                                                        -$*>•          :-^V        ifc i/t:*:[1 n                     iV ti UL             ,                             R
                                                                                       r           V"T*                        ? (15:':-:fzl!^r                                       —j*
                                                                                                                                             L
                                                                                                                                             -----C1.M J.                                ‘
                         Sub S ti -

                                  Coj]Merchants Yard
                                                                                                                                                                    /b     TownCsntrc?
                                                               »- 9 1
                                          V Cran<                 , '.i0:. i 3 j w - w i i s -2 2 n                         i Q          ] 1                         V ictoria
                                                                                                                                                                        Hi.M
                                                                  \             \ The V/in'|mi!(fS    f                23 - 27 S_ri
i       I
                     i-\
                                                :.:. 1 - 5
                                                         jiZii r "Ti u
                                                                      rl y v'C iw -ij p
                                                                             ^
                                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                                       • \ u ---------- IJJ
                                                                                                                                                                                             ..   \
                                              . - ff\\\\           rivoLi
                                            ,     | 1 \ \ \        T erraces
                                            .     /h
                                                     //■!,
                                          / c ./Vi } T~r


                                          / //$
                                          / -5 / N i



                                                                                                                                                     Mill m o o r W o r k s


                                                                                                                                                     Dividing Gate
                                                                                                                                                     Miilraoor Lane Stood

                                                                 Miilmoor Foctbai! Ground

                                                                                                                                                               s u p p o r t s :rs
                                                                                                                       \x            G|i
                                                                                                                                                     f.O T K eR H A M
                                                                                                                                                         {n a IttIy}
                                                                                                                                                         VISITORS
                                                                                                                                                     2 S -3 2

                                                                                                                                                     33 ~ 37
    Police C ontro' Room*'
                                                             X/A-'^yA-'VNAOX^/'v.V \.
            l-feteniionf.ioora "'
                       iT I
                                                                                                                       L T^r



                                                       ^\X^>v^      a A1LV/AY^>. EN
                                                       \ ■-. s '\ -N ■ ■■/
                                                                                    D
                                                                                 ,___ ,A.                 _^       j
                                                                                                                               j
                                                                                                                               1

                                                                                                                                               lioiii'iYoruKiff- i’oiici j- .••• '
                                                                                                                                                                                 ■
                                                                                                                                                                                 ’
                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                PI AN S. i j - p ; .          3 1 75                  .   5
♦
                                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                                                            too                               OtttrX
    fcft.                                                                                                                                                                 //• <2
                                                                      'D' DIVISION

                                                         WEST BAR POLICE STATION


            OPERATION ORDER NO:                             3FB                                                 MATCH CATEGORY:                                    'C*

                           a^TTjSTJ) U N I M D „                                                      C ^ I F F . C I T Y ______

            DATE:             1 SEPTEMBER 1984                                                                   KICK-01 .e:                        1500 hours




            1.      INFORMATION:

            1.1     rv ,
                    WXx
                              Saturday
                       o o « o o o © e o a
                                                1 September 1984
                                           s # 0 o c o o* e o o c o o o « e o o o Sheffield United will
                    play ... oQc^diff .Qi^y. oooooweoooooooeoo c>.t Bramall Lane
                    Football Ground.

                    NoB.             Information about previous macthes between the two
                                     clubs is to the effect thrv O < & © © u O © * » © 0 ® * * , 0 © Q © o o © o o                                              o o o o


                                     •ttO«A«>eeeaeeeo«6oeoeooooeeooeo0ooeeeee«eeoeeo                                                                 e « c e e e e « e

                                                                   No anticipated problems
                                                                                         v a
                                     © * > o b o o ® o o o o o o o o w o c « o o * - * o o i s o * < ^ o o c c r t .            o o o c o o a o o    0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0


                                     e f t e o e o e o e o e o e o e e o o e e ^ o o o e o e e e e e o e c o c o o e o e e e o e                     90OOO O Ot > 9


                                     o o o ® o o # o e o t > o o o o Q o e o o o c 9 0 0 ® o o » o o « i o o & o t > o o o o « > o o o               « o o o o » 0 « Q




                    INTENTION:

                    It is the intention of the police to facilitate the playing
                    of the match and to ensure public order and safety both insia;
                    and outside the ground, to segregate and control opposing
                    fans and prevent unnecessary obstruction of the highway and
                    damage to property. Every effort will be made to minimise
                    inconvenience to residents and persons travelling through
                    the area. This will be attained and displayed with a high
                    standard of smartness and professionalism®

                    METHOD:

            3.1               A/Superintendent Sumner
                     O A w e o e o o « r o * ' & e e e c t o o « > e « o c ' <» w o e o   a o o • o     ,. will be in overall
                     command.
                              Chief Inspector Plester                                                   ,. vri.ll be the officer in
                     • f i « s e « o » e t t « n « « e e e e o e o e o 0 9 o e e

                     charge inside the ground.

                              A/Inspector
                     # « • • * © ©
                                                      Beeden
                                 «*> « © • © © © • • o « o . » « > © © o © o e o © « * o o © « « #
                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                            \ / j —L - j-
                                                                                                                            hp
                                                                                                                            D   v   X t-
                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                     U J _ t?

                     for poliee operations outside the ground.

            3.2     OPERATIONAL PHASES:

                    The operation will be in three phases, vis:

            3.2.1   Phase 1               -      before kick-off .. i ^ i f . ^ ^ ’to

                    This wil?. include public order patro?_s in the. city centre and
                    vicinity of Branali Lane Football Ground; the escorting of
                    supporters from the Midland Railway Station, Fond Street Bus
                    Station and Leaclnrill Road Coach Paries; segregation of supporters
                    and the control of traffic, as outlined in Appendices ..........




                                                                                                                                                     1/8^
3*2.2      Phase 2     -   During the match from kick-off to 10 minutes before
                           the end of the game as per Appendix .... .'B.'... „.

3-2.3     Phase 3     -    From 10   minutes before the end of the game until
                            walking spectators and traffic ha/vedispersed.
                            Duties covering the dispersal are contained in
                            Appendix . 191 . §>. I P.'..

3.3       PARADING ON DUTY:

3*3»1     Oflicers will parade for duty as follows:

           .N - k officers will parade, for. duty, at. 1315ohourso9n o§aturday„.
           . k September in the. Shoreham Street,end.of.t h e . n e w. S^h^ t^n gl.




3.h       BRIEFING:

3*^.1     The briefing of officers v/ill be undertaken bv .
          .. S W P P F . ... and will be conducted in accordance with the
          guidelines contained in the Standing Instructions for the
          policing of footba.ll matches. Broad guidelines of the
          standard briefing are attached at Appendix ...I?'.... .

 .5       CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION DEPARTMENT:

3.5*1     The CID/Plain Clothes officers shown in Appendix © A e 0 6 e o e * o 0
          will perform duty in accordance with the instructions contained
          in that Appendix.

3.6       SPECIAL CONSTABULARY:

3*6.1     Members of the Special Constabulary  vri.llreport to the Police
          Room, where' they will be briefed as totheirduties.

3.7       POLICE ROOM:

3 7© 1
     J-       P*S.
          « e o e
                o o                           ... will be the officer in
          charge of the Police Room.

3*8       PRISONERS:

3*8.1     All persons arrested in the ground will be taken to the Police
          Room, where the officer in charge will enquire into the cir­
           cumstances and decide if the evidence supports the charge.
          Where a charge is accepted the prisoner vri.ll be photographed
          with the arresting officer, charged and a record of detention
          and charge form GEN/29 completed. Details will be supplied
          to the arresting officer, who v/ill then resume duty.

3*8.2     Adult prisoners will be transferred to the Charge Office,
          Bridge Street, where they v/ill be processed in accordance
          with the accompanying forms GEN/29.- Prisoners will be
          detained.until their identity has been verified and,
          dependent upon the circumstajices, they will b.e balled to
          attend Sheffield Magistrates' Court at times and dates
          supplied by the Charge Office staff.


                                                                                1/8^
 3.8.3.      Detained juveniles will be taken to West Bar Police Station,
            .where they will be dealt with in a similar manner, but kept
             separate from adults. Their parents will be requested to
             collect them and they will normally be reported on summons
             through the normal procedure for juvenile offenders, except
             in- cases of serious crime.

 3.8.^       All offenders arrested for serious criminal offences will
             be dealt with by the CID officers on duty at the ground or
             at Y/est Bar Police Station.

3.9     '   MATCH CONTROL:

3.9.1       Match Control v/ill hf> Innat.pd at -n^e Police Room and v/ill
             be manned by .,?:9:                    ...........      and
             .........................?.s,
3.10        TRAFFIC CONTROL:

3-10.1      Traffic Points          —        The traffic points as shown in Appendix
                                             'D' will be worked before and after   the
                                             match.

3.10.2      Traffic Divisions Involvement




3*1°.3       Parking Arrangements and Restrictions

             ‘No Parking' cones - The Duty Inspector, 'Dl' Sub-
            Division, will arrange for the Station Driver to position
            police 'No Parking' cones in accordance with Appendix 'D'«
            No officer v/ill give any person permission to park in
            contravention of any of the cones.

3.11        PUBLIC TRANSPORT:

            (At normal matches special transport is not provided.,)

3.11.1




3.U.2       Coaches

            The coach park in Leadmill Road v/ill be used for the parking
            of coaches. Details of officers concerned and their duties
            are shown in Appendix

3.11.3      Sheffield United Ground               -   Official Car Park, Cherry Street
            Entrance

            The Stev/ard will be on duty to prevent unauthorised entry and
            officers should assist him if required.   Care should be taken
            when allowing vehicles to leave before the end of the match.




                                                                                l/8'i
3.12     OBSTRUCTION OF THE HIGHWAY:

3.12.1   Persons selling badges or goods and obstructing the highway
         should be moved on, but if they persist they should be
         arrested and dealt with accoi'dingly. The driver of any car
         causing obstruction, etc, will be reported and if the obstruction
         is serious, the vehicle v/ill be moved by Traffic Division.
         Where the obstruction is so serious as to warrant the vehicles
         removal, the consent of an Inspector or above must be
         obtained before this is done and arrangements made by Match
         Control.

4.       ADMINISTRATION:

4.1      DRESS:

4.1.1    All male officers, except mounted officers on duty as such,
         will wear full uniform including helmets with chin straps
         down. Female officers should wear slacks. All should be in
         possession of police anoraks (in the case of females,
         Gannex raincoats) and waterproof over-trousers in case of
         inclement weather.  Constables working traffic points will
         wear the appropriate high visibility clothing over their
         uniform, which will be issued by the officer in charge of the
         Police Room at the ground.

4.2      POLICE TRANSPORT:

4.2.1    Police Officers v/ill alight from their transport in Cherry
         Street and will be picked up at the same location.   On the
         occasions when coaches are used they will park at, or near,
         V/est Bar Police Station.

4.2.2    Transit Vans

         The following Transit Vans will be used for patrol purposes
         and conveyance of prisoners before, during and after the
         match.  The drivers will report to Match Control for further
         instructions.

         1.             PSU Vehicle

         2.             PSU Vehicle

         3.             A320 HHE      *D2'

4.3      Refreshments

4.3.1      Refreshments will be provided in the Police Room • o • • <
         ##md.will^te.taken.as.directed.by.serial.sujDervisors



4.4      MAPS:

4.4.1    Maps are attached showing the layout of the ground and patrol
         areas in the vicinity of the ground.  See Appendix ’E'. Sector
         and Serial Commanders should familiarise themselves with their
         particular areas of responsibility.




                                                                1/84
                                 - 5 -


4„5     REPORTING OFF DUTY:

4.5»1   It is the responsibility of each Serial Sergeant to:

        (a)   Report the whole of his Serial off duty or account
              for any missing officer to Match Control.

        (b)   To complete the Duty Sheet (Appendix fF')and hand it
              to the Sergeant in charge of the Police R oqsji.

5.      COMMUNICATIONS:

5.1     Radio communication inside the ground will be available via
        Match Control.   Personal radio common channel 3 will be used.
        VHF radio in Transit Veins v/ill operate on channel 4. ’Dl*
        Control Room v/ill be in contact with Match Control on personal
        radio.

5-2     All supervisory and certain other officers v/ill be issued
         with personal radios as per Appendix         9... indicated
         (R) after collar number.

6.      MOUNTED & DOG SECTION:

6.1     The duties to be undertaken by the Mounted and Dog Sections
         v/ill be determined by the officer in charge of the match.

7.      PERSONNEL:

7.1     Details of all personnel involved in this order, see
         Appendix 1A 1.




Chief Superintendent




                                                      1/84
                            DISTRIBUTION


Category 'C1 Matches                            \


•D*
 imim-.mDivision
           .»   »

Chief Superintendent

Superintendent (Deputy)

Superintendent C.I.B.


'PI1 Sub-Division

Superint endent

Chief Inspector

Duty Inspectors

Admin Inspector

Charge Office

*D1! Control Room

Police Room, Bramall Lane


Others

Sector/Serial Commanders

Chief Superintendent, Ops & Traffic

Chief Superintendent,   'E' Division

Chief Inspector, Force Operations Room

Football Liaison Officer, H.Q,

Superintendent, Community Liaison Department, H.Q.

Inspector, Mounted Section, Niagara

Inspector, Dog Section, Niagara

The Secretary, Sheffield United Football Club
              INDEX TO APPENDICES



APPENDIX rA            Nominal Roll

APPENDIX »B            Crowd Control     -   Inside the ground

APPENDIX «C            Crowd Control     -   Outside the ground

APPENDIX »D            Traffic Control

APPENDIX »E            Maps

APPENDIX »F            Duty Sheet

APPENDIX »G            Copy of Ground Regulations

APPENDIX »H            Copy of briefing notes

APPENDIX 'I            Bnergency Procedures




                                               1/84
                                                                APPENDIX 'A'

                                   NOMINAL ROLL


MATCH           SHEFFIELD UNITED          v          CARDII CITY

DATE AND TIME          SATURDAY 1 SEPTEMBER 1984 AT 1500 HOURS

        RANK/NO/NAME                      DIV /SUB-DIV   DUTY SECTOR    SERIAL

        A/Superintendent Sumner               'Dl'

        Chief Inspector Plester               'Dl'

        A/Inspector Beeden                    'Dl'

        P.S.                                  'Dl'          1              1

        P.S.                                  'Dl'          Police Roan

        P.S.                                  'Dl'          2              1

        P.S.                                  'Dl'          3              1

        P.S.                                  'Dl'          3              2

        P.S.                                  'Dl'          4              1

        P.S.                                  'D2'          4              2

        P.S.                                  'Dl'          5              1

        P.S.                                  'Dl'          6              1

        P. S.                                 'D2'          8              3

        P.C.                                  'Dl*          Police Room

        P.C.                                  'Dl'          Police Roan

16«     P.C.                                  'Dl'          1

17*     p.c.                                  'Dl'          1

I8*     p .c.                                 'Dl'          1

19.     P.c.                                  'Dl'          1

20*     P.C.                                  •Dl'          1

21 •    P.C.                                  'Dl'          1

        P.C.                                  'Dl'          1

        P.C.                                  'Dl'

        P.C.                                  'Dl'          1

25*     P.c.                                  'Dl'          1

26*     P.C.                                  'Dl'

27.     P.C.                                  'Dl'          1              2
                                                                       AUG '§3
                     APPENDIX 'A' (Cont)

28.    P.C.   'Dl'   1           2

29.    P.C.   'Dl'   1           2

30.    P.C.   'Dl'   1           2

31.    P.C.   'Dl'   2

32.    P.C.   'Dl'   2

33*    P.C.   'Dl'   2

34.    P.C.   'Dl'   2

35.    P.C.   'Dl'   2

36.    P.C.   'Dl'   2

37.    P.C.   'Dl'   2

38.    P.C.   'Dl'   2

39.    P.C.   'Dl'   2

4o.    P.C.   'Dl'   2

4l.    P.C.   'D2'   3

42.    P.C.   'D2'   3

43.    P.C.   'D2'   3

44.    P.C.   'Dl*   7           2

45*    P.C.   'Dl'   7           2

46.    P.C.   'D2'   4           2

47.    P.C.   'D2'   4           2
'-4-
 CO




       P.C.   'D2'   4           2
   •




49.    P.C.   'Dl'   5

50.    P.C.   'Dl'   5

51.    P.C.   'Dl*   5

52.    P.C.   'Dl'   5

53.    P.C.   'Dl'   5

54.    P.C.   'Dl'   5

55. . P.C.    'Dl'   5

56.    P.C.   'Dl'   5

57.    P.C.   'Dl'   5
CO
vn
•




       P.C.   'Dl'   5

                           AUG *83
                                                         APPENDIX 'A' (Cont)

59.   P.C.                              'Dl'            6
60.   P.C.                              'Dl*            6
61.   P.C.                              'Dl'            6
62.   P.C.                              'Dl'            6

63.   P.C.                              'Dl'            6

64.   P.C.                              'Dl'            6

65.   P.C.                              *D1'            6

66.   P.C.                              'Dl'            6

67.   P.C.                              'D2'            6

68.   P.C.                              'Dl'            6

69.   P.C.                              'Dl'            6

70.   P.C.                              'D2'            6

71.   P.C.                              'D2'            8             3
72.   P.C.                              'D2'            8             3

73»   P.C.                              'D2'            8             3



      Plus 2 PSU's conprising:

      2 Inspectors, 4 Sergeants, 40 Constables

      4 Mounted Officers will be provided on the day.

      4 Dogs and Handlers will be provided on the day.




                                                            AUG '83
                                                           APPENDIX <b <


CROWD CONTROL     -   INSIDE THE GROUND


SECTOR 1        PERIMETER TRACK, PLAYING AREA

These officers v/ill collect stools from the Police Room and take up
position on the perimeter track and at the emergency gates. On no
account should the gates be left unmanned in order that access may
be gained by other officers to the enclosure.   These gates should
be bolted at all times. '"These officers will follow their Sergeant's
example by standing and facing the crowd at the following times:

Before the match; two minutes before half-time and full-time; when .
play is held up for any reason or there is crowd unrest generally or
on their side of the ground.

Prevent persons climbing the perimeter fence.• Identify trouble
makers to other officers entering the crowd. No person to be allowed
through the emergency gates except under police escort. Authorised
persons only on perimeter track.  The sale of mascots, refreshments,
etc, on the perimeter track will only be permitted up to kick-off and
at half-time. tWhen the ground is almost cleared the Serials will
report to the Inspector and patrol as instructed by Hatch Control. ■

Officer in charge:       A/Inspector Beeden       (R)


Serial Sergeant          P.S. 1174 Allen         (R)

P.C.    1             Gate   A            P.C.     1
        2             Gate   B                         2
                                                              Front of New Stand
        3             Gate   C                     3
        4             Gate   D                     4
       »              Gate   E
        6             Gate   F
        7             Gate   G
        8             Gate   H
        9             Gate   I
       10             Gate   J
       11             Gate   K




                                                            1/84
                                   - 2 ~             APPENDIX *13'


SECTOR 2    -   BRAMALL LANE STAND AND ENCLOSURE

Bramall Lane Stand

These officers will spread out and take up positions in the Bramall
Lane Stand.  They will be responsible for giving attention to bars
and refreshment areas before the match and at half-time and to public
toilets throughout the match. Maintain order between opposing
supporters and prevent the throwing of missiles from the stand.

One officer to be positioned at the top of each flight of steps
leading into the stand, to observe the supporters and, wherever
possible, prevent opposing fans entering the same section. At the
end of the match, ensure the orderly dispersal of spectators and
after the stand has cleared contact Match Control for further
instructions.

Bramall Lane Enclosure

Wherever possible visiting supporters only to be allowed into this
enclosure

These officers v/ill work in pairs and spread out at the back of the
crowd.  They v/ill maintain order and prevent climbing of the pylon
and of the ramp leading to the New South Stand, Spectators should
be encouraged to keep towards the centre of the enclosure and not
permitted to spread out towards the New South Stand.

Officers to be detailed to patrol refreshments areas and toilets..

At''the end of the match, encourage an orderly exit and assist with
the escorting of away supporters to their places of departure, as
directed by Match Control.


Serial 1                             Serial 2

P.S                        (R)       P.S.

P.C.    1                             P.C.    1
        2                                       2
        3                                     3
       k                                      b
       5                                      5
        6                                     6
       7                                     7
       8                                     8
       9                                     9
       10                                    10
                                                                APPENDIX 'B>


 SECTOR 3     -    SPION KOP, SHOR E M M STREET

                                      enclosure from John Street to divid-nr
 fence                                    “             " — -----     — ---:-;-

 Visiting supporters, if any, to be directed to the enclosure between
  he dividing fence and Cherry Street. Two gates in the dividing
 fence to be manned at all times. Home supporters to be encouraged
 to leave the ground at the end of the match via John Street/Shoreham
 otreet gates; visiting supporters by Cherry Street/Shoreham Street
 gates. Attention to be given to persons attempting to enter the
 ground without payment by climbing over the wall from Shoreham Street.

 Serial >1' to be responsible for supervision of whole of Spion Kop
 prior to kick-off.  During the pre-match period, attention should be
 paid to bars and toilet areas, gangways to be kept clear and preven­
 tion of unlawful entry.

 When joined by Serial '2' shortly after kick-off, Serial 1 1 to take
 up positions in John Street half of terrace and Serial ' ' to assume
 responsibility for the Cherry Street half.

 SERIAL 'It

Two officers to stand on observation platform and be in possession of
a personal radio to report trouble to Match Control.  Ten minutes
before half-time and before full-time, two officers to be positioned
at the top of the steps at the rear of the juvenile enclosure to
prevent adults jumping from the boundary wall and risking injury to
juveniles. Throughout the game attention should be paid to the'bar
and toilet areas to prevent youths congregating there and outbreaks
of disorder.               •'

Officers will work in pairs and will spread out at the rear of the
Spion Kop'.

SERIAL '2'

Attention to be paid to bars, refreshment and public toilet areas
throughout the match.  Keep gangways clear. During the match, officers
will spread out at the rear of the Spion Kop. Officers will work in
pairs.

At the end of the match, after the Spion Kop has cleared, Serial fl'
Sergeant to contact Match Control for further instructions.


Serial *1*                                  Serial '2'

P.S.                            (R)                                     (R)
P.O.     1                                  P.C.         See Appendix 'C1 Sector 7.
         2
         3
         b
         5        PSU P.C's
         6
         7
         8
         9
       10


                                                                    l/8k
                                            -   k   _
                                                                   APPENDIX '£><


SECTOR   k       -      JOHNSTREET STAND AND TERRACE

Serial 1         -      John Street Stand

One Constable from this Serial to be on duty at the Old Directors*
Entrance throughout the match to facilitate the use of the entrance
by match sponsors and to prevent unlawful entry.

Two officers   will patrol the bar and toilet areas behind the stand
and terrace throughout the match, to maintain order.

During the match the remaining officers are to spread out at the
rear of the stand, from where they will have a clear view of the
spectators. Particular attention will be given to prevent fans
throwing missiles, etc, from the stand into the terrace, Bramall
Lane enclosure and Spion Kop. Maintain order and, wherever possible,
prevent opposing supporters from entering the same section of the
stand.

At the end of the match ensure quick evacuation of the wing stands
to prevent baiting of any opposing fans in the terrace area.

After the stand has cleared the Serial Sergeant should contact Match
Control for further instructions.

Serial 2              John Street Terrace

After all spectators have entered the ground, these officers will
take up positions in the John Street terrace, officers will work in
pairs and maintain order and keep all entrances clear. Particular
attention to be paid to the- boundary fence separating John Street
terrace from the Spion Kop, especially at half-time.

The Sergeant will ensure that Gate E is opened 10 minutes before the
end of the match, to allow spectators to leave. He should then take
his men from the ground and resume their patrol areas.


Serial 1                                        Serial 2

P.S.                             (R)            P.S.                          (R)

P.C.     1 )                                    P.C.       See Appendix 'C' Section 7.
         2 )
         3 )
         b )
         5 )
         6 )
                     PSU P.C's

         7 )
         8   )
         9 )
       10 )




                                                                      l/8*f
                                     -   5   -


                                                           APPENDIX «B*


SECTOR 5     -   NEW SOUTH STAND

These officers will take up positions in the New South Stand and maintain
order between opposing supporters.

One officer to be positioned at the top of each flight of steps leading
into the stand, to observe the supporters and, wherever possible, prevent
opposing fans entering the same section.   At the end of the match, ensure
the orderly dispersal of spectators and after the stand has cleared,
contact Match Control for further instructions.

Officers will be detailed to patrol bars and refreshment areas before
the match and at half-time and public toilets throughout the match to
maintain order.

One officer with binoculars to remain on the T.V. Gantry during the match
and to inform Match Control of any crowd disorder or incident, identify
trouble makers to officers attending the scene, via Match Control.   In
addition, he has the responsibility for liaison with the Public Address
Operator located in the Press Office and to pass messages to the Operator
originated from Match Control.

One officer will be on duty at the Directors’ Entrance throughout the
match and he/she will obtain the official attendance figure from the club
official and inform Match Control.

Throughout the match, one officer will remain on duty on each ramp leading
from the turnstiles to prevent unauthorised entry and egress from the South
Stand, preventing missile throwing and fan baiting.   Allow no standing on
the ramp.

Officer in Charge:     P.S.                      00

P.C.    1
        2
        3
        'f
       5
        6                          (Directors1 Entrance)   (R) . 1787
        7
        8                          (T.V. Gantry)            (B)       91
       9
       10




                                                              3/8*f
                                                              APPENDIX 'C'


CROWD CONTROL    -   OUTSIDE THE GROUND


SECTOR 6   -    TURNSTILE DUTY

Officers engaged on this duty will supervise the turnstiles listed
below and will prevent supporters entering by gates they should not
use, ie visiting supporters should use turnstiles 7 ~ 10 and 17 -
20 in Bramall Lane and 21 - 26 in John Street.

All supporters will be prevented from taking offensive weapons,
banners and intoxicants into the ground.

Officers will not leave the turnstiles until they have been closed
and the gate receipts collected by the security van. Particular
attention should be paid to turnstiles 55 - 56 (duty number 8),
which are the last to be visited by the security van and will not
close until approximately thirty minutes after kick-off.

Immediately after the turnstiles have closed, officers will take up
the duties indicated.

O fficers on Turnstile Duties I -Jl-

To report to Inspector in charge on perimeter track inside the
ground and take up duties as directed in front of the New South
Stand.

Of ficers on Turnstile Duties 5 j- 12

These officers will work in -pairs, as indicated below. They should
remain on patrol outside the ground during the match and patrol the
area as indicated. Particular attention should be paid to parked
vehicles, to prevent theft and damage and to prevent unlawful entry
to the ground by juveniles climbing over walls, particularly in
Shoreham Street, and by forcing turnstile doors after they have
closed.  These officers are not to leave their patrols without the
express permissioxi of their Sector Sergeant or other supervisory
officer.

i)      Turnstile    Duties Nos    5   “    6 to patrol John Street.

ii)     Turnstile    Duties Nos    7 ~      8   to patrol Bramall Lane.

iii)    Turnstile    Duties ITos   9 -     10 to patrol Shoreham Street.

iv)     Turnstile    Duties Nos 11 -       12 to patrol Cherry Street.


Officer in charge:       P.S.
                                                              APPENDIX *C*


BRAMALL LANE:

1)    P.C.                           Turnstile Nos    1 - 1 0

2)    P.C.                           Turnstile Nos   11   -     15

3)    P.C.                           Turnstile Nos   17   -     20


JOHN STREET:

V     P.C.                           Turnstile Nos   21   -     26

5)    P.C.                           Turnstile Nos   2 7 - 3 4

6)    B.C.                           Turnstile Nos   37   ~     47

7)    P.C.                           Turnstile Nos   48   -    52

8)    P.C.                           Turnstile Nos   53   ~    59

9)    P.C.                           Turnstile Nos   6 0 - 6 4


SHOREMI4 STREET:

10)   P.C.                           Turnstile Nos   65   -    70

11)   P.C.                           Turnstile Nos   71   -    73


CHEERY STREET

12)   P.C.                           Turnstile Nos   74   -    79




MANNING OF BARRIERS:

This will be undertaken by officers shown at the following locations!

1.    Countess Road    - Clough Road     )
2.    Countess Road    - Baron Street    )
3.    John Street -    Bramall Lane      )   4 PSU Officers
4.    John Street -    Shoreham Street   )

The barriers will be placed in position immediately after briefing and
access will only be allowed to residents.
They will remain manned until 1500 hours when they will be placed at
the side of the road to await collection.




                                                               1/84
                                                                                                    APPENDIX *C*
    *


    SECTOR 7        -          PUBLIC ORDER PATROLS

    The primary duty of these officers is to patrol the areas given to
    them to prevent public disorder, ie fighting between opposing
    factions and damage to property,, They will ensure there are no
    obstructions of the highway by vendors of hot dogs, favours, etc.
    V/here licensed premises are on their area, officers will pay parti­
    cular attention to them.

    When all have entered the- ground, these officers will take up the
    positions and duties as detailed below.

    Duties Nos 1                        10_ inclusive __(Serial_ 1)

    Immediately after kick-off and when all                                   supporters have entered the
    ground, the Serial Sergeant should take                                   his men into the Spion Kop
    and assist with the supervision thereof                                   in accordance with the
    instructions contained in Appendix 1B 1,                                  Sector 3, Serial 1 '.

    Duties N os 12                 -     19 inclusive (Serial 2)

    Immediately after kick-off and all supporters have cleared, these
    officers will report to their Serial Sergeant, who will take his
    men into the John Street terrace and carry out duties as outlined
    on Sector 4, Serial 2.

    Duty No 20 (Coach Park)

    Officers on the coach park duty must remain with the coaches through­
    out the match and prevent damage being caused by rival supporters.
    The officers should ensure that all coach drivers are told on their
    arrival that they must return to their coaches fifteen minutes prior
    to the end of the match, in order that they are available to pick up
    their passengers from the ground if need be.

    ALL OFFICERS on the Sector will leave the ground ten minutes before
    the final whistle and resume their patrol areas outside the ground.

    Officer in charge:


    PATROL AREAS:

    Serial I                                                           OFFICERS                            SERGEANTS

    1)   John Street - Brarnall Lane                                   P.C.
          Clough Road - Countess Road

    2)   Countess Road - Clough Road                                   P.C.
          Baron Street - John .Street
                                                                                                          P.S.
    3)   John Street -- Charlotte Road                                 P.C.
          Clough Road - Baron Street

    4)   Countess Road from Charlotte                                  P.C.
          Road to Clough Road - Clough
          Road to Charlotte Road and
          Charlotte Road from Clough
          Road to Countess Road




                                                                                                       1/84
-              r-   -iv->•?-    ."-r-      •.....    - .S">v.-   ...                    ,,,   ...       ;... r -i-     ••   - >—   ... -
                                               APPENDIX 'C'


.5)   Shoreham Street - Midland        P.O.
       Street.  Charlotte Road to
       Shoreham Street and including
       Clough Road from Charlotte
       Road to Shoreham Street

6)    Shoreham Street - Margaret       P„C„
       Street - Charlotte Road -
       Midland Street

7)    Shoreham Street - St M ary’s     P.C.
       Road - Charlotte Road -
       Margaret Street
                                                   P.S.

8)    Bramall Lane from Clough Road    P.C.
      St Mary's Road to Countess
      Road

9)    St Mary's Road from Countess    P.C.
       Road to Bramall Lane - Bramall
       Lane to Clough Road

10)   John Street from Bramall Lane    P.C.
      to Shoreham Street

11)   London Road from St Mary's       P.C.
       Road to John Street • :

Serial 2

12)   Pond Street Bus Station -        P.C.
      Harmer Lane                      P.C.
                                       P.C.

13)   Bottom of Howard Street          P.C.

14)   Leadmill Road - Paternoster      P.C.
      Row

15)   Shoreham Street Patrol           P.C.
      between Leadmill Road and
      Matilda Street

1 6 ) Shoreham Street - Matilda        P.C.        P.S.
       Street

17)   Leadmill Road - Matilda Street P.C.

18)   Shorehain Street - Mary Street   P.C.

19)   St Mary's Road - Shoreham        P.C.
       Street

20)   St Mary(s Road - Charlotte       P.C.
       Road

21)   Coach Park - Leadmill Road       P.C.   R)
      remain and observe security      P.C.
      of coaches throughout match




                                                          1/84
                                 - 5                    APPENDIX »C«


SECTOR 8     MOBILE RESERVES

A mobile task force of three Transit vehicles, under the super­
vision of an Inspector, will patrol the environs of the ground.

Transit 1   ■- Will   patrol the Shoreham Street - Cherry Street sides.

Transit 2   - Will    patrol the Bramall Lane - John Street sides.

Transit 3   ~ Will patrol the Pond Street - Midland Station and
               city centre areas.

All Transit patrols will assist with the escorting of visiting
supporters to the ground as necessary. When not being used for
escort purposes, they will patrol their areas to prevent damage to
property, give special attention to licensed premises and to report
and deal with public order situations.

During the match the mobile patrols will continue to patrol their
areas outlined above.  Transit 1 to be available and liaise with
Match Control for the transport of any prisoners to the Central
Charge Office, etc.

After the match, the Transits will continue to patrol their areas
unless required to assist with the escort of visiting supporters
under the direction of the Inspector in charge and Match Control.

Officer in charge:                            (R)


Transit 1                              Transit 2

Insp                                   P.S.

P.C.             PSU Inspector         P.C.           PSU Sergeant
                 1 serial                             1 serial
P.C.                                   P.C.

P.C.                                   P.C.

Transit 3

P.S.                   Senior

P.C.

P.C.

P.C.




                                                             1/84
                                                               APPENDIX 'D'
 •NO PARKING' CONES:

The Duty Inspector, 'Dl' Sub-Division on .... .Morning.Duty.........will
arrange for the Station Driver to place police 'No Parking' cones in the
following positions by .X2-DD. hours. No officer will give any person
permission to park in contravention of any of these cones.

John Street               Both sides between Bramall Lane and Shoreham
                          Street

Shoreham Street           Ground side between Cherry Street and John
                          Street

Cherry Street             Ground side between Shoreham Street and Bramall
                          Lane

•No Parking' cones to facilitate free passage of South Yorkshire Passenger
Transport Executive buses.

Shoreham Street    -      Bus stop opposite ticket office and bus stop
                           opposite Cherry Street

Shorehain Street   -      Layby at the side of Arnold Laver's Limited

Cherry Street      -      In the cul-de-sac opposite the entrance to the
                           official car park, Bramall Lane Football Ground

CKCWD CONTROL BARRIERS:

Two barriers to be placed at the side of the road at after-described
locations.

John Street at junction with Bramall Lane

John Street at junction with Shoreham Street

Clough Road at junction with Countess Road

Clough Road at junction with Barron Street

TRAFFIC POINTS:

The following traffic points will be manned as shown. Where the point is
normally controlled by traffic lights, these will be turned off and manual
control operated. The Inspector in charge outside the ground, will be in
charge of officers engaged on this duty and will ensure they are provided
with the necessary keys and white coats.

Points will be operated f r o m ......... t o ........... and frccn
........ -• untii ordered to stand down. ---       --------
                       NO POINTS TO BE WORKED

                                   P.C.

                                   P.C.

                                   P.C.




                                                                         AUG *84
   a




                                                                                                                                                     A-
                                                                                                                                                    / co /'\      ,O’' [i:,;             a pvr
                                                                                                                              ,        $>$
                                                                           <Jpj                    -A/'                   fcylrdmLI#,
                                                                                                                                    vJk&cz
                                                                                                                                                                                     °
                                                                                                                                                               <
                                                                                                                                                               ILJ
                  Gy/ rr>>                                                                                      fkj/                                   y/                 v -v
o m b               X         c(-                                Z . i                                                                                  X
                                                                                                  <iv                                !/-fey            'riL/O/              :'V- -'0 \ r ;>/ s »i ,r
                                                                                                                                                                         S-\Vy\
                                                     7                                       '\y
                                     Ao \-
                                     rc ~ s ,
                                                                                                                                                       g t' S ^ b ; 3 r V •                          d j \
                                    ‘civ'-p’                                                                                                                /- f T ] x f^~\                         _   Gi
                                                                                                                                              ;"£~      -j'
                                                                                                                                                                                         fi         rr^
                                                                                              rs                                                                                         -n\
                                                                                                                                                                                     It AV
                                                                           b>                 Vi
J>
                                                                                                                          h          r^ R T v
                                                                                      \ o kO '{£
                                                                                      \o \
                                         \\v.V                                         \c \                                                   /Q-'/X
                                                                                                                                                               'W^OlVaCHfSp.
                                                                                                                                                                                              iio
                                                                                                                                    °r H        O'*VS i f )        CO/    xS*'ti                     \   :
                                                                                                                                       / //    r/7/si
                              67                                                                                                           m
                       3                             x\.
                                                                                  \\ S h e f f i e l d
                                                                                   x\ United
                        (£?i                                                          \FOGtbaJI'
                                                                                                                                                       </

        Lf'X

                                                                                                                              ST                               # < o;
                                                                                                                K
                                                                                                                • :.1f
                                                                                                            ftrr/
f«.i :''H                                       W   '    ?   v    ^    5                      ^v-   c>                              pi
                                                         ^s ^          ^        s s Vpi k     s            Hdj ljzi
                                                                                                                 u ^ o               l
                                                                                                          '<CC                                       Tram
                                                                                                        ■! of f<l
                                                                                                          ’:rf.. - II
                                                                                                                                  ) uj L
                                                                                                                                                                     /                         f>. Sp ::•.
                                                    ;o S ' W S ’
                                                               .l^,                    >>/>■                                                                                                             Sc
            is,
»-N
  m/ I*-*
Jo          u                                                                                                                                             <^•                                       V.
                                                                                                                                                                                               tftl!7Al
                         io i       \-'\
                                    \o \ \v- V• '"*
                                            iV-W
                                         \-^rvj£ : \ Q*^vN                                                                                                                                        Hcui
                          5l\                                                                                                               V                                    /
                                \73 •;.^s.y
                                    C * > */ » * v . s ' '•? \>co\ \<^>c;v >   r,\
                                                    til * w > \o '^ M ji'< 'C v v \ (?y
                                                                   f
                                \o                                                                                                                                                                  \r.n-
                         V A--vW ' :,n.                  3 ^ A ^ v                  |IX
                                                                       v«; ;o /                                                                               w
                                                                                                            /                       J±j c                /                  A l< t
                                                                                                                         !/!<                                              -<V ir.-i
                                                                                      <K'.                '/ /           O’                      /"•Vv • rr av ? * ' >
                                                                                                                                                 !• ■•\“ / i; «c *4 < • r
                                                                                                                          ■   V>'               1       v v V . . , u - U L^
                                                                                      IV

                  . . i f .
                                                                                         /                r^.>
                                                                                             //         / C>
                                        South Stand                     Groundj                                 Visiting Supporter;
                                                  I •• 6                7 •••10                                     O n l y 17 - 2 0
                                                                                                    E u H




                                                                           ,AN£
                                                   , b r a m a u u                            's
                                                                                               Vi    C.-— ;■                   ‘
                                                                                                                         07     ’         '      Visiting Supporters
                                                                                                                        \r                           O n l y 21- 26
                                                                                                                       —"*j.....—..
                                                                                                    Lone
                                                                                           gromQ^
                                                                                     ^ ____                                                        W e s t Wi ng
                                                                                      U.—»■**~00m                                                  27 2 8 29

                                                                                                                                ——
                                                                                                                                                    T e r r a c e West"
                                   i                                                                                            I •«M>*               30       3!  32
[lone Social* Club]—
                                                                                                                                                   -[Centre      SYqn d ~ ~ 3 3 ~ 3 4 ]
                                                           C a r Park
[Expcufive S u ite }           f
j Players Entrance]'
      !s Office
[Directors'SuiteT                                                                                                          p     * s      —            l T e r . E a s t 3 9 ’"4O' 4Tj
                                                                                                                           \rT~% --------------         E a s t V/ i n 9   42   43 j
jlic k e t Office
                                                                                                                                                 ----- Ter . E a s t       44   45
fRece'ption]-
                                                                                                                               \ <fZi' vZ^T              Juvenile Pen 4 6            47
 Pres                                                                                                                           1 jr n ' - —             ................... * "■      ■

               ~79l                                                                                    Spt on
                                                                                                                                                         ]5 O    51   52~

--------;------- -------------- ——     .. r
                                                                             ZZJJJ
                                                                                                                                                         453 - 5 9 ]
P o lic e ------------------------/-{r,— ^
                                P i           \                                                                                           t V*




                                                                                                                                                           -[60 - 6 4



   SEFFiELD UNITED F.C.
             B r a m ^ Lane
e /'#'N                                                                 APPENDIX rF*

                                          DUTY SHEET

  THIS FORM MUST BE HANDED TO MATCH CONTROL ON COMPLETION OF DUTY.




  Football Duty     -    Bramall Lane              Date,

  SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB               V

  Serial N o .........                             Please indicate duty worked,
                                                   i.e. A, B, C

  A.      Voluntary Overtime        B.   Duty Time         C.     YJeekly Leave

                                         NO.               NAME               DUTY

  Supervisory Officer ...................................................




  2   .

  k.




  6.


  8.


 10 .............................................. ............ .

 1 1 ....... ...................................................

 12                                                                .

 13 .................. ................... .......... ...........

 14 ................................ ........... ...............

 15 ........................ ....... ............................

 Indi.cate clearly any replacement officer and whom replacing,

 Duty commenced................. ...... .

 Duty completed......... ...... .........


All incidents in which Serial involved, together with actions taken and by whom,
foreT indicated in full overleaf.
                                                          APPENDIX 1G 1

                    SHEFFIELD UNITED POOTBAIL CLUB                             «

                           GROUND REGULATION                    '              *


1.     All matches are played in accordance with the rules and regulations
        of the Football Association. and the Football League.

2.     Play cannot be guaranteed on any day, and the Club reserves the right
        to make changes to its advertised fixtures without notice.

3.     All children entering the ground or stand must pry for admission or
        hold a valid ticket.

k.     Refund of cash admission charges paid at the turnstiles will not be
       made in any circumstances. Right of admission reserved.

5 .    Refunds will be made in respect of seats booked in advance vhene a
       match is postponed subject to the claim for a refund being made at
       least three days before the re-arranged date. Such refunds will
       not be entertained, however, In respect of matches started and
        abandoned for any reason before the comp3.etion of 90 minutes play.-

6.     Unauthorised persons are not permitted to enter upon the field
        of play.

7.     With the exception of authorised press representatives, holding
        official passes, the talcing of photographs or cine photographs
        inside the ground is prohibited.

8 .    Only persons specially authorised by Sheffield United are permitted
       to offer newspapers, periodicals or any rther articles for sale at
       Bramall Lane.

 9.    Unnecessary' noise Vsuch as tha.t from the use of radio sets or
       behaviour likely to cause confusion of any kind, is not permitted
        in any part of the ground.

 10.   The climbing of floodlight pylons, stands or other buildings in
        the ground is strictly forbidden.

 11.   Offensive weapons, glasses, flags, banners and other similar
        articles are not permitted,

 12.   All persons entering Bramall Lane are admitted subject to the above
        Ground Regulations, the bye laws of the City cf Sheffield and the
        Rules and Regulations of the Football Association and the Football
        League. Sheffield United Football Club reserves the right to
        remove from the ground any person who does not comply with them cr
        whose presence is a sourcc ^f danger cr annoyance to others.




                                                            AUG *83
                                                      APPENDIX ’H ’

                          BRIEFING DETAILS


                               GENERAL

This vdll take place in the seated area of the South Stand.

Details of the particular match to be policed v/ill be given, including
probable difficulties, past history of the corresponding match(s) of
previous year(s), club colours and other general intelligence.

After briefing and calling of the roll, officers will disperse smartly
to their respective places of duty. Supervisors will brief their men
on the individual duties given to them. Generally not more than two
officers should be stood together.

Officers are to be encouraged to report problems they see and should
be told tliat the hooligan element is only a small part of the attendance.
A firm but fair attitude should be encouraged.

All persons arrested or to be ejected from the ground will be taken to
the Police Room. There Is a door at the Shoreham Street end of the
South Stand just off the perimeter track which affords access to the
Police Room.

Officers making an arrest will complete a short form file before leaving
the ground and they will be told of Court dates by the staff of the
Police Room.

Any spectator who succeeds in gaining access to the playing area should
not be chased but arrested as he comes to the perimeter and escorted to
the Pc2&ce Room.

The officer in charge inside the ground, or his deputy, or an Inspector
appointed to the duty, will remain at the Players' Tunnel and when he
leaves it to stand just outside, all officers on the perimeter should
stand and face the crowd.. This also applies to any particular section
who have incidents taking place on their section. The occasions when
this is necessary are usually after a goal has been scored, a penalty
given or some other foul penalised and also just prior to half-time
and the end of the match.

All gates in the fence vdll be manned throughout and only Police
Officers, officials or prisoners should be allowed through them.
They will not be used to allow spectators from one part of the ground
to go to another.                                                .

Ground Exit gates will be opened by Stewards ten minutes before the end
of play and no Police Officer will ask for them to be kept closed, or
cause them to be closed after they have been opened, UNDER ANY
CIRCUMSTANCES.            ■                         .

Fifteen minutes before the end of play the Officer in Charge will decide
whether or not to escort visiting fans to their coaches/trains.    If a
decision is taken to escort, supervisors will be given specific
instructions via personal radio and once the order to allow them to
leave the ground has been given no one will countermand ic. Force
should never be used to prevent any supporters leaving the gx'Oundt bu
when the occasion demands, they will be guided and separated from home
             <

                                                                    APPENDIX »H* (Cont'cL.
(   .(   9



                 supporters by mounted and foot officers outside the ground exits with
                 a view to getting the crowd moving away from the ground.

                 There must be liaison between the officer in charge of the match and
                 the officer in charge outside the ground as to when waiting visiting
                 supporters should be allowed to leave»   Normally the request to be
                 escorted will come from visiting fans, particularly when they are small
                 in number, but speaking generally the whole crowd should be allowed to
                 leave at the end of play.




                                    !

                                        i

                                            4
                                            i


                                                \




                                                                         AUG/83
                                                          APPENDIX I



                         EMERGENCY PROCEDURES




In the event of any emergency incident or serious threat when consideration
must be given to closing/evacuating the ground, then the decision will be
that of the Senior Police Officer on duty in command on the day. That,
officer will naturally consult with club officials.

Should it appear necessary that action may be necessary, then the following
will be implemented:

a)      The Senior Police Officer will, from the Police Control
        Room, break into the public address system and cause to
        be emitted, a distinctive oscillating tone followed by a
        •coded1 message - "WILL THE MAINTENANCE STAFF PLEASE REPORT
        TO BERNARD BELLAMY?"    This will be followed by the same
        oscillating tone.                        .

        This will alert those Stewards responsible to man the
        exit gates and be prepared to open them if instructed to
        do so.

        On hearing this message, all Police Officers on duty at
        the ground must alert themselves to the possible emergency
        and those officers identified must check that Stewards are
        in position to open gates if necessary.

b)     Should it be decided to proceed with evacuation, then the
       Senior Police Officer will give the message for the ground
       Stewards to open exit gates, followed by instructions for
       all persons to leave the ground by the nearest exit (Spion
       Kop spectators may be instructed to move towards the playing
       area).

        In cases of emergency which occur before the match, then
        Stewards will be instructed not to admit further spectators.

c)     Should action at (b) above not be necessary, then a rrfessage
       will be given,, "MAINTENANCE STAFF ARE NOT NQ-J REQUIRED."

        So far as fire alarms at the ground are concerned, the
        control box for these is situated in the public address box.
        Mr. Ramsey, the Public Address Officer, will be in possession
        of a Police radio and he has been instructed to contact
        inmadiately, the Senior Police Officer on duty, should any of
        the alarms activate.     The appropriate action will then be
        taken.                           ,                              •'


N.B.   The referee and linesmen must be informed of these procedures
       prior to the match.
                                                                             *
                                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE



•_                   ‘
                                                  :
                                                  * F ' DIVISION
                                                               -----

OPERATION ORDER F (FB)2/84-5                                               MATCH CATEGORY      C


                                            SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY V       SOUTHAMPTON


  DATE       TUESDAY 4th SEPTEMBER 1984                                    KICK OFF   7.30pm


  1.           INFORMATION

     1.1       Sheffield Wednesday will play at Hillsborough

     1.2       Anticipated Attendance - no.           16/18000

     1.3       Away Supporters

     1.3.1     No.                                     2/300

     1.3.2     Colours                                 Red/White

     1.3.3     Travel - the away team supporters are expected to travel in the
                following manner -

                (A)      Coaches - no.                 3*possible-details at briefing
                         Before Match Unloading at     Leppings Lane
                         Parking Location              Coal Road
                         After Match loading at        Leppings Lane

                (B)      Special Trains to Wadsley Station                 None

                (C)      Service Train to Midland Station              Possible




                (D( Other means                        Private transport-car etc.


  1.3.4        Accommodation in Ground -               Away supporters pen on Leppings Laris terraces




  1.3.5        Away supporters history, reputation and any other relevant infortfeation

                                                       No problems expected-few will travel*due
                                                       to day and distance.
                                                                                           (2)

V*        IN TEN TIO N

 2.1      It as the intent ion of the Police to allow this match to take place and
          ensure public order and safety both inside and outside the ground; to
                  ? f*1 control opposing fans and prevent unnecessary obstruction
          Zi+h't         ^           to P^Perty. This will be attained and displayed
          with a high standard of smartness and professionalism.
 3.       METHOD

 3 .1
          Superintendent Lock will have overall charge. He will be assieted by Chief
          Inspector Greenwood who has specific resposibility for public order outside
          the ground.




          All other personnel, together with their duties, are shown in .Appendix: 'A*.
 3.2      Operational Phases

          The operation will be three phases, viz:
 3.2.3    PhaseJL ^Before Kick off - which will include arrangements for public
          order patrols and the escorting and segregation of supporters until they
          enter into the Stadium.

 3.2.2    Phase_2 During the match from kick off to ten minutes befSreThe'end of the
          game.

3.2.3
               3       rnat^ . “ frorn ten minutesbefore the end of the game until all
         the crowd and traffic have dispersed.

3.3      Parading on duty                                               •

         Time            6.0pm


                          wil1 report for dufcy to the Police Room situated under the
         North Stand.
                    'x
3.4      Briefing

3.4.1    Prior to going on duty all Officers will be briefed generally by the Officer
         in command of the (deration as to the requirements of the event and intelli­
         gence received.                  •

3.5      Criminal Investigation/Plain Clothes Departments                      x
3.5.1
         Members of the Criminal Investigation Department are on duty at the ground.
         They will remain in radio contact with Control at all times. A ll complaints
         of cr.une made in connection with this ganne will be dealt with by than, as
         will all prisoners arrested for criminal offences.                \
                                                                                -


         Officers are shown in Appendix ’A ’ (Control - Police Room and CID)
                                                     *


3.6      Special Constabulary

3.6.1    Members of the Special Constabulary will be on duty at this match.         They
                                                                                                  (3)

             priority shown.      °" ^      dUti8S Sh” '” at ^EPenaix 'B' - in the order of
'V
     3.7     Dog Section


             a^terrent^fOTe                        ^ °n d u t y " they will mainly be used as
             S w S I S f md                    * 5® rnat-h °" 0,3 rDute to      3*°™*. at tto
                                                                    tD WadSlfiy BrM3£ Stat“   ’

                           n° f ally     used in public order situations but the Officer
             S h T f S s ^ s S f o ^ T w 1"9 ‘‘f ^ i o n to use dogs in such circumstances
             ir ne reels a serious public order situation may occur.
 3.8         Mounted Section


 3'8 '1      J 5 S E S L ^ ^ T t ?                     will be on duty. They w i n be employed
             from their tSSsport.                          se3re9ate fans and e s «“* them to and

            During the game they will be in the ground where they can be seen bv the
                                                deployment wil1    at the discretion of the
            offiSrs      COCmandf “      “ “ Station with the Sergeant in Charge of Mounted

 3.8.2      Ground Rules                           •


            attSton 2             to ^ G^ Unh '^lfiS “ f°r0e at this 9round- Particular'
            e x c t a f e ^ W ^ , t° ^  ^        9-Lves Police Officers wide powers to
            exclude or eject spectators from the ground. Where persons are e-i^rfprl
            the procedures shown in 3,9 must be followed.         Persons are ejected,

3.9         Prisoners

3.9.1
                        t h ? ! £ ? t » rp<tetaT ‘3 “ thS S'"011"3 ^ the ™ i n i t y thereto will
            the ^ S u S t a n i f ^ ^                              in charge will enquire into
                circumstances and decide what action is to be taken.
3.9.2
            S f l ^ eX ? JJ ^ Wf ^ antS °nly action            the Ground Rules, the nams and
            Sf2Sv^d          <3eta“ ed PerS°" W l U te              and he will’be ejeS S j fcOT

3.9.3
           S e ? 1 r eS S S rtj^ tlflSS “ f fenCB for             Prisoner will be
           Officer.     P0* * ^ CD surmons, he will be photographed with the arresting

3.9.4
           n r a e r t ? b 2 Wl^1 to se^ haJ- f * 3 his property listed and placed in a
           property bag. Any property subject of the charge will be listed separately.
3.9.5
                                 Wi S . then '!* e n t e ^ <*> the pro-forma FBI and a copy
           given to the arresting Officer who will resume duty.
3.9.6
           i S x £ S n n? 3 d WS ^ be “ T   yea to ^   designated police Station which is
           property and
           property    and photograph.
                            p h ^ ^ o h      ^      ”l U te ^ “ ^ n ^ by pro-forma H>1.
                                                                                       (4)



  %9.7     A team of Officers will be on duty at the designated Police Station who
           will receive prisoners. They will verify identity, and, where necessary,
           complete antecedent history, fingerprints and photograph the prisoner.
           They will also corrplete form Gen/29 (record of detention and charge),

#3.9.8     A member of the reception squad on duty at the designated Station will
           charge the prisoner with the offence outlined on FBI and bail him to attend
           Court on the first available date.

           The question of bail will be considered on its merits in accordance with
           the Bail Act 1976. No person should be released until his identity and
           residence have been satisfactorily verified.

           The Officer who charges a person will corrplete the pro-forma statement FB2
           which will be attached to the file.

  3.9.9    Any juvenile arrested will be detained at Harrmerton Road Police Statical,
           separate from adult prisoners. They will be processed in the sane method
           as adults and their parents informed and where possible, requested to collect
           them. They will normally be reported on summons.

  3.9.10   Arresting Officers will complete short form file Gen 28 before going off
           duty (normally at the ground) and hand this into the Police Room.

  3.9.11   Where a 'Not Guilty' plea is entered the arresting Officer and witnesses
           will be required to submit a full Criminal Justice Act statement.
                                                                                             V



  3.10     Traffic Control

  3.10.1   Traffic points - will be manned as required.                   ^

  3.10.2   Traffic Division - members of the? motor cycle wing will be on duty to ensure
           free passage on main roads leading to and from the ground and assist with
           escorting visiting supporters coaches.

  3.10.3   No parking cones - these will be placed in accordance with the previously
           published schedule.

  3.10.4   Public Transport - South Yorkshire Passenger Transport Executive will run
           special buses to the ground. They will unload in Herries Road. Daring the
           match they will park in Penistone Road and Catchbar Lane and afterwards
           pick up passengers at three loading points - Penistone Road opposite ground,
           Parkside Road/Middlewood and Catchbar Lane.

  3.11     Obstruction of the Highway       '

           Persons selling badges or goods and obstructing the highway should be
           moved on but if they persist they should be arrested and dealt with
           accordingly. The driver of any car causing obstruction etc will be
           reported and if the obstruction is serious, the vehicle will be roofed by
           Traffic Division. Where the obstruction is so serious as to warrant the
           vehicle's removal, the consent of an Inspector or above must be obtained
           before this is done and arrangements made by Match Control

  3.12     Emergency Procedures             ’                                 -*s

           In the event of an emergency situation arising in the ground (ie fire
           or bomb call) which may require evacuation of all or part of the ground,
           the following procedure will be followed:
 (a)    Control Room will pass the following message - ’Mr Barber to go
        immediately to the Secretary's Office'.    this will be over the
        PA system and will indicate to Police Officers and stewards that
        emergency evacuation procedures are in force.

 (b)    In the event of an emergency evacuation being necessary, an oral
        message will be passed by the Police Officer in charge giving specific
        instructions as to action to be taken by the public.

 (c)    In the event of an all clear situation, the following message will be
        passed: 'Mr Barber need not now attend the Secretary's Office*.
 Security of T u m s t n s s

 Appendix *C» gives details of security procedures to be followed in escorting
 the turnstile staff with cash to various secure points in the ground.

 Coaches

No special provision has been made for the parking of coaches carrying hone---
supporters who have their own individual arrangements for unloading/loading
and parking. Under no circumstances will these coaches be allowed to unload
in Penistone Road or Leppings Lane in the iirmediate vicinity of the ground. •

Away coaches will be dealt with in accordance with 1.3.3 of this Order and
any coach arriving at the ground carrying away supporters must be directed       vs.
to the location shown, in that paragraph to unload passengers.

ADMINISTRATION

Dress                               I


All male Officers except Dog Handlers and Mounted Officers on duty as such
will wear full uniform including helmets with chin straps down. Female
Officers should wear slacks. All male Officers should be in possession of
anoraks - females should wear gannex coats. Constables working traffic points
will wear the appropriate high visibility clothing over their uniform.

Searching and Property Seized

Where searches are carried out at the turnstiles, or elsewhere, and property
temporarily seized, the person from whom the property is taken should be
informed of the seizing Officer's collar number and where it may be collected
from (the Police Room) after the match. The Officer taking possession of
 he property must affix a label with the name (only) of the owner prior to
handing it in to the Police Room. It will be the responsibility of the Officer
in charge of the Police Roan to list property so deposited and return to
the owner against signature. Any property not claimed will be taken to
Hanmerton Road Police Station and treated as found property.

Refreshments

Liquid refreshments will be available during this duty adjacent to the Police
Roan. Sergeants will ensure tht members of their serial stagger?their •
refreshment break so only two at ctny one time are released. This facility
is subject to the exingencies of duty.
                                           \
Maps

Large scale maps are available in the Police Room showing the ground and
the surrounding district.
                                                                                    (6)


^ •5   Reporting Off Duty

       It will be the responsibility of each Serial Sergeant to report'     whole
       ° ^ _ ^ s Serial  duty or account for any person missing. No one will go
       off duty without the consent of Control. Prior to leaving the ground the
       Serial Sergeant must corrplete the Serial Return and submit it to ths Police
       Room.

5.     COMMUNICATIONS

5.1    Ground Control is situate in the kiosk (located between the south and
       west stands). Call Sign - 'Ground Control'.

5.2    Personal Radios will operate on channel 25.    They will be issued to    1
       si^>ervisory ranks.                                                  \

5.3    Vehicles will operate on VHF (where fitted).

5.4    Call Signs - These will be the collar numbers of the relevant Officer,
       or if an Inspector or above, the name prefixed by Siera 1234. Vehicles
       will operate on the previously issued call sign.
' V
          INDEX TO APPENDICES AND SCHEDULE OF NUMBERS INVOLVED




          APPENDIX     »A»               DUTIES

          APPENDIX     *B*               TRAFFIC POINTS /SPECIAL CONSTABULARY

          APPENDIX     *C*               CASH SECURITY

          APPENDIX     *D*               MAPS




                SCHEDULE SHOWING NUMBER OF OFFICERS INVOLVED.




                                  SUPT      ■   C/INSP    INSP      SGT               PCo



      Inside Ground                1                        2        6                60
                                                                     »*»   * ■; »v
      Outside Ground                              1                  3                20
                                            *

      Mobile Reserve                                                 1                 8

      Control and Police Room                                        2                 5

      Traffic points

      C.I.D.                                                         1               :2
                                   A

      Mounted                                                       1                  7

      Dog Section                                                   1                • 7


                                   1              1          2     15                 109
                                 APPENDIX   'A*


PI&BfSCTORS DUTIES

SECTOR 1       (SERIALS   1-3      )                A/INSPECTOR             Murray

^CTOR 2        (    II                                          ft
                          k - 10 )                                          Calvert

SECTOR 3       <(   t»     -       )                            n

SECTOR 4       (    it     _                                    tt
                                   )

SECTOR 5       (    **     •mm     )                            tv




CONTROL                                             p>s
    \
                                                    P.C



.POLICE ROOM                                       p>s>

                                                   P.C.
                                                   P.C.




 DIRECTORS ENTRANCE                                P.C.


 PBTSONER PROCESS                                         CID


 P/C                                               D.S.              D.C.




 MOUNTED SECTION                                      DOG SECTION


 "y/k   Penistone Road

                                                  As mounted
 5/8    ^eppings -^ane
A/Enspector Hurray
 Serial 1                            PERIMETER    LACK & SOUTH STAND

                                     Phases 1,2 Sc 3 ~ Throughout Dut^_

1.      PC                           a)   ^PC's - South Stand. 2 will remain in
                                          vicinity of Directors Box and the others
2.      PC
                                          patrol the bar areas. Both will maintain
        PC                                order in the stand.
t                                    b)   8 PC's - Perimeter Track. 3 at either end in
5.      PC                                front of terraces and positioned near gates
6.      PC
                                          in fence. 2 in front of South Stand midway
                                          between tunnel and end of ground. Collect
        PC                                stools from Police Room after briefing and
8.      PC                                take up their allocated positions. The
                                          Sergeant v/ill remain in the vicinity of the
9 . • PC                                  players tunnel throughout this duty and the
10.     PC                                officers on the track will follow his example
                                          by standing and facing the crowd at the
11*     PC                                following times: before kick-off, half time
12. -PC                                   and full time and also during any stoppage of
                                          play or when there is any crowd unrest. This
                                          will be indicated during the game and shortly
                                          before half and full time by the'Sergeant
                                          leaving the players tunnel and standing near
    Cash Security-See Appendix 'C*        the touch line. Particular attention should -
                                          be paid to prevent any person climbing the
                                          fence to gain access to the grouiii, the gates
                                          must reraain bolted at all times except when in
                                          use. No one is to be allowed access to the
                                          track from the terraces without consent of a
                                          Senior Officer (except to receive medical
                                          treatment). When ground is     eared the whole
                                          Serial will report to Control for deployment
                                          as required.


    >   v..L                         NORTH STAND St PERIMETER TRACK

sst •                                Phases 1, 2 & 3 -'Throughout Duty

 'u     PC-                          a)     PC’s will patrol in North Stand. They will
2 :. pc                                   maintain order and whilst the bars'are open
                                          ensure that they comply with the conditiious
3-      PC                                of the' licence and do not sell intoxicants in
h.      PC                                bottles and that the only intoxicants served’
                                          over the bars are in plastic containers.
5-      PC                                These officers will carry out this duty
6.      PC                                throughout all phases of the operation.

7*      PC                           b)   \ PC's will take up positions in front of the
8.      PC                                North Stand (on track). Collect stools from
                                          the Police Room arid space out on ti-ack.
                                          Before kick-off, at half time, at full time
                                          and during any stoppage of.play, PC’s will
                                          stand, this will be indicated during the game
                                          by the Sergeant -in the players tunnel who will
                                          leave the tunnel and stand near Vhe^touch line.
                                          These officers will remain in these*positions
                                          throughout all phases of the operation.
  Serial "-5                      SPION KOP

  Sg;y                            Phase T - Before Match

  1.     PC                       a)   Turns biles - 5 PC's on Penistone Road
  2.     PC                            turnstiles to supervise entry ^tn.d maintain
                                       order. Home supporters only to be admitted
         PC                            to this end of ground. Prevent supporters
         PC                            taking banners, missiles etc into ground.

  ?«     PC    Road Traffic
                                  b)   Spion Kop & Ramps - 5 PC's to patrol Spion
  6.     PC                            Kop and approach ramps to maintain order etc

  7.     PC                       Phase 2 - During Match
  8 ." pc
                                  All PC's to be spaced in pairs across rear of
- 9.     PC                       Spion Kop to maintain order etc. At half time
 10 .    PC                       patrol area at rear of Kop.

                                  Phase 3 - After Match

                                  When the Spion Kop begins to clear, all officers
   Cash Security-See Appendix C   will rendevouz with the Sergeant at the bottom
                                  of the Main Ramp and patrol outside the-ground
                                  in Penistone Road and supervise PSV loading in
                                  Penistone Road North. When crowds have cleared,
                                  return to Control for stand down.

                                  ALL PC's will work in pairs.
                Calvert
          1 4
                                  Leopings Lane Terraeei
                              B
 sro                              Phase 1 t: 2 - Before and Dax-.i.n>; Hatch

 'i.      re                      a)   2 PC's in central pen - this will
                                       remain free of all supporters - to
 2.       pc                           ensura it remains go and gates froin
          PC                           other pens closed-
 3-
 W        PC                      b)   b PC's in north pen with home
                                       supporters - prevent any attempt
 5-       PC                           to move from this pen into central,
 6... •   PC                           pen or away supporters pen at south
                                       side- of terraces.
 ?-       PC
 3.       PC                      c)   h PC's in south pen with av/ay
                                       supporters - ensure that only away
          FC                           supporters are in this area.
10.       PC
                                  Phase 3 - After Match                          •

                                  Supporters to transport - they will be
                                  kept in the ground until clear of home
                                  supporters - ax/ay supporters will not
                                  be allowed to leave until control allows
                                  them to do so.                                     ^

 -serxai.                         Elevated Terrace, Stand and Enclosure

 S°"fc                    B       Phase 1 & 2 - Before and During Hatch
 1.       PC
                                  a)   2 P C ’s in elevated section (between
 2.       PC                           north & west stands) to prevent entry
          PC                           by axiy away supporters and maintain
 3-
 1.
                                       order.
 ;-r-     PC-
 c;       FC                      b)   k PC’s in West Stand - 2 P C ’s to be located
                                       at front of stand - over away supporters
 6-       PC                           to prevent missiles being thrown^ 2 P C ’s
 ?.       PC                           to patrol and maintain order - including
                                       bar area.
 3.       PC
                                  c)   ^ P C ’s in enclosure rear of West Stand tc’•
 %        PC                           maintain order. ( 2 to cover barriers to
10.       PC                           prevent access to away supporters pen)


                                  Phase 3 - After Match
                                  Escort to transport. The away supporters
                                  will be held in the ground until cl£sa*ed
                                  tliis serial will leave ground v/ith the
                                  home supporters and assemble in Leppings
                                  Lane on the bridge - they will prevent a
                                  build up in this area of home supporters.
                                  When av/ay supporters are .allowed to j^eave
                                  they will follow the column and ensure
                                  there is no straggling.
                                               LEPFIUG5 LANK TuRNSTiTjr;    V.:   TS’iu*.,'

                                               Phase 1    Before Mar.-:h
                                               Supervise turnsti;!.e:-y ah J v,nping-s Lane end of
s— -         V                                 ground to prevent supporters taking                 ,
1    r:                                        drink, banner:-; or anythin" could be used u'.r; u
                                               weapon into grourd.


     •
o., T>-
t   X  \.j
                                               Also assi.»t stewards in preventing other than
                                               juveniles and pensioners entering through
5                                              their turnstiles.
4    PC                                        Av/ay supporters will be accoramoda'>rd in the
5    PS                                        South Pen on the terrnt;es and they should he
                                               directed to it on arrival at the round, In
6 re                                           order to prevent problems with5.n the -ground,
? ro                                           home supporters who arc an obviously unruly
                                               element should he directed to the Spio/j Hop..
■a i ’G
                                               Phase 2 - During Hatch               .
9    FC                                        Ten Minutes after kick off enter ground and .
10   PC                                        take positions as directed by Control.
                                               Phase 3 -.After Match                               -
                                               Remain v/ith av/ay supporters' and escort to
                                               transport as directed.
             CASH^SECtJRITY-SEB APPENDIX 'C'
Outside Duty - Including Official Oar Park etc

Phase 1, 2 & 3 - Through-) *
                           : the duty

a)     2 PC's will before kick off, patrol
       in the vicinity of the Players
       entrance to allow free access for
       players and other persons v/ith
       legitimate access. He will prevent
       interference with the players, both
       home, who will arrive in their own
       transport, and av/ay, who will arrive
       by coach. During and after the match,
       they will patrol, in the Official Car
       Park and carry out duties as outlined
       at (b) below.



b)     2 PC's will at all times patrol in
       the Official Car Park to ensure the
       security of the Shops, Restaur'ant,
       cars, team coach and, if present, to
       prevent any interference with any
       Television Control, vehicles. They will
      'maintain the one- ^ay system for all
       vehicles (from Penistone Road to
       Leppings Lane) and prevent any vehicular
       movement in the Car Park from the final
       whistle for 1 0 minutes, to allow the
       crowd to clear.

•c)   6 PC's will patrol in pairs, the area
      bounded by Leppings Lane, Penistone
      Road North and ground to ensure order
      is maintained and prevent offences. In
      particular, before and after the garae,
      they should prevent supporters gaining
      access to side roads adjacent to the
      ground.

      When the crowd clears, return to
      Control for stand down.
Serial               Reserves - Mobile (Call Sign — r~•;Rsit 1)

                     Phases 1 & 2 - Before and After ' -»t^i;

 1.            PC    Patrol in a personnel carrier or; the City
2.             PC    side of the ground, giving particular-
                     attention to public houses in the vicinity
 3.            PC    of the Owlerton Stadium car park, where
                     home supporters gather on the forecourts
 *r.           PC
                     (these contain some of the known hooligan
5.*            PC    element). If directed escort away supporters
                     to and from the coach park or. railway station.
                     Follow supporters towards the City centre
                     after the game to prevent damage en route.

                     Phase 2        During Match

                     During the game the serial will take up a
                     position in the area between the South
                     Stand and Spion Kop. They will remain at
                     this location for use as a reserve for
                     deployment by the Ground Commander.




Serial 9             Reserves - Mobile (Call Sign - Transit 2)

S*t
• '- 'e n '*
                     Phases 1 &        - Before and flf- gr Match

1.             PC    Patrol in a personnel carrier on the away
2.             PC    from City side of the ground, giving
                     particular attention to public houses on
O ' 'PC              Penistone Road North where away supporters
h.             PC    vehicles may have to pass. If directed
                     escort away supporters to and frost the
5-             KJ.   coach park or railway station.

                     Phase 2 - During Match                   * '

                     During the game the serial will remain on
                     patrol around the ground to ensure security
                     of parked vehicles etc.          •



 Serial 10           GROUND RESERVE

P.S.                 Stand by adjacent to Police Control for reserve
1 PC                 duties as directed,                "
2 PC
3 PC .
k PC
5 PC                                      *
6 PC
7 PC
8.PC                           -•                    .
             SPECIAL CONSTABLES DUTY - HILLSBOROUGH EOOTBALL GROUND




These duties will be allocated in the priority shown and not in
accordance with any individual preference. They are set out in three
phases.

Phase 1 - Pre-Match      Phase 2 - During Match     Phase 3 - After Match * •


DUTY NO. 1 - 2 SPC's

Phase 1 - Patrol Penistone Road North (to city lane) to prevent parking
in the area to be used by PSV's during the match (from Herries Road
Herries Road South).

Phase 2 - North Stand - rear - Kop end.
                                                                          *



 Phase 3 - Assist supervision of loading of PSV's Penistone Road North.

DUTY NO. 2 - 2 SPC'S

 Phase 1 - Assist stewards at entry to' Offical Car Park in Penistone Road
 North to prevent access to car park by unauthorised vehicles.

 Phase 2 - South Stand - rear - Kop end.

Pnase 3 - Assist PC on traffic duty Parkside Road/Penistone Road to maintain
free flow of traffic.

DUTY NO. 3 - 2 SPC's

Phase 1 - Assist stewards at exit to Offical Car Park Leppings Lane in
preventing vehicles entering in contravention of the one way road system
from Penistone Road.

Phase 2 - North Stand - rear - Leppings Lane end.

 Phase 3 - Assist in easing flow of traffic at traffic island Penistone Road
•North/Leppings Lane.

DUTY NO. b   - 2 SPC'S                                                          *

Phase 1 - Ramp to playing area between Kop and North Stand.    Prevent
unauthorised access to playing area. '

Phase 2 - As Phase 1.
                                  .   .   .                               v
Phase 3 - Assist with supervision of loading PSV's in Penistone Road North.
                  *                                 *
DUTY NO. 5 - 2 SPC's

Phase 1 - Assist stewards on stairways to West Stand in preventing unauthorised
entry.                                                     '

Phase 2 - West Stand - rear.


Phase 3 - Assist with supervision of loading PSV's in Parkside Road/Catchbar Lane
r        A PPE N D IX
                                SECURITY & SAFETY OF TURNSTILE OPERATORS



         In the interest of cash security and the safety of turnstile operators, the following
         precedures have been agreed with the club. The club have been informed that if
         the turnstile operators do not remain for the Police escort, we cannot accept
         any responsibility for their safety.

         1.    Leppings Lane and West Stand Turnstiles (except those at 2)

Serial         Fifteen minutes after kick-off* two constables from this Serial will rendezvous
 6             with operators from the. above turnstiles in the enclosure at the rear and
               escort them to the perimeter track, via the gate in the North Stand. (Leppings
               Lane end). They will supervise the entry of the operators onto the track
               in order that they may make their own way to the gate office in the South Stand.

         2.    Leppings Lane 'Stopping* Turnstiles (nurrbers 7, 14 & 17)

               These turnstiles remain open until half time. Ten minutes after the second
 6             half has commenced, a Constable from this Serial will follow the procedures
               outlined in number 1 above, in respect of these turnstiles.

         3.    South Stand (Except 25,26 & 35)

Serial         Fifteen minutes after the match has commenced a Constable from this serial
               will contact turnstile operators 19,20,21 and 22, (Leppings Lane end of Stand)
 1             and accompany them via the pathway between the South Stand and uncovered seating v
               to the gate room. He will then go to turnstiles 33,34 and 36 (Kqp end of
               Stand) and accompany them to the gate room.

         4.    South Stand 'Stopping' Turnstile (Number 35)                              :

Serial         This turnstile will remain open until half-time. A Constable from this Serial
               will go to the above turnstile ten minutes after second half has commenced
 1             and accorrpany the operator to the gate room.

         5.    South Stand-Tumstiles 25 & 26

               It will be the responsibility of the Constable on the Directors Entrance duty,
               to ensure these operators are escorted to the gate room via tbs Players Entrance.

         6.    Penistone Road (Except 51,55 & 57

Serial        Fifteen minutes after kick-off two Constables from this serial will contact
              these operators and accompany them from the rear of the turnstiles to the
              ramp leading to the track (between the North Stand and Spion Kop) where the
 3
              operators will be allowed to make their own way to the gate office.

         7.    Penistone Road 'Stopping* Turnstiles (Numbers 51.55 & 57) _____ ■               _______

Serial        Ten minutes after the second half has commenced a Constable from this Serial
 3            will contact the above operators and accompany them to the track via the route
              outlined in 7 above.

                                                                                    %
                                                                                     \
              NOTE:     The 'Gate' office is situated in the-.South Stand and is entered via
                        the Players Entrance.                '                 \        •
D.      Finance Sub-Committee - 5th, 12th, 19th, 26th March, 1985

The Committee discussed the subject of hooliganism at, and associated with,
football matches, as requested by Minute 5 of the Finance Sub-Committee of
26th March, 1985, and the Chief Executive submitted to each Member present
a report on the County Council's powers under the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act, 1975. These powers had been delegated to the Fire Service Committee,^
who had constituted Officer Working Parties for each of the District Council
areas to undertake the required detailed working.

The Chief Constable acknowledged and thought it appropriate that the Safety
of Sports Grounds Act was administered by the Fire Service Committee as the
Act was mainly concerned with physical factors such as lay-out, access, egress,
means of escape, fire precautions, structural stability. Policing aspects
were covered in pre-planning meetings with the football clubs for every
match which took place in South Yorkshire.

The Committee noted that the Government had called both the Football
Association and the Football League to a meeting on football hooliganisms
which was scheduled to take place today, but felt that the Government were
failing to take account of the many social and economic disadvantages which
had been created by their policies.

RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meetings of the Finance Sub-Committee held
on 5th, 12th, 19th and 26th March, 1985, be approved and the following items
confirmed:

(i)     Notice of Retirement

RESOLVED - That the request of Mr. A .R. Clement to retire on 30th April,
1985, be agreed.

(ii)    Command and Control Computer System - Communication Lines

RESOLVED - That an order for the communication lines be placed with British
Telecom (involving an annual rental of £27,842 per annum payable from the
date of the completion of the installation of the full network) and that the
installation fee (of £16,480) be paid upon the order being placed.

(iii)   Castle Green/Snig Hill Gable Walls

RESOLVED - That a contribution of £3,000 be made to the cost of building
screening walls for gable walls nos. 2 and 3.
      •N> '•


t ^     ''             ji                 *             J___,J, ,,
                                                                     Bssfcme*   i¥©^a

                                                j           Pehc*         C p f t k lhi'   .
                                                *
                                                f
                                                t                         -■->>•


                                                I I X i p L J if X                         r- J




               (iv )            Revenue Budget Reductions - 1985/86 Financial Year

               RESOLVED -

               1.     That the required reduction of £l.lm gross in the Police Committee's
               1985/86 Revenue Budget be achieved as follows:
                                  i
               Budget Head                       Item                                             Target Saving
                                                                                                     £
               1.      Premises                  (a)     Fuel, Lighting and Cleaning               16,500
                                                         Materials
                                                 (b)     Repair and Maintenance                   100,000

               2.      Supplies and              (a)     Equipment, Tools and                      23,000
                       Services                          Materials
                             i                   (b)     Catering Facilities                       30,000
                            •
                                                 (c)     Clothing and Uniforms                     85,000
                                      t          (d)     Communications                            43,000
                                      1          (e)     Miscellaneous Services                    21,000
                                  i
                                                         (cancellation of the Police
                                                         Show)
                                  t

               3.      Transport and            (a)     Petrol, Oil and Tyres                      40.000
                       Plant

               4.      Establishment            (a)     General Office Expenses                     16,500
                       Expenses

               5.      Police Horses            Non-replacement and general                          5,000
                       and Dogs                 economies on equipment, etc.

               6.      Employees                (a)     Training Expenses                          40.000
                                                 (b)     Salaries and Wages                       415.000
                                                         (Overtime)
                                                 (c)     Salaries and Wages                       256.000
                                                         (delayed recruitment)

               7.      Income-Fees              (a)     Services of Police                        Estimated
                       and Charges                                                                Additional
                                                                                                  Income£9,000

                                                                                                  Overall Budget"
                                                                                                  Reductions
                                                                                                  £ 1 , 1 0 0 ,0 0 0
               2.     That the officers be requested to submit a monthly monitoring report
               to the Sub-Committee.                     •
                                           E x fc a e i   U m

                                   Policy          C p z rSe,..



                                   .                             —
                                                                        *+<vn*f&»zaf



(v)      Charges for Police Services

RESOLVED -

1     That the charges to private employers for the services of police
officers be increase! with effect from 1st April, 1985, in accordance with the
standard rates applied throughout the ACPO No. 2 (North East) Region, as
follows:

Hourly Rate, Minimum of 4 Hours*

                          Normal ,                              Public Holiday
                          Present          Revised              Present   Revised




Superintendent             24.75           26.00                32.20            33.80
Chief Inspector            18.10           19.00                23.65            24.80
Inspector                  16.30           17.00                21.20            22.20
Sergeant                   14.55           15.00                18.80            19.60
Constable                  12.35           12.80                15.80            16.40

*     Except for charges to professional football clubs where attendance is
      1,000 or below in which case actual hours worked are charged.

The charges are subject to Value Added Tax at the standard rate.

2.     That the charges for the hire of police horses and the use of vehicles
on special duties be increased with effect from 1st April, 1985, in
accordance with the standard rates applied throughout the ACPO No. 2
(North East) Region, as follows:

                                   Present charge per mile                             Proposed charge

                                       £                                                £
                           •

Force Coach                        1.72                                                1.81
Crewbus (17 seater)                 .45                                                 .47
Mobile Cell Block                   .37                                                 .39
Prisoner Van                        .91                                                 .96
4 Berth Horse Box                   .72                                                 .76
Tractor Unit                       1.19                                                1.25
Range Rover                         .54                                                 .57
Bedford KM Truck                   2.79                                                2.93
Underwater Search Unit             2.14                                                2.25
Cars up to 1600 cc                  .28                                                 .29
Cars over 1600 cc                   .32                                                 .34
Vans up ■t.o^'1600 cc               .30                                                 .32
Vans over 1600 cc                   .53                                                 .56
Motor Cycles                        .30                                                 .32
Trailers                            .11                                                 .12
Horses                             7.00 a day                                          7.35   day
Dogs                               1.75 a day                                          1.84   day
All the above charges are subject to Value Added Tax.
                                    E a ix a o i   tie m




 (vi) 'Bank Holiday Workinp

 RESOLVED - That representations'be made to the Police Negotiating Board to
 recognise the fact that Good Friday is worked normally in the majority of
 South Yorkshire by substituting the following Tuesday as a Bank Holiday day
 for Police Regulation purposes so as to enable the Force operational
 requirements to be properly met.

 (vii)   Hooliganism at, and associated with, Football Matches

 ALSO RESOLVED -

 1.     That the points raised by the Finance Sub-Committee on 26th March and
 the contents of the Chief Executive's report on the County Council's powers
 under the Safety of Sports  Grounds Act, 1975, now submitted, be noted.

2.     That Minute 5 of the   Finance Sub-Commit tee of 26 th March and theCh'ief
Executive's report be submitted for consideration by the Community Liaison
Steering Committee at their meeting to be held on 11th April and by
subsequent meetings of the appropriate Divisional Liaison Committees, the
latter to liaise with the Fire Service Committee's Officer Working Parties
constituted to deal with the detailed investigations of the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act, 1975.
                            POLICE COMMITTEE
                        FINANCE SUB-COMMITTEE

                      (»)      5th March, 1985

PRESENT: Councillor G. H. Moores C.B.E. (in the Chair),
Councillors: J. Bower, P. Collins, W. Layne, R. J. McElvenney, R. H. Patton,
R. Walton.

Apologies for absence were received from Councillor R. Burford and, on
other Council business, from Councillors B. P. Flanagan (Vice—Chairman),
P. T. Senior and M. E. Smith.

1 ._____ Minutes of Previous Meeting

RESOLVED -> That the minutes of the meeting held on 26th February, 1985, be
approved as a correct record.

2 ._____ Financial Statement       _

The County Treasurer circulated to each Member present, a report in the
updated form requested at the meeting of the Sub-Committee held on
11th September, 1984, which showed that the additional expenditure incurred
up to 3rd March, 1985, was now estimated at £23,281,100. The total cost
to South Yorkshire and the other Police authorities providing officers
 (based on both basic salary and overtime costs) for policing the coal
industry dispute in South Yorkshire now amounted to an estimated total cost
of £47,064,175.

In reply to queries from Members, the Chief Constable reported that the
number of resident PSU’s had been reduced from 75 to 7 currently, but
obviously it would be a little while yet before an accurate picture of
policing demands emerged.

RESOLVED - That the Financial Statement be noted.

 3.    Mutual Aid Received from other Forces

The County Treasurer circulated to each Member present a report giving
details of further claims received for the provision of aid within South
Yorkshire and suggestions for payment in accordance with previously agreed
criteria.                  .....

 In reply to queries from Members, the County Treasurer reported that a
 considerable amount of information was still awaited from the claiming
 authorities and that consequently it was likely to be some months before
 the accounts could be cleared up. A further claim for grant was to be
 submitted to the Home Office today.

 RESOLVED -

 1.    That, in accordance with minute 7 of the meeting of the Finance Sub­
 committee held on 23rd October, 1984, the following payments on account be
 approved:-
 Force                    Payment
                            £

 Greater Manchester'       6,000
 Norfolk                 280,000
 West Yorkshire           80,000

          Outstanding Accounts

 The County Treasurer circulated to each Member present, a Schedule (number 34)
 of 40 accounts totalling £150,580.82 gross.

 The Chief Constable answered Members’ queries and confirmed that all supplies
 and services had been obtained using the recognised procedures, including
 those of the Central Purchasing Unit.

 The Chief Constable explained that Account No. 1257 related to the use of
 RAF Swinderby for a thirteen week period and covered lodging, meals and fuel.
 The cost charged per P.S.U. was less than half that charged for the use of
 Beecholme.                       '

 RESOLVED - That the 40 accounts totalling £150,580.82 gross, as detailed in
 Schedule 34 now submitted, be passed for payment in accordance with the
 authority previously granted by the Police Committee.

 5.       Police Mutual Aid Deployment

The Chief Constable circulated to each Member present, a Schedule of Mutual
Aid Deployment for the week ending 1st March, 1985.

RESOLVED -

 1.       That the Schedule be noted.

2. ^ That, as previously agreed,     the Schedule be also submitted to the next
meeting of( the Complaints Sub-Committee.

6.       Crime Prevention Campaign

Further to Minute 6 of 26th February, 1985, the Sub—Committee considered a
letter dated 25th February addressed to the Chairman by Radio Hallam containing
likely costs of the proposed campaign.

The Sub-Committee were disappointed to note the level of the likely charges,
and discussed the terms of the I.B.A. charter for Local Radio Stations relating
to involvement with the community.    It was  also noted thatthere wereno
details as to which day or time of   day the  "jingles" mightbe played.The
existing Police Bulletins on Radio Sheffield were also discussed.

RESOLVED -

1.     That, particularly because of the Government’s financial restrictions
on local government expenditure, no action be taken at the present time to
participate in the proposed Radio Hallam Crime Prevention Campaign in view of
the likely cost.

2. ^    That the Chief Constable be requested to consider whether the existing
radio police bulletins could be modified to reinforce the crime prevention
message.             -
       H ackenthorpe   S u b -D iv is io n a l H ead q u arters,   S h e ffield

With the Chairman's permission, the Chief Constable reported on the repairs
which were required as a matter of urgency to the floor of the C.I.D.
extension at the Hackenthorpe Sub-Divisional Headquarters.

RESOLVED - That authority be given to carry out immediate repairs to the
floor of the C.I.D. extension at the Hackenthorpe Sub-Divisional Headquarters
at an estimated cost of £2,600.
                                     POLICE COMMITTEE
                              FINANCE SUB-COMMITTEE

                              (li)   12th March 1985

PRESENT: Councillor G. H. Moores C.B.E. (in the Chair).
Councillors: B. P. Flanagan (Vice-Chairman), P. Collins, W. Layne,
W. K. Martin, M. McCoy, R. J. McElvenney, R. H. Patton, M. E. Smith.

Apologies for absence were received from Councillors J. Bower and R. Walton
on other Council business and Councillor R. Burford.

1 .____ Minutes of Previous Meeting

RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting held on 5th March, 1985, be approved
as a correct record.

2 .____ Financial Statement

The County Treasurer circulated to each Member present, a report in the
updated form requested at the meeting of the Sub-Committee held on 11th September
1984 which showed that the estimated additional expenditure incurred up to
10th March, 1985, was now estimated at £23,389,200. The total cost to
South Yorkshire and the other Police Authorities providing officers (based on
both basic salary and overtine costs) for policing the coal industry dispute
in South Yorkshire now anbunted to an estimated total cost of £47,325,725.

RESOLVED - That the financial statement be noted.

3 .____ Mutual Aid Received from other        Forces

The County Treasurer circulated to each member present a report giving details
of further claims received for the provision of aid within South Yorkshire
and suggestions for payment in accordance with previously agreed criteria.

RESOLVED - That in accordance with minute 7 of the meeting of the Finance
Sub-Committee held on 23rd October, 1984, the following payments on account be
approved:-

Force                                      Payment
                                           £
Lancashire                                  1 1 0 ,0 0 0
Northamptonshire                              33.000
North Wales                                   36.000
Suffolk                                     310,000
Surrey                                        30.000
West Mercia                                   50.000
City of London                                18.000

 4 ._____ Outstanding Accounts

 The County Treasurer circulated to each member'present, a schedule (number 35) of
 28 accounts totalling £19,541.73 gross.

 The Chief Constable'answered members' queries and confirmed that all supplies
 and services had been obtained using the recognised procedures, including those
 of the Central Purchasing Unit.
     RESOLVED ~ That the 28 accounts totalling £19,541 73 gross as detailed in
     Schedule 35 now submitted be passed for payment in accerdance with the
     authority previously granted by the Police.

     5♦_____ Police Mutual Aid Deployment

    The Chief Constable circulated to each member present, a schedule of Mutual
    Aid Deployment for the week ending 8th March, 1985 and informed members that
    although some Police Support Units had been retained in the Countyuntil
    6th March, none had had to be deployed since 4th March, 1985.

    RESOLVED -

    1.     That the schedule be noted.

    2.  ^ That, as previously agreed, the schedule be also submitted to   the next
    meeting of the Complaints Sub-Committee.
              I
    6»_____ Notice of Retirement

    The Chief Executive reported that, he.had received a letter from
    Mr. A. R. Clement, Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) giving notice of
    his wish to retire from the South Yorkshire Police on Tuesday, 30th April
    1985*       !                                                             9
                  ii

    Officers of the rank of Assistant Chief Constable are required to give
    three months' notice, but the date of 30th April had been arrived at in
    consultation with his senior colleagues and had been accepted as suitable.

    RECOMMENDED - That the request of Mr. A. R. Clement to retire on 30th April,
    1985 be
          r
             agreed.                                                    .  *

—          Command and Control Computer System - Communication Lines

    Further to minute 140B of the Police Committee of 31st October, 1983 a joint
    report was submitted by the Chief Constable and County Treasurer on the
    communication lines for the Command and Control Computer System.

The Command and Control computer would link all the significant locations
within the Force via a network consisting of private communication lines
provided by British Telecom and equipment provided by I.A.L. Gemini. The
installation and commissioning of the network would be a complex and lengthy
exercise and must be completed in advance of the delivery of the computer
equipment to site m September 1985. The communication lines themselves must
be installed by 1st July 1985 to allow time to commission the equipment.

British Telecom had revealed that t h e y ^ r e able to install the communication
 m e s at short notice if the lines were ordered before the end of March 1985.

The installation charge for the network would'be £16,480 and the annual rental
of the network would be £27,842 per annum payable from.the date of thecompletion
of the installation of the full network*

RECOMMENDED - That an order for the communication lines be placed with
British Telecom and that the installation fee be paid upon the order being placed.

—         Criminal Information System Computer - Memory Upgrade

                           Sub'Co* ittee on 19th February 1985 a joint report of
the Chief Constable and County Treasurer was submitted informing members that
                                                     S:s
            _   .,L^.^ ^ ^ ^ ^ mm--~~------




                                            *                    r   ,UP cuooly of either half
                                       I,* frnni three companies for tn    PP    tem computer.
tenders had                                            t ? t h e Criminal Infor^txon System
or a full megabyte of me                        ry                                                   ^       offered

                 ffer received was from Thomas BYS^ ® ceT!                              £3,100 for a half
The only offer recei;ve“               at the following price.
s u i t a b l e se c o n d hand me ^ y ^ n e g a b y t e .
megabyte and              >                                                  rec„ e n d e d to accept the

* S C L « D - - f uir m f g^ y f e ' r m ^                      E -   Thomas      Business System Ltd.
tender for a full meg* >

 ~ ------------------------------------------------- the                                         d       t    D iSPuteai
 The Sub-Committee discussed the c o s ^                              ^               pollce o f f e r s
 in so far as it was        Police Budget.
 time and the effect on the Pol                                                                          suitable
                                   u      r v ^ f Executive and       County     Treasurer ma                    ^ . ^
  RESOLVED - That the Chxe£^1 - . ^                           conceming f i n a n c e the
  re p re se n ta tio n       to       th e   nom
  programme.

     10;^___J'astle_Green/Sni£_Hili__£2)ii£--i^^‘                                 _   [e 180 o( ttie Police
&'                              onorted that further to minute 1 _                                    Sub-Committee
     The County T r e a s u rer^report^ ^     policy Lands                                      J j /Snig Bill

     had^resolved that ^   “^ / ^ I S C t h e  Police C o « t t e e .
     Gable walls be noted and re£e „ e  ^     ^ ^    ^ ^        ^                                            ^




                                                                          -3 -
                              POLICE COMMITTEE
                          FINANCE SUB-COMMITTEE

                         fIjj 19th March 1985    '

 PRESENT: Councillor G. H. Moores C.B.E. (in the Chair).
 Councillors: B. P. Flanagan (Vice-Chairman), J. Bower, P. Collins,
 W. Layne, M. McCoy, R. J. McElvenney, R. H. Patton, P. T. Senior, M. E. Smith,
 R. Walton. •

 Apologies for absence were received from Councillor R. Burford and, on other
 Council business, from Councillor W. K. Martin.

 1»_____Minutes of Previous Meeting

 RESOLVED- That the minutes of the meeting held on 12th March, 1985, be
 approved as a, correct record.

 2._____Financial Statement
             I

The County Treasurer explained that, owing to the very small increase in
amount compared to the Statement submitted last week, he had not prepared
the usual Statement for this week's meeting. Subject to.the Sub-Committee's
views, be proposed to submit the Statement monthly in future.

 RESOLVED - That the Sub-Committee agree with the County Treasurer's suggestion
 to submit the Financial Statement monthly in future.

 3»    Mutual Aid Received from other Forces

The County Treasurer circulated to each member present a report giving details
of further claims received for the provision of aid within South Yorkshire
and suggestions for payment in accordance with previously agreed criteria.

Reference was made to dissatisfaction expressed nationally as to the standards
of meals and/or accommodation at some of the billets used throughout the
Country for housing Police Support Units leading, in one instance it was
understood, to Court action for extra payments for th e p e r s o n n e l involved.

The Chief Constable pointed out that the billets used by the South Yorkshire
Force had received praise on being visited and inspected by Senior Officers
and Police Federation representatives of other Forces, and individual minor
complaints had been rectified on the spot.

RESOLVED - That in accordance with minute 7 of the meeting of the Finance
Sub Committee held on 23rd October, 1984, the’following payments on account
be approved:-

                                 Payment
                                 £
Bedfordshire                     41.000
Cheshire                           5,000 (Dog Handlers only)
Cleveland                        14.000 (Dog Handlers only)
Greater Manchester                 7,500
Lancashire                       12.000
West Midlands                    92,000                        •
     A : _______ O u t s t a n d i n g A c c o u n t s


     The County Treasurer circulated to each member present, a schedule (number 36)
     of 65 accounts totalling £40,346.71 gross.

     The Chief Constable answered members' queries and confirmed that all supplies
      n services had been obtained using the recognised procedures, including
     those of the Central Purchasing Unit.                                   8

     S   S    " That th f e. 5 accounts totalling £40,346.71 gross as detailed in
     Schedule 36 now submitted be passed for payment in accordance with the
     authority previously granted by the Police- Committee.

 —                 Revenue Budget Reductions - 1985/86 Financial Year

 A joint report of the Chief Executive, the Chief Constable and the
                                   ,
                                   CirCVlated to eaeh Member present on the requirement
               r          ? Police Committee Revenue Budget by the sum of £l.lm gross in
 for t h e ^ g S S / S ^ f i J a n c ^ r ^ a r ? " r6quirementS in s i t i n g the rate precept


 S^redStion^ ^         ^   identified.wh^ h had the least effect on manpower,
 fol w S ! ?      • ? equipment, .services and administration costs now proposed
 followed a financial yearin which similar savings were required to be made,
 would bePr n      n^ ^ ex^ lnS deteriorati°n- Stringent expenditure controls
 on Jhe m o n T r Se^ but/   a d?Sree of flexibility to allow adjustments (based
 resu^pH        ^    iPe T an°® in eaCh area)> t0 ensure that the economies
 resulted in the least damaging effect on efficiency and operational effectiveness.

 t L t afhp°fed                     ?!! f ajorv area of saving was for overtime working,, and
 disproportion*^     £    J     d UP°n “ averaSe operational'year with no
 disproportionate number of emergency events. The Sub-Committee discussed
 all of the proposed savings on an item by item basis.

 RECOMMENDED -                                                        '


             the          red“?tion °£ £1-1- gross in the Police Committee's
 1985/86 Revenue Budget be achieved as follows:-

Budget Head                                   Item                                Target Saving
                                                                                  f
 1.            Premises                       (a)     Fuel, Lighting       and     16,500
                                              Cleaning Materials.

                                              (b)     Repair and                  100,000
                                              Maintenance.

2.            Supplies and                   (a)     Equipment, Tools and         23,000
              Services                       Materials.

                                              (b)        Catering Facilities.     30,000

                                             (c)         Clothing and Uniforms.   85,000

                                             (d)         Communications.          43,000

                                             (e)     Miscellaneous Services 21,000
                                             (cancellation of the Police Show).

3.             Transport and"                (a)         Petrol, Oil and Tyres.   40,000
               Plant
        4.       Establishment       (a)      General Office
                 Expenses                                                    1 6 ,5 0 0
                                      Expenses.
        5.       Police Horses       Non-replacement and general              5,000
                 and Dogs
                                     economies on equipment, etc.
        6   .    Employees           (a)      Training Expenses.             40,000

                                     (b)   ^ Salaries and Wages          415.000
                                     (Overtime).

                                    (c)      Salaries and Wages          256.000
                                    (delayed recruitment).
       7.       Income-Fees         (a)       Services of Police.
                and Charges                                              Estimated Additional
                                                                         Income 9,000.

                                                                         Overall Budget Reductions
                                                                         £ 1 , 100, 0 0 0 .

($     to the slib-C^Utfe?'518 be requested to submit a monthly monitoring report


       of the

      ib-       Charges for Police Services


      TriasSer^s'ci^cSutS1^                               ^      C°nStable and the C°“«y
      the Police Committee of 29th O c t o b ™                 !e“ U Jng the d«i«ion. of
      charges to private emol6vf>r<?      n, *       •*            implement the revised
      from 1st September, 1983) and 26th                  ? L f ° li<:e officers (last increased
      charges for the hire „f           u Nove,,,ber> 198‘ relating similarly to the
      (last increased from 1st D e c e m b e ^ " ^ ' 4 *1,?'u*e of chicles on special duties




     RECOMMENDED



     be increased with effect ^ r o r T s r A ^ l ^ l J s s * 0' ^   seJvices of Police officers
     rates applied throughout the ACPO No. 2 ,(Norti East)^ g i o n ! Isitf o n L S:-a”dard
     Hourly Rate, Minimum of Four Hours*

                                         Normal
                                                                   Public Holiday
                                     Present    Revised          Present    Revised
                                       £             £               £          ~     ----------
     Superintendent                  24,75       26.00           32.20
     Chief Inspector                 18.10                                       33.80
                                                 19.00           23.65           24.80
     Inspector                       16.30       17.00          21.20
     Sergeant                                                                    22.20
                                     14.55       15.00          18.80
     Constable                                                                   19.60
                                     12.35       12.80          15.80            16.40

                                                                         ~                     is   1 . 000



                                             -3 -
The charges are subject*to Value Added'Tax at the standard rate.

2.     That the charges for the hire of police horses and the use of vehicles
on special duties be increased with effect from 1st April, 1985, in
accordance with the standard rates applied throughout the ACPO No. 2
(North East) Region, as follows:-

                           Present charge per mile      Proposed charge
                           £                            £

Force Coach                1.72                         1.81
Crewbus (17 seater)         .45                          .47
Mobile Cell Block           .37                          .39
Prisoner Van                .91                          .96
4 Berth Horse Box           .72                          .76
Tractor Unit               1.19                         1.25
Range Rover                 .54                          .57
Bedford KM Truck           2.79                         2.93
Underwater Search Unit     2.14                         2.25
Cars up to 1600 cc          .28                          .29
Cars over 1600 cc           .32                          .34
Vans up to 1600 cc          .30                          .32
Vans over 1600 cc           .53 .                        .56
Motor Cycles                .30                          .32
Trailers                    .11                          .12
Horses                     7.00 a day                   7.35   day
Dogs                       1.75 a day                   1.84   day

All the above charges are subject to Value Added Tax.

7.____ Bank Holiday Working

The Sub-Committee discussed the financial effect of Bank Holiday Working, and
the Chief Constable reported on the normal Force operational policy of one—third
of the Force working and two-thirds off on such days. What became evident was
that whilst Police Regulations required Good Friday to be treated as a Public
Holiday and thus to incur payment at double time rates, in the north of the
Country and South Yorkshire in particular, most factories and shops worked
normally on that day. There was thus a normal policing requirement, whereas on
the following Tuesday when the Force was normally manned, most factories and shops
were closed. The Sub-Committee had no intention of reducing the total number of
days designated as Bank Holidays by Police Regulations, but considered that
representations should be made to recognise the actual operational demands at
Easter in South Yorkshire.

RECOMMENDED - That representations be made to the Police Negotiating Board to
recognise the fact that Good Friday is worked normally in the majority of
South Yorkshire by substituting the following Tuesday as a Bank Holiday day
for Police Regulation purposes so as to enable the Force operational requirements
to be properly met.




                                   -4 -
                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPORT                                    POLICE COMMITTEE
                                                            1ST APRIL, 1985

            Supplemental to Minute 5(g) of Finance Sub-Committee of
                             26th March, 1985


Under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, the County Council is responsible
for granting Safety Certificates to such Stadiums as are designated by the
Secretary of State for the Home Department as requiring such Certificates.

The Act requires that a Safety Certificate shall contain such terms and
conditions as the County Council considers necessary or expedient to secure
reasonable safety at the Stadium when it is in use, and the terms and
conditions may be such as to involve alterations or additions to the Stadium.
In particular, a Safety Certificate:

(a)   shall specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to the
      Stadium;

(b)   may specify the maximum number to be admitted to different parts of
      it; and

(c)   shall include terms and conditions -

      (i)     as to the number, size and situation of entrances to and
              exits from the Stadium or any part of it (including means
              of escape in case of fire or other emergency) and the
              means of access to any such entrances or exits;

      (ii)requiring those entrances,    exits and means of access to
             be properly maintained and kept free from obstruction; and
        4                              #                ,
      (iii)   as to the number, strength and situation of crush barriers.

The County Council delegated its functions under the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act, 1975, to the Fire Service Committee. Because of the necessarily
detailed technical investigatiofts and the requirement in the Act for the
Chief Officer of Police and the Building Authority to be consulted, the Fire
Service Committee constituted Officer Working Parties for each of the District
Council areas to undertake the required detailed working. The Officer Working
Parties consist of representatives of the County Fire Service (at both
Headquarters and Divisional levels), the South Yorkshire Police (at both
Headquarters and Divisional levels) and the District Council's Building
Regulation staff, with co-ordination being undertaken by staff of the County
Council's Department of Administration. By this means, the necessary inputs
from the means of escape, fire precaution, safety, security and structural
stability aspects are considered jointly and not in isolation.

This has resulted in the Fire Service Committee having issued General Safety
Certificates, following designations by the Secretary of State, in respect of
the Hillsborough Stadium of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club (in 1979),
the Millmoor Ground of the Rotherham United Football Club Ltd. (in 1984), and
the Oakwell Ground of the Barnsley Football Club Ltd. (in 1985). The
Bramall Lane Ground of the Sheffield United Football Club Ltd. was designated
by the Secretary of State in August, 1984, and the Officer Working Party
(Sheffield District) is undertaking the detailed investigations in conjunction
with the Club’s consultants. The Belle Vue Ground of the Doncaster Rovers
Football Club Ltd. has not yet been designated by the Secretary of State,
but the Officer Working Party (Doncaster District) is continuing to work on
an informal basis with the Club.

The Act itself contains little in the way of detailed requirements, these
being contained in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (Football) issued
by the Home Office and generally referred to as "the Green Guide     The
Guide states that" the problem of crowd safety at football grounds is complex
and cannot be solved by ensuring that each component of a ground is
satisfactory in itself. The inter-relation of components^is essential: they
should be compatible and combine to form a balanced unit.

The Guide also states that"although new work or reconstruction of football
grounds should not be to a standard lower than that set out in the guidelines,
it should be borne in mind when using the Guide to assess whether existing ^
situations provide adequately for the safety of spectators, that the criterion
is that of a reasonable degree ©f safety. It would be unreasonable, even it
it were practicable, to seek the absolute safety of everyone attending a ground

The Act itself contains an appeal procedure to the Secretary of State against
the inclusion of any term or condition by a-local authority in a General
Safety Certificate which an applying football club considers to be unreasonable

 On football hooliganism generally, Members will be aware that the Government
 has called both the Football Association and the Football League to a meeting
 on Monday, 1st April.

                                                  J. C. HARRIS
                                                  Chief Executive
                                                  ACC(OPS)/TT
                                                  2 November 1984

J C Harris Esq MA LLB (Cantab)
Chief Executive and County Clerk
South Yorkshire County Council
County Hall
BARNSLEY


FOR THE ATTENTION OP D VAUGHAN


Dear Sir

SAFETY OP SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
BARNSLEY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD

I refer to your letter of 15 October 1984, which the Chief Constable
has passed to me for my attention. The football match between
Barnsley FC and Leeds United FC at the Oakwell Ground on Saturday 13 October
1984 was, of course, recognised as being difficult to police because
of the well publicised violence in recent times of the Leeds supporters.
Consequently, the numbers of police officers deployed in and around
the ground were far in excess of what would have been provided for a
match involving any other Second Division team visiting Oakwell, and
during the day 377 police officers, including 11 mounted officers and
13 dog handlers, were on duty.

The Divisional Commander puts the blame for the disorder entirely on
the Leeds supporters, but feels that additional problems were caused
by the closure of certain turnstyles too early, causing some Leeds
supporters to miss the first 10 minutes of the match, and the fact that
a number had been sold tickets for the Pontefract Road end of the West
Stand, enabling them to mingle with Barnsley supporters. The Club
management have been warned about this.

You may know that 41 arrests were made and a further 32 persons were
ejected from the ground.

To date the Oakwell ground has not been granted a certificate under
the Act, but the Divisional Commander feels that anything not yet
completed by the Club had no bearing on this incident.

The next difficult match is likely to be that between Barnsley and
Sheffield United at Oakwell on Saturday 3 November, but it is possible
that the FA will agree to an 11.00 am start, which virtually removes
the problems caused by supporters arriving at the ground having consumed
large quantities of alcohol.
J C Harris Esq                     2                     2 November 1934


Generally, the Oakwell Management Team are most co-operative and whilst
efforts should be made to cause the® to complete the work necessary
for the grant of a certificate, the incident of 13 October highlights
the problem Leeds United have, rather than any defect at Oakwell.

I hope my comments will be of assistance to you.

Yours faithfully




Assistant Chief Constable
(Operations)
            South Yorkshire County Council
            Chief Executive & County Clerk:                                   Department of Administration
            j. C. Harris, M.A., LL.B.(Cantab)                                 County Hall
                                                                              Barnsley
                                                                              South Yorkshire S 7 0 2TN
                                                                              Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                              (STD 0 2 2 6 ) 86141
                                                                              Telex: 5 4 7 6 7 5

            Our Ref: DV/GM/583/1          Your Ref:                           Date: 15th October,               1984.


            This matter is being dealt with by    d   . V au g h an           Ext. No. 4 2 2




Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
Barnsley Football Club L t d .

I am, of course, aware of media reports of incidents following the match
with Leeds United at the Oakwell Ground on Saturday, 13th October.

Whilst not wishing in any way to impinge on your operational responsibilities,
you will be aware that the County Council has certain responsibilities
regarding the Ground under the above-mentioned Act.

It would be of assistance in determining the factual position if you could in the
first instance kindly let me (a) have a copy of your Divisional Officer's
re.Dort on the incidents and (b) know whether in your opinion action under the
Act would assist in reducing the possibility of such incidents in the future.

                                                Yours faithfully,


                                                                                 S O T O yo rks f o u - r l .


                                                                                        17 0CF19SI                      I
                                                Chief Executive.          f                            -Q


                                                                                     B A f? X '.   3        5      "f




                                                                 n
The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
Sheffield,
S3 8LY.                                                               ,
                             S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E POLICE

                                                                 REF:            B/DHQ/ATW/PM
FROM:   Chief Superintendent    'B' Division
                                                                 STATION/DEPT:   BARNSLEY
        ACC (Operations)                                         DATE:           19 October 1984


         SUBJECT:          BARNSLEY v LEEDS UNITED - SATURDAY 13 OCTOBER 1984




        With reference to the above subject and the attached letter from the
        Chief Executive, South Yorkshire County Council, dated 15 October 1984.

        The attendance at the match was 16,199 and we used a total of 377 Officers,
        including 11 horses and 13 Police dogs in;the policing arrangements.

        During the match 400/500 Leeds supporters in the Spion Kop constantly-
        caused trouble by attempting to climb the safety fence and damaging same.

        Immediately at the end of the match some 2,000 Leeds supporters surged
        onto the playing area both from the Spion Kop and the terracing.  It
        was clearly their intention to attack the Barnsley supporters, who did
        not retaliate.

        Police Officers on duty managed to control the trouble-makers and caused
        them to leave the playing area.

        On leaving the ground, many Leeds supporters stoned the invalids stand
        and also broke numerous house windows adjacent to the ground.

        41 Persons were arrested for public order offences and 32 persons were
        ejected from the ground.

        On Wednesday 17 October 1984, Chief Inspector Dixon (Bl) and myself met
        the Club Chairman, Mr Buckle, and the Club Secretary, Mr Michael Spinks.
        Our only real complaints with regard to the match were (1) early  closing
        of turnstiles and (2) Leeds supporters having been allocated tickets
        in the Pontefract Road end of the West Stand.  Mr Buckle promised to
        take steps to deal with these matters.

        We then discussed the Barnsley v Sheffield United Match to be held on
        Saturday 3 November 1984.  At our suggestion the Club Representatives
        agreed to a provisional 11am kick-off, but stressed they would first
        have to confer with both the Football Associaiton and Sheffield United
        PC.  Once a decision as to the.kick-off time has been finalised, a further
        meeting would be convened.
I suppose one way to reduce the likelihood of a repeat of this
situation is for an even greater deployment of Police manpower
so that policing outside the ground does not rely on the r e ­
deployment of men from inside.  Critics could say that after
this particular match we simply did not have enough men in
residential streets adjacent to the ground, because many Officers
remained committed to the pitch invasion inside.

It would, of course, be of great assistance if barriers, fencing
etc., inside the ground was of such a standard so as to absolutely
prevent pitch i n v a s io n s , but I do not envisage the Club at
Barnsley going to that expense in the foreseeable future.

A meeting has already been held with Officials of the Club.
I have also epxressed my willingness to meet with residents
and the Councillor;: for Barnsley Central Ward (I saw him at
last Thursday's Barnsley Town Council Meeting) to discuss possible
solutions or improvemnts.

The letter from the Chief Executive, South Yorkshire County
Council addressed to the Chief Constable is returned herewith,
to enable reply.  Also attached is a similar letter from the
Barnsley Borough Council which you might also wish to answer
in like vein to that to the County.  Alternatively, I can,
of course, reply  from this Office.

The Rt Hon Roy Mason, M P , was at the match and was, I understand,
quite complimentary about the Police.

A photostat copy of the Operational Order for the Barnsley
v Leeds match is attached hereto for information.




Chief      intendent
BARNSLhY zJ 10 84 pm
ACC (Operations)

You will note that there was a substantial Police commitment
to the Barnsely v Leeds football match on Saturday 13 October
1984.'

Prior to the game, my main concern was for the protection of
the general public - women shoppers, etc. - and business premises
in the town centre.

Whilst some arrests were made, it is accurate to say that due
to the substantial Police presence there was no major problem
in the town centre before kick-off.

One difficulty that does occur, however, and I see no way of
preventing it, is that many supporters drink heavily in town
centre public houses until shortly before kick-off time and
then make a last minute dash to the football ground.  This
last minute dash, plus the fact that on this occasion the Club
had closed some turnstiles early, a matter already taken up
with the Club, resulted in     supporters still requiring access
20 minutes after kick-off.  Drink, combined with the inability
to gain immediate access, creates aggravation.

Aggravation on the part of a considerable number of Leeds
supporters was apparent from the start and increased following
Barnsley's 27th minute goal.    Officers at the Spion Kop end
occupied by Leeds supporters were abused throughout, being spat
a t , thrown at and with the retaining fence between the pitch
and supporters under constant attack.

Shortly before the end of the game, Officers from inside the
ground were detailed to take up various positions outside the
ground. EUe to the behaviour o f 'supporters inside and the end
of game pitch invasion by Leeds fans.     the re-deployment of
Police resources from inside to outside the ground was limited.

On leaving the football ground, the route to the railway and
bus stations for supporters: from away is through a large car
and coach park and then down a -street of residential property.
 Having carefully examined the situation, I see no alternative
route, but it does enable the troublesome element to pick up
stones, etc., from the unsurfaced car park and then damage
property in the residential area en route to the railway station.
         <._ . w(Si» ■Tr y AO * "■ ---------—
                       S T A T...LI T O P Y—^I N S T R U                    M E N T§ 7 W W 4

O 't'—
                                                                                 JEADQ UARTEHS
C o*-* CH                                       1984 No. 942                      A D M i rjiS m A IIO N -

                                        OUNDS ANDSEQRTING E V E N T S ~ ~ ^ 7 T Z p
V - 2                                 , J f ^ o ' T t i I C R :% f 0 U 1 E-       1              ^ Y       / r ' i

A te. ^ - s )
                  The Safety of Sp >rts 'Grpuhds (pesignation^ rder^ 8 4

                        Made -                                            3rd Jui >
                        Laid before Pa liame                            iM t
                        Coming into 0\                                                ! 1985
                                               OPERATIC
                                                                                  jc      '

            In pursuance of the powers conferred up<                                 1) of-the Safety of
            Sports Grounds Act 1975(a), and after S U W 1 C U I15> U 1 I d . H U 1 1 as js mentioned in
            section 18(4) of that Act, I hereby make the following Order:—

              1. This Order may be cited as the Safety o f Sports Grounds (Designation)
            Order 1984 and shall come into operation on 1st January 1985.

               2. The sports stadia specified in the Schedule to this Order (being stadia each
            o f which in the opinion of the Secretary of State has accommodation for
            more than 10,000 spectators) are hereby designated as stadia requiring safety
            certificates under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.




                                                                               Leon Brittan,
                                                                  One of Her Majesty’s Principal
            Home Office.                                               Secretaries o f State.
            3rd July 1984.

                                                  SC H ED U LE


                      Address of stadium                           Occupier of stadium

                The Manor Ground                             Oxford United Football Club Ltd.
                Headington
                Oxford
                Bramall Lane Ground                          Sheffield United Football Club Ltd.
                Sheffield
                Plough Lane Ground                           Wimbledon Football Club Ltd.
                Durnsford Road
                Wimbledon
                           EXPLANATORY NOTE
                     (This Note is not part o f the Order.)
  By this Order the Secretary of State designates certain sports stadia as stadia
requiring safety certificates under the Safety of Sports Grounds A ct 1975.




                             Printed in the UK for H M SO
                        790/U51419      WO J79      C ll  7 /84
                                         35p net
                                 ISBN 0 11 046942 9
    /'*
*   SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
          W ith the Compliments of

         E CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                                                  w




              FOR IN FORM A TIO N




              FOR ACTION




              FOR C O M M E N T B V        M
    1/        ft Vift-rr&R efc UfeCr&MCy , PleMC




Fror                         Date       -L.T> ■       'V h
Departm ent ot Administration
County Hall
Barnsley      Tel. Barnsley86141 Ext.       U--2-2.

CR/ACE/001
                                                                           P » /(


                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL                       \     /
                                                                                       %
           JOINT REPORT OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE,                    FIRE SERVICE COMMITTEE
           THE CHIEF FIRE OFFICER AND THE CHIEF                    8th SEPTEMBER    1983
           CONSTABLE                                                   — --------5---- ~

                                SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT,   1975

  1   .    Background

  1.1      The Committee will recall that the County Council's powers and duties under
           this Act are delegated to this Committee.  On 8th January, 1976, the
           Committee decided that any necessary detailed investigation should be
           undertaken by Officer Working Parties for each of the four Borough Council
           areas.  These Officer Working Parties consist of representatives of the
           Fire Service, the Police, the Building Inspectors of the Borough Council,
           co-ordination being undertaken by the Department of Administration.

 1.2       Whilst it is Parliament's intention that all sports grounds which have
           accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators should be subject to the
           provisions of the Act eventually, the only grounds designated by the. Secretary
           of State to date as requiring General Safety Certificates from the appropriate
           County Council have been certain "International" grounds and those of clubs
           in the First and Second Divisions of the Football League.

           Position in South Yorkshire

 2. 1      The Hillsborough Stadium of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. was
           designated by the Secretary of State as requiring.to apply to the County
           Council for a General Safety Certificate by 1st January, 1979.  Following
           detailed investigations by the Officer Working Party for the Sheffield
           District, the Certificate was granted on 21st December, 1979, after approval
           by the Committee.


2.2       The Officer Working^Parties for the four Districts have also given informal
          advice on a continuing basis, on request, to the remainder of the football
          league Clubs in South Yorkshire.

2.3       Following their promotion to the Second Division of the Football League, the
          Barnsley Football Club Ltd. and the Rotherham United Football Club Ltd. were
          designated by the Secretary of State as requiring to apply to the County .
          Council for a General Safety Certificate by 1st January, 1982 (as reported to
          the Committee on 3rd September, 1981).;

2.4       The two Clubs did so, but have taken rather longer than they anticipated to
          carry out the works required to meet the provisions of the Act in view of
          certain development and re-development proposals which the Clubs had in mind,
          naturally, the Clubs were reluctant to incur expenditure.on their Grounds
           u  A Se P roposals w e ye to be Put into effect. It should be pointed out that
          the Act does not specify a time limit for consideration of an application
          tor a General Safety Certificate once the application has been formally made.

          General Safety Certificates

3.1       On 30th November, 1978, the Committee approved a draft General Safety
          Certificate as the basis for the standard certificate to be used throughout
          the County.
The General   Safety    Certificate granted to the Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club Ltd.     on 21st   December, 1979, was based on the standard certificate with
additions     to meet   the particular conditions at the Hillsborough Stadium.   The
Committee     decided   on 14th January, 1930 not to make any charge for the
Certificate   after     referring the matter to Policy Advisory Sub-Committees 'A'
and 'B '.

Experience gained since the granting of the Sheffield Wednesday General
Safety Certificate showed the desirability of incorporating two minor
amendments to the standard certificate and, on 3rd September, 1981, the
Committee agreed to the Standard Certificate being amended so as to
incorporate the two suggested minor amendments.

All of the required works have been carried out or will be completed shortly
and, in order to enable the General Safety Certificates to be issued, drafts
of the Certificates in respect of the Oakwell Ground of the Barnsley Football
Club Ltd. and the Millmoor Ground of the Rotherham United Football Club Ltd.
are attached for the Committee's consideration.  These are, of course, based
on the standard South Yorkshire General Safety Certificate previously
approved by the Committee.

The Committee is also requested to consider the question of whether a fee
should be charged for the Certificates in view of the earlier decision of
14th January, 1980, that no charge should be made to the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club Ltd. for the General Safety Certificate in respect of the
Hillsborough Stadium.

Recommendation

(i)    That the General Safety Certificates now submitted in respect of the
       Oakwell Ground, Barnsley, and the Millmoor Ground, Rotherham, be
       approved, and that the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Committee
       be authorised to agree any amendments necessary should any of the
       requirements not be able to be complied with by the actual date of
       issue.

(ii)   That the Committee make a decision as to whether a charge should be
       made to the Barnsley Football Club Ltd. and the Rotherham United
       Football Club Ltd. for their General Safety Certificates.




F. A. MALLETT                       H. WRIGHT                 P. WRIGHT
Chief Executive                     Chief Fire Officer        Chief Constable
[SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
    I
   ^ j^ ith the Com plim ents of

 TH E CHIEF EXECUTIVE
  Tf t ^ . t l ^ R C W H U e W ,         & 9-U ,




                         FOR IN FO RM A TIO N £p<*W«x1'|
                                                ^ t-k o L .
                                          v<to woji*cfcWfcw>v>^
                         t>'| •VUAH'^>
                         FOR A C TIO N




                           OR C O M M E N T




   From                                     , D ate A L l I L lSlI
   D ep artm ent of Adm inistration
   County H all
   Barnsley                T el. Barnsley86141 Ext
                                           <9 P 1                    h -ljo T .1


South Yorkshire County Counci
F. A . M allett, LL.B., Chief Executive                 County Hall
                                                        Barnsley
J.C. Harris, M .A., LL.B., (Cantab), County Secretary   South Yorkshire S70 2
Departm ent of Administration                           Telephone: Barnsley
                                                        (S T D 0226) 86141
                                                        Telex: 547675


O urR ef:   DV/LW/583/2          YourRef: GS/SJH        Date:   11th November, 1981.




Dear Sir,

 Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

 I thank you for your letter dated 29th October.

 Whilst I appreciate what you say, I think it would be as well
 to reiterate that one of the County Council's objectives in
 setting up the Officer Working Parties (one for each of the
 District Council areas) was to assist and advise all the Football
 League Clubs in South Yorkshire on the requirements of the Act.
 Additionally, it was hoped that this would obviate the possibility
 of alterations or improvements at grounds needing further work to
 meet the requirements of the Act on designation by the Secretary of
 State.

 This procedure has worked well in practice, especially with the
 Barnsley and Rotherham United Football Clubs.  The advice given by
 the appropriate Officer Working Party has enabled the Clubs to carry
 out works on a phased basis, and thus eased the load imposed on
 their designation by the Secretary of State (following their
 promotion from the third to the second division of the football
 league).

 I hope you will agree that it is in the Club's best intereste to
 seek the Officer Working Party's advice.

 As regards the charges for police at football matches, this-is
 initially a matter for the Chief Constable and, in the final event,
 for the South Yorkshire Police Authority.

                                  Yours faithfully,




                                  Chief Executive.




 G. Smith, Esq.,
 Director,
 Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd. ,
 Belle Vue,
 DONCASTER,
 DN4 5HT                             i
                                                                                               N

 oncaster Rovers
ootball Club Ltd.                                               BELLEVUE
Your Ref:     DV/ a a /583/2                                     DONCASTER
                                                                   DN45HT
                                                                      To): Don. (0302) 55281
GS/SJH



29th October, 1981



F* A. Mallett, Esq.,
Chief Executive,
South Yorkshire County Council,
County Hall,
Barnsley,
South Yorkshire S70 2TN.



Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

We thank you for your letter of 5"th October and apologise for the delay in
arranging a date to meet the County Councils Officer Working Party.

The delay, however, has been due to two factors, the first of which relates to a
meeting held during the summer between ourselves and members of Doncaster
Metropolitan Borough Council when the subject of a council proposal to develop a
Sports Complex in the vicinity of Doncaster Airport was discussed.   A possible
inclusion in the scheme would be an athletics track laid around the perimeter of the
football pitch at the Belle Vue ground.   Such a scheme would seriously affect the
layout of the ground and as we are still awaiting the outcome of the Councils
feasability study, we feel it would be impractical to enter into a scheme involving
ground improvements until the outcome is known.

The second reason for delay is linked somewhat with the first in that even if the
Club were to embark on ground improvements at this time, it would undoubtedly
experience great difficulty in meeting the resulting costs.   Whilst the football
team is enjoying one of its most successful spells for many years, it is still
difficult to draw the attendances we require, mainly due we believe to the present
recession.   Our finances are not helped by the excessive Police costs required by
the South Yorkshire County Council which are gradually crippling the Club.    Recent
research has revealed that South Yorkshire Football League Clubs pay out what in
many cases is more than ten times that of the amout paid by our colleagues in the
Third Division.   We are, however, in the process of trying to arrange a meeting
with officials of the South Yorkshire County Council to discuss these matters.

As soon as we feel that the Club is in a position to offer some realistic
contribution, we will contact y o u further.




Granam smicn
                                                                     Chairman:   I.M.JONES
                                                                         Directors: H. BATES
Director.
Manager: W. J. BREMNER                                           A. PHILLIPS, K. JACKSON,
Secretary: R. W. READE                                           B. E. BOLDRY, J. J. BURKE,
Company Reg. No. 1701792                                                          G. SMITH
DV/AA/583/2          ER/SJ3                  5 October 1981




  Dear Sir,

  Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

  Since your letter of 13th August, I do not
  appear to have heard further from you regarding
  a mutually convenient date and time for the
  Officer Work i n g P a r t y ’s visit to the Belle Vue
  Ground (first raised in m y letter of
  22nd May).

  Can you let m e know the present position, please.

                        Yours faithfully,




                        Chief Executive.




  Mr. R. Eeade,
  Secretary,
  Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd.,
   Belle Vue,
   Doncaster.
   DM4 5HT
       Slender, strong and structurally     to specifiers worldwide. The range of
efficient, RectangularHollowSections        ISO metric sizes extends from 20 x
        ritish Steel Corporation are        20 m m to400x400m m insquaresand


«       here people and performance
        count. Offering a clean, smooth
        external profile, RHS are easy to
protect against corrosion and
                                            from 50 x 3 0 m m to 4 5 0 x2 5 0 m m in
                                            rectangles, with thicknesses ranging
                                            from 2.4m m up to 16mm. Fully
                                            weldable steelsare supplied, normally
                                            to BS 4 3 6 0 grade 43C mild steel and
aesthetically give an unbeatable
result. Once sealed RHS will not            high yield grade 50C, with other
corrode internally, asdetailed tests on     grades and international specifications
Chelsea F.C.’s floodlight towers and        also available. And fo r fabricators
the davits of the SS Mauritania             RHS are simple to cut, weld and
(launched in 1914) have shown.              finish - and are readily available
       BSC is the largest                                   eitherdirect from the
and most experienced                                        Mill or from BSC
manufacturer of hot                                          Warehouses and
rolled RHS in Europe                                         stockholders through­
(hot rolling giving                                            out the country.
 improved metallur­                                                   Specify hot
gical properties),                                              rolled RHS and
supplying 2 5 0 ,0 0 0                                          you’ll score
tonnes each year                                                 everytime.




                                                                 ints
        th
         di
                                                                   RHS scores for an
                                                                   unbeatable range
                                                                    of sizes.
 Galvanize, meta
 spray or hand
 paint for a
 superb finish.




                                                                            and it’s top
                                                                     of the league for
 Once sealed it
 stays corrosion                                                    thickness range
                                                                   too.
 free inside.



                                                                 Neat corners-
                                                                 no rough edges.
     The strength
and reliability of Rlt>                                                                                                                             The spectator-free
                                                                                                                                                    covered access tunnel.




put the terraces back
under control                                                                                                                                 Luton's electronic
      While there’s a demand fo r the exciting
atmosphere of the terraces, there will always                                                                                                 scoreboard - supported
                                                                                                                                              by RHS columns.
be the potential problem of crowd surge. If
you’ve ever experienced it, you’ll know just
how frightening it can be: one slip can be fatal;
                                                                                                                                                                             tm m
broken bones and broken tempers an
unwelcom e‘bonus’.
      Crowd control barriers in British Steel’s
Rectangular Hollow Sections are easy to
fabricate and install and require minimal
maintenance. They put safety on the terraces
and keep the terraces off the pitch.
      Team up with RHS and you’re a winner
everytime.



       The clean lines of RHS provide safety with
       elegance.



       Safety fencing
                                                    — ..
       surrounding the
       crowd staircase.                                          Grey painted tunnels, providing
                                                                 fast, protected access from
                                                                 pitch to terrace for Police,
       Crush barriers and I                                      stewards and first aid teams.
       fencing give a safe,
       unrestricted view.




                                                           4^5

                                                                                                   The barriers and fencing at LUTON          RHS gates flank
                                                                                                   TOWN F.C.’s ground were designed by        the covered
                                                                                                   Laithwaite and Ward, Structural            access tunnel.
                                                                                                   Engineering Consultants, Leicester and
                                                                                                   fabricated from BSC’s RHS by Leicester
                                                                                                   Fabrication Specialists Ltd. Photographs
                                                                                                   taken by kind permission of Luton Town
                                                                                                   Football Club.
                   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

           Note of a Visit to the Millmoor Ground, Rotherham
                            on 3rd June 1981



PRESENT:    Representing the Rotherham United Football Club Ltd

            J. Adams (Commercial Manager)
            J. E. Bennison (Secretary)
            Dr. W. Eastwood (Eastwood & Partners)
            A. Johnson (Chairman)
            R. Nellar (Henry Spencer & Sons Ltd)
            V. Smith (Lilleker Bros. Ltd)

            Representing the Officer Working Party (Rotherham District)

            H. Allen (South Yorkshire Police)
            W. Armeson (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
            A. K. Beaumont (South Yorkshire Police)
                         ](Rotherham Metropolitan Borough Council)
            K. Danks (South Yorkshire County F i r e •Service)
            P. Garner (South Yorkshire Police)
            R. Grimshaw (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
            P. W. Herbert (South Yorkshire Police)
            J. Nesbit (South Yorkshire Police)
            J. P. Ruddy (South Yorkshire Police)
            A. Seaman (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
            D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

       Purpose of Meeting

The visit was the second in the twice-yearly programme of visits by the
Officer Working Parties to all five Leagae Football Clubs in South
Yorkshire as mentioned in the Chief Executive's correspondence with the
Club (the visit on 2nd December 1980 having been counted as the first
due to its proximity to the first visits to the remainder of the
Grounds in January/February) . Additionally, it was thought th^ft, following
the Club's promotion from the Third to the Second Division of the
Football League, it would be advantageous for the designation and
certification procedure to be discussed on an informal and preliminary
basis.

2.     Designation Procedure and Related Aspects

Assuming that the practice of previous years was followed, the Secretary
of State would introduce, probably towards the end of July, a Statutory
Instrument designating those Clubs promoted to the Second Division as
requiring a General Safety Certificate from the appropriate County Council.
The Home Office would write to the Clubs advising them of their
designation, the correspondence normally including a specimen application
form.     Formal application would then have to be submitted to the County
Council not later than the 1st January following.     There was no statutory
time limit for the consideration of an application by a County Council, but
the general intention was that any required works would be completed by the
end of the 1982 close season, following which the Certificate would be
i s su ed.
A list of information and plans which would be formally required by the
County Council from the Club on designation would be passed to the Club's
Secretary for information.  Much of this had already been supplied and
the work already carried out or to be carried out shortly at the Ground
by the Club following the informal advice given by the Officer Working
Party would obviously help When the formal Certification procedure was .
commenced.  It would obviously be of benefit to everyone if the goodwill
and co-operation which had existed to date could be maintained, and an
assurance was given that full discussion and consultation of any aspect
which the Club wished to raise would continue to take place.

(a)      Crush Barriers

Following experiences with the crush barriers at the Hillsborough Stadium,
the County Council would require all crush barriers to be tested
initially so as to provide a known standard from which to work.   Subsequently
one-fifth would be required to be tested each year, so that all the
barriers in the ground would be tested at least every five years.         u ,
                                                                  f


The Club announced that Dr. W. Eastwood had been appointed as Consultant
and had been requested to provide a report and recommendations on
meeting the Green Guide crush barrier requirements.

Dr. Eastwood showed the Officer Working Party a plan illustrating his
thoughts to date.   The proposals also included revised gangways and
walkways.   With the exception of the long horizontal barrier at the^
Railway Terracing end, he considered it was unlikely that the existing
crush barriers would meet the Guide requirements. Accordin gly, it was
proposed to strengthen the existing barriers where possible and replace
the others.   The total number (including%brand new ones) would be some
2 or 3 times greater than at present, and naturally they would be sited in^
accordance with the Green Guide recommendations.

Whilst obviously not having had the opportunity to date of considering the
proposals in detail, the Working Party welcomed the proposals and supported
them in principle.

Both the Club and the Working Party felt that the biggest and immediate
problem related to the barriers and gangways at the Tivoli end of the
ground.  Experiences with the railed walkway used for Police purposes had
shown that it had not proved as advantageous as originally envisaged, and
Police stated that they would not object to its demolition.

IT WAS A G R E E D :-

(i)    That the upgrading of the Tivoli Covered Terracing crush barriers
and gangways should be carried out on a priority basis, if possible by
the commencement of the forthcoming season (the existing railed walkway used
for Police purposes to be demolished) .

(ii)   That the remainder of the crush barrier and gangway upgrading should
be carried out in the 1982 close season.
(b)   Pitch Perimeter Wall/Fence

Pitch Perimeter Walls or Fences served a dual purpose.   From a safety point
of view, if spectators were able to lean on them the Green Guide deemed them
to be a crush barrier and they had to fulfil the specified height and
strength requirements.  Their other purpose related to security, as the
Green Guide required access to the playing..area for normal purposes to be
made as difficult as possible.

The proposals being recommended to the Club by Dr. Eastwood incorporated the
gates in the pitch perimeter wall for emergency purposes, as suggested in
the Working Party's Interim Report to the Club.  The proposals also
envisaged that, with upgrading, the pitch perimeter walls on the Main Stand
and Millmoor Lane sides of the Ground would meet the Guide's requirements.
However, it was intended to replace those at the Tivoli and Railway
Terracing ends with a fence constructed to Class "A" barrier standards.

A discussion took place as to the feasibility and/or desirability of erecting
a complete pitch perimeter fence.  Whilst the Police would ideally like
to see this done, it was generally felt that there normally were little
problems with the Main Stand and Millmoor Lane sides of the Ground.
Additionally, the Club had in mind such factors as the restricted viewing
which would result and, not unnaturally, the    additional cost which would be
involved if a complete pitch perimeter fence were to be erected.
                                                             /
IT WAS AGREED

(i)    That the Club would upgrade the existing pitch perimeter walls on
the Main Stand and Millmoor Lane sides of the Ground to the Green Guide
requirements.

(ii)   That the Club would erect fences to Class "A" barrier standards at
the Tivoli and Railway Terracing ends of the Ground.

(iii)  That the Working Party would consider and reply-shortly to the Club
on the suggestion that, whilst the Tivoli and Railway end fences would be
so designed and constructed as to provide for an increase in height for
security purposes, the work required to increase their height ^hould not
be carried out until a later date and experience has shown the necessity
of doing so.

(c)    Fire     Warning System

The Fire Service outlined the thinking behind the Main Stand and gates onto
the pitch surround evacuation recommendations, and stressed the need for
the early installation of an automatic fire detection system in the
Main Stand, due to its timbered construction.

IT WAS AGREED  that the Club would arrange for the installation of
automatic fire detection equipment as a matter of urgency.
(d)    Fire Protection Works

The Club reported that the fire protection recommendations of the Fire
Service relating to the rooms and buildings below the Main Stand were
in h a n d .

(e)   Tivoli Covered Terrace

The toilets at the rear had been reduced in size so as to allow the full
width of Exit Gate No. 7 to be used, as agreed at the meeting on
2nd December, 1980.

It was noted that {here were areas of cracked or spalled concrete in
certain parts of the terracing which required attention.

(f)   Police Facilities

The Working Party's Interim Report had referred to t h e n e e d for an
adequate police room and facilities, and a discussion took place ^s to
how these could be achieved.  The importance of the siting of the >
termination point of the fire warning system in the Police Control Post
was stressed.

IT WAS AGREED
                                                             /
(i)    That the small concrete wall at the front of the Boy's Enclosure
(abutting the Railway Terracing Stand) should be demolished and the
existing concrete step extended so as to provide improved access to the
present Detention Room.

(ii)   That the appropriate representatives should stay behind after the
meeting to discuss and formulate proposals for Police facilities to
enable a scheme to be drawn up  for both the Club'sand the Working Party's
consideration.

(s)   Parking of Visiting Coaches

The Police reported that agreement had been reached with Mr. B^oth to
permit the parking of some 15/20 coaches on his land to the rear of
the Railway Terrace end of the Ground.  This would be beneficial from
both a segregation and access/egress point of view if used for the
parking of coaches carrying visiting supporters.

IT WAS AGREED  that the Club would consider providing suitable ballast
material in order to provide a footpath from the coach parking point
to the access point over the railway line.

(h)    General

IT WAS AGREED:-

(i)    That Dr. Eastwood would send blank copies of the plans direct to
Divisional Officer Seaman at the Fire Service Divisional Headquarters
at Erskine Road, Rotherham (who would pass copies to Mr. Brewer) to
enable detailed consideration to be given to the Club's crush barrier
and gangway proposals.
(ii)   Mr. Vaughan would supply a further copy of the Working Party's
Interim Report for Mr. Smith's use as regards the electrical aspects.


                                    4.
P22/02/12

Note for File

Supt Bradley (B1) 71 312^ requested name of firm that hired out
sectional buildings, Portakabins etc. to see if one of these
could be purchased, cheaply, for Barnsley football ground.

Following information left with the Chief Inspector B1. who
said that Supt Bradley would be informed as soon as he was back
from leave.

J D Bridges Group Limited
Mexborough
Rotherham 585591 Ext.   k 5   - Greg Marshall or Gordon Jones

Portakabin type building available shortly 2 k ' x 8'. Presco
Steel Clad with veneer ply inside - used for office accommodation
Price new £2,260
Second Hand price ,£1,500 approximately

Other end of scale:

2 5 ' x 10' timber hut-used
as contractor site hut
Price new £798
Second Hand price negotiable.

 Plenty of other buildings in between the two quoted.

 The Chief Inspector is to ask Supt Bradley to contact J D Bridges
 to discuss the type of building required.
                                                           MJS/BW
Mr G Buckle
Chairman                                                   ADM/RC/CLS
Barnsley Football Club Limited
Oakwell Ground                                             31 July 1980
Grove Street
BARNSLEY




Dear Hr Buckle

POLICE ACCOMMODATION AT OAKWELL

Thank you for your letter dated 17 July 1980 concerning the above and I am
pleased to read that your Board agree that an effort should be made to
improve the police accommodation at the ground.

I understand the problems facing all football league clubs but regret that
the Police Authority would not agree to share the cost of providing
accommodation at your ground.  Apart from the problems of paying 50% of the
cost of the building, maintenance requirements, etc., become more difficult
in all matters affected by joint ownership.

I hope that you will accept that it is much better for the club to be the
sole owner of buildings on your ground and I invite you to consider the
provision of the improved facilities at the club’s expense.

Yours sincerely




 tiief Constable




                           Ch Supt
                           R Cummings           3309
      %
     .%
%X                                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                      REF.    ADM/RC/CLS
     FROM:   Chief Superintendent (Administration)                                    STATION/DEPT- Head<luarters

     T0:     Chief Superintendent,              ’B* Division                          DATE:   21 July 1980


               SUBJECT:        POLICE ACCOMMODATION - BARNSLEY FOOTBALL CLUB



                 Following the submission of Superintendent Bradley’s report dated 18 June
                 1980 and my discussion with you, I arranged for the Chief Constable to
                 write to Barnsley Football Club regarding the unsuitability of the police
                 room at Oakwell.  A copy of the letter is attached.

                 You will see that no mention is made of the Police Authority paying half
                 the cost of the portakabin or making any contribution towards its removal.
                 This was done because I cannot see how the Authority ean be expected to pay
                 50 per cent of something which is never to become their property and in any
                 event sharing the cost could result in written agreements being required in
                 relation to maintenance, etc.  The letter also points out that the
                 provision of facilities are the responsibility of the Club.

                  A letter has now been received which indicates that Barnsley Football Club
                  will meet 50 per cent of the cost of acquisition and transportation and
                  declare their willingness to accept Superintendent Bradley's suggestion.

                  It now seems unlikely that the Club will provide the facilitis or that the
                  Police Authority will agree to pay 50 per cent of the cost and I should be
                  grateful if you would arrange to supply an explanation as to why the
                  proposal was made in the first instance.




                  Chief Superintendent
                  (Administration)



                   2

                  S u p e r in t e n d e n t B r a d l e y ,   B1 S ub D iv is io n


                  Relative to the above minute, I would appreciate your
                  explanation in due course, please.




                   S u p e r in t e n d e n t t o r
                   C h i e f S u p e r in t e n d e n t
                   BAR NSLEY 2 2         7 80         pm




GEN/2
            Chief Supt. Watson,
            In the initial discussions with officials at Oakwell Football Ground referred
            to in my report dated 18 June 1980 I pointed out the deplorable state of the  a
            accomodation provided for the police.   The management agreed that it was not
            satisfactory but they pointed out that they had provided the hut and did not
            feel, at that stage with the possibility of large expenditure being required
            for ground improvements, that they could provide anything better.

            I made local enquiries, found the used 'Portacabin1 and raised the matter again
            with the club.     At that stage the Club representatives, Messrs. Spinks and
            St'';ele agreed that the provision of a 'Portacabin' would be an advantage and
            suggested that the club*would m 8ke a contribution towards half the cost.     This
            is what I reported.

             I did not make an offer that the Police Authority pa" half the cost as I
             have no authority to make such a statement.   I suggestthat the club
             be asked again to pay the whole amount, and I feel" that it will be met.




             Superintendent.




              4



              Chief Superintendent, Administration

              Submitted as above.




             Superintendent for
             Chief Superintendent
             BARNSLEY 23 7 80            pm




            5      Q a c (< n $ .J


                                     4a W * A   j




SOUTH             POUCt



     2 8 JUL1980

                     IB
MANAvjcMcinV s e r v i c e s *!
    /
         /
    ■f
/            Mr G Buckle
             Chairman                                                                            ADM/RC/CEC
             Barnsley Football Club                                                                          i
             Qakweli Ground                                                                      27 June 1980
             BARNSLEY




             Dear Mr Buckle

             Following the working party visit to your ground on 21 May 1980, it has bean brought to
             my notice that the provision of accommodation for the police was discussed. My officers
             tell me that the existing building is no longer suitable for the purpose of dealing with
             prisoners, issuing equipment, siting of radio control, and othsr matters. They have made
             some enquiries and have discovered that a second-hand "Portacabin" can be obtained from
             Mr Duncan Sharp of Shaw Lane, Carlton, for the sum of £500. The building is 25 feet by
             9 feet, has three offices with lighting and heating, and would be most suitable for police
             purposes. The present hut is owned by your Club end the provision of facilities for the
             police at all Football League grounds is the responsibility of the Club in consultation with
             focal officers.

             I know you are anxious to improve all your facilities and invite your Board to consider the
             provision of these improved facilities for the police at a price much less than would be paid
             for any form of new building. I understand that this matter can be placed before a forth­
             coming Board Meeting and I should be grateful for their views upon the proposal.

             Yours sincerely




              Ibiaf Constable




                                                 Ch. Supt. R Cummings            3309
ESTABLISHED 1887                                                                                            TELEPHONE 0 / 1 1 1 - 3
                                                                                                           telegram s OHl IJ


BARNSLEY                                     FOOTBALL                                 CLUB                        LTD.
English Cup Finalists                    Members of the Football League
       1909-10                                                                                                  English Cup Winners
                                     North Midlands League.      Northern Intermediate League                         1911-12


   J. STEELE - General Manager
                                                                                            Colours—Red Shirts, White Shorts
                                                                                                    White Stockings
      M. J. SPINKS.Secretary                       Chairman—G. BUCKLE
                                                                                                  Registered Office:
   A. CLARKE- Team Manager                                                                 OAKWELL GROUND, BARNSLEY
                                                                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE S71 1ET


Our Ref. :       jjjs / bw
                                                                                                17th July, 1980.
Your Ref. :


Ch. Supt. R. Cummings,
South Yorkshire Police,
Snig Hill, '
SHEFFIELD, S3 8LY.



Dear Sir,

                        POLICE ACC O M CDATI CN AT OAKY/ELL

         Thankyou for your letter addressed to our chairman Mr. G-. Buckle.

     At a recent meeting of my Board of Directors the contents of your letter
was discussed and it was agreed that an effort to improve police accommodation
at our ground should be made.

     Speaking to Superintendent Bradley of Barnsley, hs did suggest that any
expenditure incurred in the provision of accommodation should be shared between
ourselves and the Police Authority. With this in mind may.I suggest that the
£500 quoted for the second hand 'Portacabin' , along with any charges for
transportation be shared equally.

      Should this arrangement be acceptable, then I would hope that the
'Portc&abin' can be on site and in operation for our first match on 12th Aurust
1qftn                                                          -   ’



                                                              Yours faithfully,


                                                              IS, ti. o p i n e s
                                                              Secretary.




                                                                                                                V
                      MINUTE SHEET                      '                  d a t & l l Juix29§o
                              SAFETY OP SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 -
                      Subject                               .... ................ ............ .............



To
ACC
(Management           Further to our discussion of 23 July 1980, I confirm that
Services)             having consulted with Superintendent Smith at Barnsley and
                      the South Yorkshire County Council representative, Mr Vaughan,
Mr                    it has been agreed that for the present time the ten to
                      fifteen minute rule concerning the opening of the gates prior
                      to the end of matches will be conformed to while ever the
                      gates are inward opening.  As you are aware, this practice
                      was introduced following the incidents at Bramall Lane where
                      injuries were caused and is necessary in view of crowds at
                      the end of a game seeking to gain exit from the ground and
                      problems being encountered in trying to open gates against
                      the pressure of supporters.

                      Should our recommendations regarding the alteration of these
                      particular gates to an outward opening position be accepted,
                      then the ten to fifteen minute rule can be relaxed and we will
                      revert to our standard policy of the gates being opened at
                      the discretion of the police.




                      Superintendent
                      OPS BLM/SM


              SOUT’                         f   S ' j .




                    2 5 JULI980


              I I     .
                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                       REF:             ALB
 FROM:                            Chief Inspector Sumner 'Bl1
                                                                       STATION/DEPT:   ■Barnsley
 TO:                              The Chief Superintendent 'B'         DATE:           ' 15 J u ly 1980

                 SUBJECT:         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                 With reference to the attached report touching on the matters requiring
                 attention at the Barnsley FootballClub Ground, Oakwell, Barnsley, submitted
                 by the South Yorkshire County Council.

                 I consider this an excellent report and I            unable to suggest any
                 improvements or offer any criticisms.

                 I have only one reservation, which is to the final sentence of item 7t
                 paragraph E 'The gates must be fastened in the fully open position 10
                 to 15 minutes before the end of play'. As you are aware, on 'Derby1 Mitch
                 days it is the policy to retain the visiting spectators on the 'Spion Kop'
                 for ^.bout ten minutes, this enables the home fans to clear fro® that area
                 and allows us to escort the visitors to the coach park/railway station,
                 therefore minimising the danger of the opposing elements coming into
                 contact. In addition, it prevents the home fans from entering the 'Spion
                 Kop* area before the end of play. This strict segregation being essential
                 to prevent what could lead to a serious breach of the peace. I therefore
                 ask that the opening of the gates in this area be left to the discretion
                 of the Police.




                 omei inspector

                      2   .
                      Chief Superintendent W atson,
                      I agree with. Chief Inspector Sumner.   Can the matter of opening the gates
                      at the Spion Kop "be raised formally with the S.I.C.C. please.


SOU"'



        17   U L i m ^ g f naent-

             J-i.O.



                          Assistant Chief Constable "(Operations)

                          I agree with Chief Inspector Sumner, it is necessary on quite a nu»ber(of
                          occasions to retain supporters of visiting clubs to avoid public order
                          disturbances

                          The question of when the gate should be opened can only be resolved, toy fete®
                          police on the day of the match.   We always have sufficient officers on
                          to deal with any of the fans who take exception to our plans. I wottM       ’
                          therefore agree with Superintendent Bradl-i^fy that this point should be    '
                                         l formal basis between yourself and South Yorkshire Couttty ,




                          Superintendent for
                          Chief Superintendent.    17.7.80                                            \--   •'*^
                                                                                                            M im m
                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLiCE

                                                          REF:            ALB
                Chief Inspector Sumner *B1'                                -d
                     . . .                                STATION/DEPT:   Barnsley
                The Chief Superintendent          *B*     DATE:           15 July 1980


     SUBJECT:   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975


     With reference to the attached report touching on the matters requiring
     attention at the Barnsley FootballClub Ground, Oakwell, Barnsley, submitted
     by the South Yorkshire County Council.

     I consider this an excellent report and I am unable to suggest any
     improvements or offer any criticisms.

     I have only one reservation, which is to the final sentence of item 7«
     paragraph E *,The gates must be fastened in the fully open position 1 0 1
     to 15 minutes before the end of play*.   As you are aware, on ’Derby* match
     days it is the policy to retain the visiting spectators on the 'Spion Kop*
     for about ten minutes, this enables the home fans to clear from that area
     and allows us to escort the visitors to the coach park/railway station,
     therefore minimising the danger of the opposing elements coming into
     contact.  In addition, it prevents the home fans from entering the 'Spion
     Kop* area before the end of play.   This strict segregation being essential
     to prevent what could lead to a serious breach of the peace.   I therefore
     ask that the opening of the gates in this area be left to the discretion
     of the Police.




     Chitff Inspector



       Chief Super.'..ntendent W a tson,
       I agree with. Chief Inspector Sumner.  Can the natter of opening the rates
       at the Spion Kop be raised formally with the S,Y.C.C. please.




1.              ■l d   e o t -




.E Y


        3.
        Assistant Chief Constable          (Operations)

        I agree with Chief Inspector Sumner, it is necessary on quite a nuaber of
        occasions to retain supporters of visiting clubs to avoid public order
        disturbance.

        The question of when the gate should be opened can only be resolved by the
        police on the day of the match. We always have sufficient officers on duty
        to deal with any of the fans who take except ion to our plans. I would
        therefore agree with Superintendent Bradlfey, that this point should be
        dealt with on a formal basis between yourself and South Yorkshire County
        Council.


        Superintendent for
        Chief Superintendent•           17,7.80
SOUTH’ VORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL.

  ^ V i t h the Com plim ents of

  TH E CHIEF EXECUTIVE



                  FOR INFO RM ATION




                   FOR A C TIO N




    v   /          FOR C O M M E N T
                           S tO & V uvucM T O   C t-u fe .




   From _                                   \ Ur     l -     4>_0
   D ep artm ent of Administration
   County Hall
   Barnsley         Tel. Barnsley86141 Ext Mr'L ’Z
C,
K




                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

                           Safety of Sports Grounds Act,   1975

                           Matters requiring attention at the
                      Barnsley Football Club Ground, Oakwell, Barnsley

    A..    TERRACE    (SPION KOP END - IN FRONT OF MAIN STAND)

                  Available Area            630 square metres
                  Capacity is between     3,400 and 1,700 persons

           Exit route available is to the left hand side of the terrace through a
           20' wide opening providing 11 units of exit width to Gate No. 2
           (1114" wide = 6 units) and Gate No. 3 (9'0" wide = 5 units).

           RECOMMENDATIONS

           1.     Existing sunken walkway along this terrace to be infilled to reduce
                 the step height.

           2.    End of the terrace requires surfacing to ground level, and the exit
                 walkway that leads to the final exit gates should be improved by
                  levelling.

            3.   The terracing to be maintained to remove tripping hazard from
                 spalled concrete.

            4.    Gates 2 and 3 should be refitted to open outwards in the direction
                  of exit flow and made easily and immediately openable from within.
                  If it is considered that this will provide a security problem when
                  the public are admitted to the ground the provision of two uniformed
                  stewards at the gate will be accepted, subject to those persons being
                  able readily to open the gates.

                  No locks will be accepted when the ground is occupied.

                  The gates must be fastened in the fully open position 10 to 15
                  minutes before the end of play.

          * 5.    Gate No. 3 should be increased in width to 12'3"   (7 units)

            CONCLUSION

            The number of exit units available will be sufficient for the maximum
            occupancy of 3,400 persons subject to the above work being satisfactorily
            carried out.

    B.      TERRACE   (PONTEFRACT ROAD END - IN FRONT OF MAIN STAND)

                  Available Area            602 square metres
                  Capacity is between     3,250 and 1,625 persons

            Exit route available is to the right hand side of the terrace through a
            passageway 1 4 f0" wide (8 units) to Gate No. 5 (1114" wide * 6 units)
            and through 4 f6" opening (2 units) to Gate No. 4 (ll'O" wide * 6 units).




                                             -1 -
RECOMMENDATIONS

1.   The terracing to be maintained to remove tripping hazard from
      spalled concrete.

2.    Existing sunken walkway along the terrace to be infilled to reduce
      step height.

3.    Gates No. 4 and No. 5 should be refitted to open outwards in the
       direction of exit flow and made easily and immediately openable
       from within. If it is considered that this will provide a security
     . problem when the public are admitted to the ground the provision of
       two uniformed stewards at the gate will be accepted, subject to
       those persons being able readily to open the gates.

      No locks will be accepted when the ground is occupied.

      The gates must be fastened in the fully open position 10 to 15
      minutes before the end of play.

4.   Improve opening in gateway leading to toilets to 7'0" (4 units).

CONCLUSION

The number of exit units available is sufficient for the maximum occupancy
of 3,250 persons subject to the above work being satisfactorily carried out.

*    The provision of an ll'O" (6 unit) gateway, sited between gates 2 and 3
     would dispense with Recommendations A5 and B 4 .

PONTEFRACT ROAD STAND AND TERRACE

      Available Area         1,890   square metres
      Capacity is between   10,200   and 5,100 persons

Exit routes available are to the rear of the terrace at the Main Stand
End to Gate No. 6 (ll'O" wide = 6 units) and Gate No. 7 (ll'O" wide
= 6 units).

From the main terrace an opening 28'0" wide (16 units) leads to the Main
Stand End Terrace, and a sliding door at the rear oftheStand (7'0"     wide
= 4 units) in width leads to an open passageway 7'0" wide (4 units) to
routes to either Gate No. 6 (ll'O" wide = 6 units) or Gate No. 7 (ll'O" wide
= 6 units).

RECOMMENDATIONS

1.   The existing sunken walkway at the rear of the stand leading to
      the rear exit to be infilled to reduce step height hazard.

2.   The sliding door   at the rear of the stand to be removed and the width
      of opening increased to a minimum 10'6!' wide (6 units).

3.    An additional exit 1 0 ’6" wide (6 units) in width should be provided
      at the rear of the stand as indicated on the plan.

4.   The terracing to   be maintained to remove tripping hazard from
      spalled concrete.
     5.   The walkway from the rear of the stand to Gate No. 8 (9'3" wide =
          5 units) and the proposed new exit gate should be improved to
          remove tripping hazards and with a gradient not less than 1:10
          with safety handrails.

     6.   Gate No. 6 and No. 7 should be refitted to open outwards in the
           direction of exit flow and made easily and immediately openable
           from within.  If it is considered that this will provide a security
           problem when the public are admitted to the ground the provision of
           two uniformed stewards at the gate will be accepted, subject to
           those persons being able readily to open the gates.

          No locks will be accepted when the ground is occupied.

          The gates must be fastened in the fully open position 10 to 15
          minutes before the end of play.

     7.   Gate No. 8 should be recessed and rehung to open outwards from the
          right hand side of the frame and made easily and immediately
          openable from within.  If it is considered that this will provide
          a security problem when the public are admitted to the ground the
          provision of two uniformed stewards at the gate will be accepted,
          subject to those persons being able readily to open the gate.

          No locks will be accepted when the ground is occupied.

          The gate must be fastened in the fully open position 10 to 15
          minutes before the end of play.

     8.   The brickwork over the entrance to the toilets at the rear requires
          attention.

     9.   The brickwork to the exchange turnstiles is leaning badly and
          requires attention.

     CONCLUSION

     The number of exit units available is not sufficent for the maximum
     capacity but is restricted to 5,760 persons.  On the completion of the
     above work satisfactorily the capacity could increase to the maximum
     floor capacity of 10,200.

D.   GRANDSTAND INCORPORATING TERRACING AT EACH SIDE   (BREWERY STAND)

          Available Area         1,796 square metres
          Capacity is between    9,700 and 4,850 persons

     Exit routes available from each end of the terrace are by way of a 5'0
     walkway (3 units) and a 7'0" open stair (4 units) leading to the rear
     of the stand to a 13'0" walkway (7 units) leading to Gate No. 9 (ll'O"
     wide = 6 units) and Gate No. 10 (ll'O" wide = 6 units).  From the end
     of the stand terracing an opening (21'0" wide = 12 units) leads over the end
     terracing to the rear of the Pontefract Road End Stand leading by an
     ll'O" wide (6 units) walkway to Gate No. 8 (9'3" wide » 5 units).  From
     the ground stand 2 stairs 6'0" wide (3 units) discharge to below the stand
     to a 13*0" wide (7 units) walkway leading also to Gates 9 and 10.

     RECOMMENDATIONS

     1.   The terracing and walkway in the stand terrace to be maintained to
          remove tripping hazard from spalled concrete.


                                    -3 -
{




    2.   The stairs in the stands to' be provided with handrails on both sides.

    3-   The balustrades to the Pontefract Road end of the stand require
         attention, and certain areas of the timber terracing adjacent to the
         balustrade require  replacing.

    4.   An additional stairway 7'0" wide (4 units)with side and centre
         handrails, to be provided to lead to the rear of the stand at the
         Kop E n d .

    5.   A safety fence should be provided to run along the embankment from
          the corner of the stand to the Kop railings.

    6.   A safety fence should be provided at the end of the stand near the
          new stairs to the top of the terracing to join up with the existing
          safety rail on the Pontefract Road end.

    7.   The walkway at the rear of the stand should be improved to remove
          tripping hazards.

    8.   The underside of the stand should be cleared of vegetation and
          combustible materials and again fenced off to prevent public access.

    9.   Gates 9 and 10 should be refitted to open outwards in the direction
          of exit flow and made easily and immediately openable from within.
          If it is considered that this will provide a security problem when
          the public are admitted to the ground the provision of two uniformed
          stewards at the gate will be accepted, subject to those persons being
          able readily to open the gates.

         No locks will be accepted when the ground is occupied.

         The gates must be fastened in the fully open position 10 to 15
         minutes before the end of play.

    10. The area at the corner of the ground adjacent to Gate No. 10 should
         be railed off to ensure that persons could not be pushed into the
         corner should the gates be lobbied back as recommended.

    11. It appears from a visual inspection that the general structural
        stability of the stand must be suspect in view of the following
        findings:

          (a)   the concrete ring beam which carries the foot of the steel
                rakers has been badly under-mined,

          (b)   certain gusset plates to the bases of the rear columns are
                badly corroded,

          (c)   certain tie bars between the rear brick column are corroded
                and, in some cases, have collapsed,

          (d)   certain brick columns are badly perished,

          (e)   there has been movement between the raking tie bars and the
                brick columns.


                                   -4 -
It is recommended that a structural survey is carried out as a matter of
urgency between the Club's Consultants and the Building Authority's
Building Control Section, with the findings being put into operation
before the start of the coming season.  (Note - If necessary, these
works or the closure of the stand would be required to be carried out
under powers vested in the Building Authority in Section 58 of the
Public Health Act, 1936).

CONCLUSION

The number of exits leading to the rear of the stand would allow for an
evacuation of 6,000 persons, but the position of the lighting pylon reduces
the effectrve opening to 13'0" (7 units), which only allows for the
evaluation of 4,200 persons past this point whilst making their   way to
Gates 9 and 10.

An improvement of the situation could be created by providing 2 x ll'O"
wide (6 units) walkways at the top of the terracing leading to Gate
No. 9, and a new gate ll'O" wide (6 units), or by clearing an area under
the floodlights.

The existing arrangements where Gate No. 8 is used from this part of the
ground would give an occupancy figure of 7,200 persons.

If the recommended work is carried out satisfactorily the occupancy
figure would be increased to the maximum capacity for the floor area
which is 9,700 persons.

SPION KOP AND BOYS' ENCLOSURE

     Available area         1,241 square metres
     Capacity is between    6,700 and 3,350 persons

Exit routes available are by a 1 5 ’0" wide (8 units opening from the end
of the Kop Terracing, and by a 4'0" wide (2 unit), 3'6" wide (2 unit),
and 6'0" wide (3 unit) opening in safety fencing at the rear of the Boys'
Enclosure,  giving access to Gate 1 (12'8" wide = 7 units), and through
internal 8'6" wide (5 units) to Gate No. 2 (11'4" wide = 6 units).

RECOMMENDATIONS

1.   Increase the width of the opening from the end of the main terracing
     to 21'0" wide (12 units) as indicated on the plan.

2.   The two adjacent exits at the end of the Boys' Enclosure could be
     improved by moving the centre railings and creating one opening
     7'0" wide (4 units).  The stepping and levels in this area could
     then be improved.  The existing fence to the rear of the Boys'
     Enclosure is sub-standard.

3.   The terracing to be maintained to reduce tripping hazard from
     spalling concrete.

4.   A safety fence should be provided to run along the top of the
     embankment enclosing the area to the proposed new steps leading '
     to Gate No. 1.

5.   The sliding gate in Spion Kop should be maintained in good working
     order and made available on match days to be used for emergency
     evacuation into the Ground Area should this be necessary.
#        6.   The width of the internal gate leading from the Spion Kop to the
              Terrace should be increased in width by 3'6" (2 u n i t s ) .

         7.   Gates No. 1 and No. 2 should be refitted to open outwards in the
              direction of exit flow and made easily and immediately openable
              from within.  If it is considered that this will provide a
              security problem when the public are admitted to the ground the
              provision of two uniformed stewards at the gate will be accepted,
              subject to those persons being able readily to open the gates.

              No locks will be accepted when the ground is occupied.

              The gates must be fastened in the fully open position 10 to 15
              minutes before the end of play.

         CONCLUSION

         The number of units available is not sufficient for the maximum capacity
         and is restricted to 5,760 persons.  On the completion of the above work
         satisfactorily, the capacity could be increased to the maximum capacity
         of 6,700 persons.

    F.   GRANDSTAND   (MAIN - SPECTATORS' AREA)

         The seating capacity is 2,164 persons.

         Exit routes available from the seated areas are by way of 5 x 4 3
         (2 units) stairways giving direct access from the stand to the circulation
         areas, in turn leading to gate No. 3 9'0" wide (5 units) and Gate N o . 4
         ll'O" wide (6 units).

         Exit routes from the Director's Box, and Press Box are by way of two
         separate 2'9" (1 unit) stairways leading to  the underside of the stand,
         and then     by 2'6" (1 unit) internal doors tothe     final main exit doors
         3 ’6" wide (2 units) from the stand, in turn giving access to Gate No. 3
         or Gate No. 4.

         RECOMMENDATIONS

         1.   The Director's Box and Press Box are only accessible   from the
              doors and stairways leading from beneath the Grandstand.
              Access by way of these single timber stairways is not considered
              satisfactory.   To alleviate this dead end condition an exit should
              be provided from the Director's Box by way of an inward opening
              door in the corner of the box, as indicated on the plan.

         2.    The stairways leading to the Grandstand are used for the storage
              of cushions.   All means of escape, walkways, stairways, etc., must
              be kept clear of such storage when the ground is open to the public.

         3.   A number of loose seats were found during the inspection; all
               seating should be examined and any defects made good.

         4.   The doors giving access to the two stairways serving the Director's
              Box and Press Box should be provided with half-hour fire-resisting
               self-closing doors onto 1" rebates.

         5.   The Press Box has windows which would give a passage for smoke or
              flames in the event of a fire in the void beneath it.  These
              windows should be infilled with fire resisting materials to a
              minimum of h a l f -hour.

         6.   Staircase ’D' which projects partially into the gymnasium is

                                         -   6-
                                                     ■-m tr   ■   j    ■■■     ? ■■■- w   ■   /
     constructed in part timber. The spandrel to this staircase
     requires upgrading to a minimum one hour fire resistance to
     protect the escape route from the main stand.

7.   The exit from the gymnasium is kept locked and the key is not
     readily available.  This door is essential for means of escape
     purposes as the gymnasium is sited on an excessive dead end.
     A suitable fastening should be affixed so as to be readily
     operable without the use of a key.

8.   Certain air grates connect through from the underside of the
     stand to the stairways; these should be made up.

9. 'The glazed areas to the ends and rear of the stand have certain
    broken panes which should be replaced.

CONCLUSION

The number of exits available is suffient for the maximum capacity of
2,164 persons on the completion of the above work satisfactorily.

GENERAL (EXTERNAL AREAS)

1.   REAR OF GRANDSTAND

     (a)     The railings and walling adjacent to the General Manager's
             Office requires repairs.

     (b)     The guttering to the rear of the stand requires attention
             (work in h a n d ) .

2.   REINFORCED CONCRETE COLUMNS AND BEAMS

     Certain reinforced concrete columns and beams to the rear of the
     main stand require remedial work as the concrete has spalled
     leaving the reinforcement exposed.

3.   DEVELOPMENT OFFICE

     (a)     The steps and platform situated outside the Development Office
             protrude into the walkway running along the rear of the stand.
             A protective safety rail should be provided around this
             obstruction to avoid tripping when persons are using this
             walkway.

      (b)    The coping stones and railings to the stairway giving access
             under the Development Offices to be replaced securely.

4.   GYMNASIUM EXIT DOOR

     The access steps leading to the gymnasium door from the walkway at
     the rear of the stand should be protected by a safety rail to
     ensure that persons do not trip over the steps when using this
     walkway.

5.   GATEWAYS

      (a)    Any of the final exit gateways which open direct onto the
             public thoroughfare should be lobbied back into- the opening
             when converted to outward opening.
          (b)   The columns to Gate No. 3 require securely fixing as the
                gates and supports are unstable.

          (c)   The two top hinges to Gate No. 7 are pulling away from the
                brickwork support and would appear unstable,

     6.   CRUSH BARRIERS

          Whilst the test loading of crush barriers cannot be enforced^(except
          under emergency procedure) until the ground is designated, with the
          Club's goodwill, it would be desirable to carry out such tests on
          a random sample of the barriers (to be selected by the Building
          Authority) prior to the commencement of the forthcoming season.

H.   INGRESS TO GROUND

     The ingress to the ground is considered to be satisfactory.  Plans have
     recently been submitted for the provision of three additional turnstiles
     at the Spion Kop end of the ground.

I.   ACCESS FOR EMERGENCY APPLIANCES

     Access to the ground by way of two approach roads from the Town Centre
     is considered to be satisfactory.

     This access is limited to the front of the ground only.

     It is essential that no parking in the public roads immediately adjacent
     to the ground is permitted.

J.   EMERGENCY LIGHTING

     In the event of a failure of any part of the main lighting circuit,
     emergency lighting must be brought into use to illuminate all designated
     parts of the premises and along all exit routes, with any exit signs
     suitably illuminated.

     The premises are at present provided with an emergency lighting system
     as detailed below.

     AREA UNDER MAIN GRANDSTAND

     Covered by a non—maintained system operated on circuit failure.

     MAIN GRANDSTAND SEATED AREAS,    STAIRS, AND TURNSTILES

     Covered by a system of maintained emergency lighting which is switched
     by the ground staff as and when required.  This system is used to provide
     lighting to certain parts of the ground which are not covered by mains
     supply.

     Xt is recommended that the maintained system of lighting be extended to
     cover all parts of the ground where members of the public have access.

     Prior to any work being done on emergency lighting, it is recommended
     that the C l u b ’s electrical contractor meets with the Fire Service to
     discuss the matter in more detail.

     The system as installed at present is of an unknown quality and could
     not be tested at the time of inspection.



                                     -8 -
FIRE WARNING SYSTEM (GENERAL EVACUATION)

The existing public address sytem of unknown quality could possibly
be used for the purpose of fire warning and other emergency announce­
ments.  The Control Room for the public address system is adjacent to
the players' tunnel, with facilities for the use of a trailing hand
microphone from the edge of the playing area,

FIRE WARNING (UNDER MAIN STAND)

A manual electric fire alarm system using the buzz/flash unit system
should be provided with break-glass call points sited as follows.

1.   Exit from the Tea Room
2.   Main Entrance
3.   Gymnasium       .‘

The buzz/flash system would alert staff having access to the public
address system and should be sited as follows.

1.   Tunnel
2.   Public Address Control Room

Further points are considered necessary in occupied areas which are in
use during weekdays for staff purposes.

The effectiveness of the system should be reinforced by the provision of
automatic fire detection equipment appropriately sited.  This system
would be capable of giving an automatic warning of fire when a match is
in progress, and the large areas under the stand are unoccupied.

Any proposed fire warning system should be discussed in detail with
officers of the Fire Service prior to installing.

NOTICES

Exit routes must be distinctively and conspicuously identified by a
notice in letters of adequate size.

Where a route to be taken is not apparent a similar notice incorporating
an arrow indicating the direction to travel will be necessary.

Exit signs with 8” green letters on a white background should be provided
in the following a r e a s .

1.   Above the stairways leading from the ground stand (2 notices)

2.   On the external walkway at the rear of the above stand   (2 notices).
     Directional arrows will be required on these notices.

3.   Above the openings existing and proposed at the rear of the
     Pontefract Road end stand (2 notice s).

4.   Above each of the exit stairways leading from the main stand
     (5 notices) .

The above notices should be sited in areas covered by the existing
emergency lighting, and any proposed emergency lighting.  The exact
position to be determined on site with an officer of the Fire Service.
• *   ■


          M.   FIRE FIGHTING EQUIPMENT

               In addition to the existing fire equipment a fire point should be
               established adjacent to the tunnel entrance opposite the Referee and
               L inesmen’s Room. Six 2 gallon water type extinguishers should stand
               in this defined area utilising the four extinguishers presently sited
               in the main stand.

               This equipment would be available for use at all parts of the ground
               and its positioning would give protection from vandalism.

          N.   EMERGENCY PROCEDURE

               It will be necessary for stewards on   gate and door duty to be in close
               communication with a central control point.

               The action to be taken on receipt of information must be clearly
               defined.  Should an emergency arise,' gates must be opened without
               delay.

               Other stewards situated throughout the ground must try to ensure that
               the public remain calm and follow directions given over the public
               address system.

          0.   TRAINING

               The emergency system must be checked at frequent intervals  to ensure
               that each member of staff is aware of their duties which must be
               defined to them.  Full scale tests are essential followed by debriefing

               Staff should also know how to operate fire warning systems and use the
               fire equipment without delay.

          P.   HOUSEKEEPING

               There must be no accumulation of rubbish when the premises are open to
               the public.  After use the ground must be cleared of all rubbish at
               the earliest opportunity.

          Q.   POLICE FACILITIES

               So that police officers at the ground may safety deal w ith matters
               within their sphere of responsibility and, in particular, deal with^ -
               the processing of prisoners, an adequate police room should be provided

          R.   FIRST AID FACILITIES

               Adequate facilities for the reception and treatment of spectators
               requiring first aid should be provided.  (Area Health Authority to
               give detailed advice, which will be passed on to the C l u b ) .




                                             -1 0 -
s.   SAFE GROUND CAPACITY
                                                                          Numbers with
                                                        Present Numbers
                                                                          Improvements

     A.   TERRACE SPION KOP END                              3,400            3,400
     B.   TERRACE PONTEFRACT ROAD END                        3,250            3,250
     C.   PONTEFRACT ROAD STAND & TERRACE                    5.760           10,200
     D.   GROUND STAND AND TERRACING                         7,200            9.700
     E.   SPION KOP AND BOYS' ENCLOSURE                      5.760            6.700
     F.   GRANDSTAND (SEATED AREAS)                          2,164            2,164

                                                            27,534           35,414
                                                                             or 36,800 if
                                                                             extra exit unit
                                                                             widths provided
                                                                             as discussed.

     NOTE:-     In certain instances the recommendations made will
                not increase the occupancy numbers for given area,
                but will contribute to improved safety standards.

     Terraces     60 persons/unit/min.
                  therefore 8 mins. = 480/unit

                  1 unit =   480 rs          l'-9"
                  2          969 ss          3'-6"
                  3        1,440 ss          5'~3"
                  4        1,920 =£          7 ’-0"
                  5        2,400        SS
                                             8'-9"
                  6        2,880        SS   1 0 '-6"
                  7        3,360 =           12’-3"

     Stands       40 persons/unit/min.
                  therefore 8 mins. = 320/unit

                  1 unit   =      320 ss 1 1-9"
                  2        as     640 = 3'-6"
                  3        ss     960 ss 5 1-3"
                  4        rs   1,280 = 7 1-0"
                  5        ss   1,600 ss 8 ’-9"
                  6        ss   1,920 rs 1 0 ' - 6
                  7        s    2,240 ss 12'-3




     County Hall,
     Barnsley.

     July, 1980.




                                              “ 11-
                                                        ADM/RC/CLS
Chief Superintendent (Administration)                         Headquarters

                                                        21 July 1980
Chief Superintendent, *B' Division


            POLICE ACCOMMODATION - BARNSLEY FOOTBALL CLUB


    Vollowlna the submission of Superintendent Bradley's report dated 18 June
                           ,1th you. I .rr.n,.d for th. Chi.f 0 - p - O . »
    write to Bam.ley Footb.ll Club r.g.rdlng th. u n . » l t.blltty of th. pollc.
    roo. .t Oatanll. A copy of th. l.tt.r 1. .tt.ch.4.


    T
    S3.  «
        ”ult                            “Jss Sr«
             d o n e b e ^ u . e I cannot ... h » th. Authority c » b.. « P ~ « d » W
    50 p.r cent of wmethlng which 1. n.v.r to b . c o « th.lr prop.rty m d w m y
     event.harlng th. co.t could r..ult in w l t t - .«rw».nt. b.lngrequlr-l In
     relation toLint.n.nce, etc. Ih. l«t.r jljo point, out that th.
     provision of facllltl.. *r« th. r«.pon.lblllty of th. Club.

     A l.tt.r h.. now been received which Indict.. thattam.l.y 'ootbeU Ci“b
     trill neat 50 ner cent of the cost of acquisition and transportation and
     declare their willingness to accept Superintendent Bradley s sugges on.

     It now seems unlikely that the Club will provide the facilitis or that the
     lllTZ  Authority will agree to pay 50 per c e n t of the coat and l should be
     grateful if you would arrange to supply an explanation as to why tne
     proposal was made in the first instance.




     Chief Superintendent
     (Administration)
                 South Yorkshire Police
To:-1 ACC (MS)    MINUTE SHEET                date     July 198.0..

                  Subjest   POLICE ACCOMMODATION - BARNSLEY
                              FOOTBALL CLUB



                  The attached letter is in reply to ours
                  of 27 June 1980.

                  You will see that the Club are asking us
                  to pay 50% of the cost of the building
                  and the cost of removing it from its
                  present site, a direct result of
                  Superintendent Bradley's involvement.

                  In my view it is now almost impossible
                  to get the Club to agree to provide the
                  facilities and I cannot see how we can
                  pay 50% for something which will never
                  belong to the Police Authority.




                  Chief Superintendent
                  Administration



                  SOUTH YORK*. POLICE



                       18 JUL1980        /o   xSrXl "S ' /h r

                                   2k.
 GEN/SI.
ACC (MS)                                   18 JviXy 1980

                   POLICE ACCOMMODATION - BABS&LE?
                     FOOTBALL CLUB



           The attached letter is is reply to oars
           of 27 Jane 1980.

           Ton w i n see that the Club are     »g »«
           to pay 50# of the cost of the building
           and the coat of retaoving it from its
           present site, a direct result of
           Superintendent Bsadley'a involvement.

           In ay view it is now almost impossible
           to get the Club to agree to provide the
           facilities and I cannot see how we c m
           pay 50% for something which will never
           belong to the Police Authority*




           Chief Superintendent
           Administration
                                                                                                        TELEPHONE O J 1 1 Q
ESTABLISHED 1887                                                                                        TELEGRAMS         ^



Ba r n s l e y                            football                                 club                       ltd.
English Cup Finalists                  Members of the Football League                                        English Cup Winners
       1909-10                                                                                                     1911-12
                                   North Midlands League.     Northern Intermediate League


    J. STEELE - General Manager                                                          Colours—Red Shirts, White Shorts
                                                                                                 White Stockings
       M. J. SPINKS - Secretary                   Chairman—G. BUCKLE
                                                                                               Registered Office:
                                                                                        OAKWELL GROUND, BARNSLEY
    A. CLARKE- Team Manager                                                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE S71 1ET



Our Ref. : MJS/BW                                                                            17th July, 1980.
Your Ref. :


Ch. Supt. R. Cummings,
South Yorkshire Police,
Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD, S3 8LY.



Dear Sir,

                        POLICE ACCCMM QDATICN AT OAKWELL

          Thankyou for your letter addressed to our chairman Mr. G-. Buckle.

      At a recent meeting of my Board of Directors the contents of your letter
 was discussed and it was agreed that an effort to improve police accommodation
 at our ground should be made.

     Speaking to Superintendent Bradley of Barnsley, he did suggest that any
expenditure incurred in the provision of accommodation should be shared between
ourselves and the Police Authority. With this in mind may I suggest that the
£500 quoted for the second hand 'Portacabin* , along with any charges for
transportation be shared equally.

      Should this arrangement be acceptable, then I would hope that the
 'Portcibabin' can be on site and in operation for our first match on 12th August,
 1980 .


                                                              Yours faithfully,


                                                              M. d . spinxs
                                                              Secretary.
Mr G Buckle
Chairman                                                                            ADM/RC/CEC
Barnsley Football Club
Oakvmll Ground                                                                      27 June 1980
BARNSLEY




Dear Mr Buckle

Following the working party visit to your ground on 21 May 1980, It ha* been brought to
my notice that the provision of accommodation for the police was discussed. My officers
tall me that the existing building is no longer suitable for the purpose of dealing with
prisoners, issuing equipment, siting of radio control, and other matters. They have made
some enquiries and hava discovered that a second-hand "Portacabin" can be obtained from
 Mr Duncan Sharp of Shaw Lane, Carlton, for the sum of £500. The building is 25 feet by
9 feet, has three offices with lighting and heating, and would be most suitable for police
purposes. The present hut is owned by your Club end the provision of facilities for the
police at ail Football League grounds is the responsibility of the Club in consultation with
local officers.

I know you ere anxious to improve all your facilities and invite your Board to consider the
provision of these improved facilities for the police at a price much less then would be paid
for any form of new building. I understand that this matter can be placed before a forth­
coming Board Meeting end I should be grataful for their views upon the proposal.

Yours sincerely




 Ihief      ible




                                    Ch. Sufkt. R Cummings           3309
                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                         'REF:           _ MM          , '
^pFROM:
                     Superintendent Bradley              STATlON/DEPT:    Barnsley
   TO:               Chief Superintendent Watson         DATE:            ig J m e IfS©
                                                                                . r-


          SUBJECT:   BABNSLEY FOOTBALL CLUB - OAKWELL GROUND

          At 2.30 pm on Wednesday 21 May 1980, I attended a meeting at the above ground
          with Chief Inspector Sumner and Superintendent Mole. Also presentwere
          representatives of the GLub, Fire Service, Barnsley Metropolitan'Borough
          Council and South Yorkshire County Council.

          Minutes of the meeting are attached and reflect the discussion which took place*

          She d u b was concerned to increase the ground capacity of 25*200 (calculated in
          the letter from South Yorkshire County Council dated 3 April lf8@) to 33*916.
          She latter figure had been calculated by the d u b Architect, Mr. Landau, and
          had been arrived at because of an alleged        in the original calculations
          combined with the provision of new gates at the Pontefract load End.

          It was agreed that more detailed plans would be produced for further consider**
          tion and discussion and these will be forwarded as soon as possible.

          I suggested improvements which were not included in the produced plan (see
          page 2 of minutes) and it was agreed that the d u b would lock into the
          possibility of including these matters in the revised detailed plans. We
          now await the revised plans and on receipt will make comment.
                                                                                             t

          I also raised the question of a new Police hut in the ground and'jfche d u b were '
          sympathetic towards some cash assistance. I have made enquiries locally and
          find that a used 'Portacabin*, fitted with three office®, light* and heaters,
          will be sold by Mr.               from his premises at Shaw Lane, Carlton, in
          September of this year, ana nxs price is £500. I have inspected the cabin size
          25* x 9 ’ and it would be most suitable for our purposes.

          She current Police hut is far too small and has no facilities worth speaking of.
          It is the only place on the ground where the Police can, 1) store equipment,
          2) process prisoners, 3) detain prisoners,    take refreshment, 5) write reports-
          and 6) deal with found children, and other matters. In addition the control
          room is operated from the hut. She hut measures 9* x 15* and is made of timber.
          It provides severely limited facilities.

          She provision of the 'Portacabin* would allow room for a control room, and items
          1, 2, 5 and 6 above could be dealt with in it.   The current Policehut could     -
          then be used for items 3 and k above. She 'Portacabin' could be sited next to    -
          the Police hut and I have seen Messrs. Steele (General Manager) and Spinks
          (Secretary) at the ground to discuss the site. Shey agree that a 'Portacabin'
          can be placed next to the Police hut.                              ,             V
          It has also been suggested that the d u b would make a contributioa    toward® th
          cost. Local enquiries show that the cost of a similar new 'Portacabin' is
          £ 2,500.
          I ask :    ■
          1.   Shat the 'Portacabin* be purchased at £500 (eost of transport -will, be extra);*
          2.   Shat a formal approach be made to Barnsley Football d u b for permission to 1,
                site a 'Portacabin* next to the Police hut and that the d u b contribute
                £250 to the cost.
                                                               SOUTH YORKS. POLICE


                                                                    19 JUN1980
GEN/2

          Superintendent                                             13’D.H.Q,
                                                                    aftRNSuEV.:-
                                                                              *
                                                                          ♦




 Chief Superintendent Administration Department

 It has been recognised for some time that the facilities available for the
 Police at Oakwell leave something to be desired and it seems to me that at
 a reasonable cost these could tie improved dramatically, and I suggest that
 very serious consideration be given to Superintendent'Bradley's recommendation
 please.                  '              r




 Superintendent for
 Chief Superintendent".
' B/DHQ/DS/JG   19 .6 .8 0




  P it

                                          k   rtJruxri J p -




                                                               t   ?




         JZj



                             ?
t/s   CO^
r
S O U T H . Y O R K S H IR E C O U N TY C O U N C IL

      '.W ith the C o m p lim en ts cf

    THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
    To      R . ^                          -------------



                         F O R.JISIFO R M A T SO ISi



                                                 1980
                         FOR A'




                         FOEh©0WMEIMT




     From   ,                                 D a te W
     D e p a r t m e n t of Adm inistration
     County H a l l
     Barnsley              T e l. Barnsley86141 Ext l^ * a
                        SAFE TY OF SPORTS OROTJNDS A CT,                       1975

N ote of a m e e tin g b etw een the O ffic e r W orking P a r ty ( B a r n s le y D is tr ic t) and
r e p r e s e n t a tiv e s o f the B a r n s le y F o o tb a ll Club L im ited

                   O akw ell Ground, B a r n s le y ;      2 1 s t M ay, 1980

PR E SE N T :     R e p r e s e n tin g the W orking P a r ty

                  D.   Sum ner (South Y o r k sh ir e P o lic e )
                  R.   P . B r a d le y (South Yorkshire P o lic e )
                  B.   M ole (South Y o r k sh ir e P o lic e )
                  T.   F e llo w s (South Y o r k sh ir e County F ir e S e r v ic e )
                  A.   S eam an (South Y o r k sh ir e County F ir e S e r v ic e )
                                    ( B a r n s le y M etro p o lita n B orou gh C ouncil)
                                   (South Y o r k sh ir e County C ouncil ~ A d m in istr a tio n
                                                                                   D epartm ent)
                                   (South Y o r k sh ir e County C ou ncil - A d m in istr a tio n
                                                                                   D ep artm en t)

                  R e p r e s e n tin g the C lu b

                  G . B u ck le (C hairm an)
                  J , S te e le (G en eral M anager)
                  M . J . Spinks (S e c r e ta r y )
                   P . Landon (N uttall, Y arw ood and P a r tn e r s )

1.        P r o p o s e d im p r o v e m en ts to the Ground

The p r im a r y p u rp ose o f the m e e tin g , w hich had b een c a lle d a t the r e q u e s t of the
C lub, w as to c o n s id e r im p r o v e m e n ts which the Club intended to und ertake,
d u rin g the c l o s e s e a s o n , if p o s s ib le , with a v ie w to in c r e a s in g the capacity of the
ground to 33, 916 w hich th ey f e l t w a s a m o re r e a li s t i c fig u r e than the interim
fig u r e o f 2 5 , 200 s u g g e s te d by the W orking P a r ty . T he Club w e r e o f the opinion
th at the W orking P a r t y 's c a lc u la tio n s had u n fo rtu n a tely b een w ro n g ly computed
f o r two m ain r e a s o n s - F i r s t l y , the se c o n d gate in the south-east perim eter wail
o f the ground behind the P o n te fr a c t Road stand had not b een included when
c o n s id e r in g e x it p r o v is io n s and, se c o n d ly , the total stan d in g area in fron t of the
G ro v e S t r e e t G randstand m a y be la r g e r than w as a p p r e c ia te d when c o n s id e r in g
the s in g le lin e draw in g, by v irtu e o f the stan din g a r e a exten d in g u n d er the forward
p r o je c tio n of the seated a r e a .

The C o n su lta n t A r c h ite c t ou tlin ed on the d isp la y e d p lan the C lu b 's p r o p o s a ls to
im p r o v e the ground n a m e ly :-

          (a)     in c r e a s e to 12'6" width, the gate a t the N orth W e s t c o r n e r
                  o f the Spion Kop end;
          (b)     a n ew fe n c e to run fr o m the m id - r e a r o f the P o n te fr a c t
                  R oad stan d to the p e r im e te r w a ll, the e x is t in g gate to be
                  w idened to 1 2 '6 H and the ram p ed e x it a r e a to be regrad ed ;

          (c)      a n ew g a te to be b u ilt in the P o n te fr a c t Road p e r im e te r
                   w a ll, a g a in w ith a 12'6" opening. He b e lie v e d that when
                   t h e s e im p r o v e m e n ts w e r e taken into a c c o u n t to g e th e r w ith
                   a r e - c a lc u la t io n o f the stan d in g a r e a in fr o n t of the G rove
                   S tr e e t G randstand then the total ground c a p a c ity would be
                   a p p r o x im a te ly 33, 916.

The C ounty F ir e S e r v ic e and the B u ild in g A u th o r ity sta te d that th ey w ould n eed
to s e e the d e ta ile d p la n s, p a r tic u la r ly r e la tin g to s e a te d a r e a s , b e fo re th e y could
m ak e a n y p o s itiv e c o m m e n ts on the p r o p o s a ls . The South Y o r k sh ir e P o lic e
e x p r e s s e d in itia l s a tis fa c t io n w ith the C lu b ’s p r o p o s a ls , s u b je c t to a d e ta ile d
stu d y , and a sk e d the C lub w h ether it would be p o s s ib le to r e v ie w c e r t a in a r e a s
o f the ground w hich th ey f e lt w e r e 'tr o u b le sp o ts' fr o m a p o lic in g view p o in t.
T h ese w ere:-

          a)       C e r ta in e x it s opening inw ards w h ich did n ot con trib u te to
                   the flow o f s p e c ta to r s a fte r a m atch,

           b)      T oo few e n t r y g a t e s fo r the Spion Kop end o f the g r o u n d -
                   w h ere v is it in g fans n o r m a lly stand - w h ich c a u s e s trou b le
                   o u tsid e the ground when the g a m e c o m m e n c e s and fans
                   h a v e n ’t b een ab le to g a in a c c e s s ,

           c)       The g r a d ie n t a t the N orth W e st c o r n e r o f the Spion Kop n e e d s
                    r e d u c in g . The C lub pointed out th at c r u s h e d lim e s t o n e had b een
                    la id in that a r e a - fo llo w in g s e tt le m e n t s te p s w e r e to be in s ta lle d
                    to e a s e a c c e s s / e g r e s s ,

           d)       The p o s s ib ilit y o f e s ta b lis h in g a 'n o -m a n ’s land' b etw een the
                    Spion Kop and the 'B r e w e r y ' te r r a c e - the a r e a to be p o lic e d ,

           e)      The n e t fe n c in g on top o f the w all a t the South E a s t s id e of
                    the P o n te fr a c t R oad Stand to be str e n g th e n e d ,

            f)     The p r o v is io n o f m o r e s a t is f a c t o r y a c c o m m o d a tio n w ithin
                   the ground fo r p o lic e o f fic e r s on duty,

            g)     The tid yin g up o f a r e a s s u c h a s c a r p ark s w h ich a r e o c c a s io n a lly
                   s tr e w n w ith rubble - a p o s s ib le su p p ly o f m i s s i l e s for fighcing
                    fa c tio n s .

 The C lub und ertook to look into the p o s s ib ilit y of th e s e ite m s being includ ed in a
 g e n e r a l r e v ie w o f the ground.
2.        Inspection o f the Ground

The W orking P a r ty m ade a b r ie f in s p e c tio n of the ground in co m p a n y with the
C lu b 's r e p r e s e n t a tiv e s , d uring w hich the im p r o v e m e n ts c u r r e n tly being
u n d er ta k e n by the C lub w e r e pointed out.

3.       A c tio n

IT WAS AG REED th a t:-

a)          M r . Spinks would su p p ly M r . Vaughan with c o p ie s fo r the d is c ip lin e s
c o n c e r n e d o f the d e ta ile d p lan s p rod u ced by the C on su ltan t A r c h ite c ts ;

b)          The v a r io u s d is c ip lin e s , upon r e c e ip t o f the p la n s, would a s s o o n a s
r e a s o n a b ly p r a c tic a b le a r r a n g e a d e ta ile d stu d y o f the ground, fo llow in g which
th ey would m e e t to d i s c u s s the in t e r - d is c ip lin a r y im p lic a tio n s , w ith a v iew t o ,
resp o n d in g to the C lu b 's s u g g e s tio n s .
                         South Yorkshire Police                                                                                    P 2.2 fon I


                               MINUTE SHEET                                                                                     date        May...1980.


                               Subject       ....c o r r e s e d n d e m c e ...3;q ..e q q t b a u i ».a s s o c i a t i o n




 To
Mr                              A t t a c h e d h e r e t o i s c o r r e s p o n d e n c e c o n c e r n in g o u r l e t t e r
                                o f p r o t e s t t o th e F o o t b a ll A s s o c ia t io n i n r e s p e c t o f
ACC
                                t h e p r o p o s e d r e - p l a y o f t h e s e m i f i n a l a t B r a m a ll L a n e ,
( O p e r a t io n s )
                                a n d a c o p y o f t h e l e t t e r o f p r o t e s t s e n t b y t h e S o u th
                                Y o r k s h ir e C o u n ty C o u n c il.    I n a d d it io n , r e p lie s h a v e now
                                b e e n r e c e iv e d fr o m th e F o o t b a ll A s s o c ia t io n                  i n re s p o n s e
                                t o b o th l e t t e r s a n d a re a tta c h e d h e r e to f o r                     your
                                co n s id e r a t io n .


                                T h e F o o t b a ll A s s o c ia t io n a p p e a r t o h a v e ta k e n p a r t i c u l a r
                                n o t e o f o u r c o m m e n ts a n d a c c e p t o u r r e s e r v a t i o n s c o n c e r n ­
                                i n g t h e p r o p o s e d r e - p l a y w i t h p a r t i c u l a r e m p h a s is o n t h e
                                n e e d f o r th e g ro u n d t o b e c e r t i f i c a t e d u n d e r th e p r o v is io n s
                                                                   Q~ ~ r t s   G ro u n d s A c t .




                                s u p e r in c e n a e m :
                                OPS E LM /S M



                                Enc




                                               .     ft''rfl   >




      GEN/52
SO».JTK YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

  m        '
  ^ ^ W ith th e C om plim ents of

  THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE



                    FOR INFORMATION



                     FOR ACTION



                     FOR COMME




      From _
   D ep artm en t of A dm inistration
   County Hall
   B arnsley          T el. Barnsley86141 Ext
                THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                         LIMITED
                            Patron: H er M ajesty T he Q ueen
                          President: H .R .H . T he D uke of K ent
                    Chairman: S ir H arold T hom pson , C.B.E., F.R.S.-

 Secretary:                                                                             Telegraphic Address:
E. A. C roker                                                              F ootball A ssociation , L o n d o n , W 2 3LW
                                                                                       Phone:01-2624542
                                                                                          Telex: 261110

                   16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON, W2 3LW

O urRef:   EAC/KMV/1678                    Your Ref:      DV/AW/583/4                         2nd May,            1980




Mr. F.A. Mallett, LL.B.,
Chief Executive,
South Yorkshire County Council,
County Hall,
Barnsley,
South Yorkshire, S70 2TN.




Dear Mr. Mallett,

      Thank you for your letter dated 30fch April referring
to the Semi-Final Replay that may have been played at
Brarohill Lane.

     We have noted carefully the comments you make about
grounds with or without certificates and we can only say
that we are relieved in every respect that this match
provisionally planned in Sheffield w i l l not now be played
as there was a definite result last n i g h t .

           We will certainly bear your comments in mind in future.

                                          Yours sincerely,




                                            E.A. Croker
                                             Secretary




                                                                     SCl’TH YC3K




                       Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Cate, London, W 23LW
                       Incorporated in London      Registration Number 77797
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
 •           \
          W ith the C om plim ents of

  THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
     To                            ^    ■ VioiE.



                       FOR INFORMATION



                        FOR ACTION



                        FOR COMMENT




     From,                              . D a t e ~7 ’ S’ -
     D ep a rtm en t of A dm inistration
     County Hall
     B arn sley          T el. Barnsley 86141 Ext
                                                                                              ■'■.V&tfc':':ss<
                 THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION                                                                         ;
                                            l i m i t e d                     ,
                            Patron: H er M w e s t y T h e Q u een
                           President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                     Chairman: S ir H a r o l d T h o m p so n , C .B .E ., F.R.S.-

 Secretary:                                  * ** ft
E. A . C roker                                                                F o otball A ssociation , L o nd o n , W 2 3 L W
                                                  *•                                       Phone: 01-262 4542
                                                                                              re /e x : 261110


                    16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON, W 2 3LW

Our Ref: EAC/KMV/1678                         YourRef:       DV/AW/583/4                                 2nd M a y / 1980




Mr. F.A. Mallett, L L .B .,
Chief Executive,
South Yorkshire County Council,
County Hall,
Barnsley,
South Yorkshire, S70 2TN*




Dear Mr. Mallett,

      Thank you for your letter dated 30th April referring
to the Semi-Final Replay that m a y have been played at  , \ ■
Bramhi^J. Lane.

     We have noted carefully the comments you make about
grounds wi t h or without certificates and we can only say
that we are relieved in every respect that this ma tc h
ptovisionally planned in Sheffield w il l not now be p l a y e d
as there was a definite result last night.

          We will certainly bear your comments in m i n d in f u t u r e „

                                            Yours sincerely,




                                               E.A. Croker
                                                Secretary

                                                                                                                                 -   .i.   'I




                                                                         SOUTH YC3jt&i.“S 'CCVT-                      rtu,
                                                                                  Bepsrurjst o f / - A            _

                                                                              :           7     m         m
                                                                                  CQZm-       K ’A L t    :


                                                                             •SOiiin      .K Z K ill.         -

                         Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London* W2 ii,W     ,
                         Incorporated in London     ftexi.Mration Number 77797
                  THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                              LIMITED
                               Patron: H e r M a jesty T h e Q u ee n
                             President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                       Chairman: S ir H a r o l d T h o m p s o n , C .B .E ., F.R.S.-

 Secretary:                                                                                         Telegraphic A ddress:
E . A . C roker                                                                  F o o t b a l l A ss o c ia t io n , L o n d o n , W2 3LW
                                                                                                 Phone:01-2624542
                                                                                                   Telex: 261110

                      16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON, W2 3LW


Our Ref:          EAC/KMV/1677                  Your Ref:         ACC(OPS)/JEL                             2nd May,                 1980




Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
Sheffield, S3 8 L Y .




Dear Sir,

     Thank you for your letter dated 30th April referring
to problems that could have existed if the Semi-Final
Replay at Coventry had not resulted in a w i n for Arsenal
last night.

     We have taken careful note of your comments and will
ensure that we take heed of these whe n we find ourselves
again faced wit h decisions regarding Semi-Finals of the
F.A. Cup or other important matches.

     Particularly important is your point about the Safety
of Sports Ground Certificate and we will bear, this in mind
in future.   Needless to say, we are delighted that the
match was resolved last night and only regret that you may
have already made contingency plans which will n o W have to
be reversed.   We continue to appreciate the help and
efficiency of the police in the interests of football and
we will always try and w or k in co-operation with you.

                                              Yours faithful!
                                                                                          SOUTH YORK3. POLiCE



                                                                                                   - 9 MAY 1980

                                                                                                           A.C.C.
                                                 E .A . Croker
                                                   Secretary                                        OPERATIONS




                           Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London, W2 3L W                                      /
                           Incorporated in London      Registration Number 77797
    TELEPHONE:
    SHEFFIELD (0742) 78522
                                                                                                                    p i M L                                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                                                                                                                    SNIG HILL
                                                                                                                     i m            m                                                   SHEFFIELD S3 8LY



    J. H. BROWNLOW. Q.P.M.
    CHIEF CONSTABLE



                                                                                                                                                30 A p r il                         1980




                                                                                                                    1

D e a r M r M a lle t t ,

I         e n c lo s e                          fo r       your                    in f o r m a t io n                        a c o p y o f th e                                    le t t e r
w h ic h                     w as to d a y                           s e n t to                              th e    S e c r e ta r y o f th e                                      F o o tb a ll
A s s o c ia t io n                                 b y th e                      C h i e f C o n s t a b le .

T h e c o n te n t o f                                          th e               le t te r                    is      s e lf - e x p la n a t o r y .


Y o u rs                      f a it h f u lly ,




    '------------------------------------------ ^   ------- i---------------------------------------------               '


C h i e f C o n s t a b l e 's                                                 S ta f f O f fic e r .




                                                                                                                             S0L7H
                                                                                                                                 . Yor.’ns. F-ri
                                                                                                                                    |M .............................illIIIHUJ t X        JHIIMnni<f


                                                                                                                                           A jy f / t y i

                                                                                                                                       -1 MAY 1980

                                                                                                                                                     A.C.C.
                                                                                                                                        o peratio ns

                                                                                                                               i'                  12a-/ ■ 1            1
The Secretary
Football Association                                       ACC(OPS)/JEL
Lancaster Gate                                             3o ^ r± 1 1980
London
Wl




Dear Six

I writ* following tha telephone conversation with my Assistant Chief Constable
(Operations), Hr I D Head and your Deputy Secretary on 29 April 1980.

Having fully considered the issues involved with ray chief officers 1 can state
quite categorically that we view with grave misgivings the choice of Bramall
Lane football stadium as the proposed venue for a further replay of tha
FA Cup 8«ul-Final on May Day. Whilst understanding that if other factors,
for example, determining the result of the tie at Coventry on Thursday or the
postponing of the Final itself, the very short notice given creates great
problems for the police which could have been outlined before the decision as
to venue was made.

At this late hour the various services with whan we must liaise in the making
of our arrangements have already made plans for the Bank Holiday weekend, as
indeed have the police. May Day is of special importance to a majority of
people in South Yorkshire, who customarily hold canmemorative parades and
marches on this datef as a consequence all the public services will be stretched.
The railway undertakings and bus service operators will require to make new
plans in order to provide a service which will ensure the segregation of
opposing supporters which we regard as vital in the interests of public safety.

Additionally, Bramall Lane is not, as you know, covered by a certificate under
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act although steps in this direction are being
taken. However, to hold a mateh of this significance at Bramall Lane where
such a certificate is not in existence makes a mockery of the procedures,
which we would like to see in respect of a ground where oapacrlty crowds are
expected. It seems even more paradoxical that Hillsborough stadium which
has such a certificate, and whore the police are used to covering S«d-Finals
should exist in the same city,and not be selected for such an encounter.




                                                                 Continued
Football Association                .   2>.                  30 April 1980




Whilst the matter is obviously fait accompli on this occasion I ask you
to note my disquiet at the lade of consultation leading to the choice of
such a venue.

I am copying this letter to the Chief Executive of the South Yorkshire
County Council.

Yours faithfully




Chief Constable
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

              th e C om p lim en ts of

 THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                            TtcuE,                         & l&n ,
  S   ■ Pz>\«4                   H-tU (   * ^ W th it4 .


                      FOR INFORMATION



                       FOR ACTION



                       FOR COMMENT




  From __                                 P ate .3 Q : _H-,:*P
  D epartm ent of Administration
  County Hall
  B arnsley            Tel. B arnsley86141 Ext Ur'Z-'Z.
                                                                  ^      G    9 i


•        (f^                    South Yorkshire County Council
                               F. A . Mallett, LL.B ., Chief Executive                                County Hall
                                                                                                      Barnsley
         m                     J. C. Harris, M . A . , LL.B. (Cantab), County Secretary               South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                               D epartm ent of Administration                                         Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                                                      (S T D 0226) 86141

                                                                                                      Ext. N o ....................

                               Our R e f :D V /A W /5 8 3 /4      Your Ref.                           Date:     30th A p r il, 1980




        D e a r S ir ,

         Safety o f S p orts G rounds A c t , 1975

        T h e County C ou ncil h a s s e e n r e p o r ts in the m ed ia that should to m o r r o w n igh t’s
        F . A . Cup S e m i-F in a l R eplay b etw een A r s e n a l and L iv e r p o o l end in an o th er d raw ,
        the r e p la y w ill b e p la y ed a t the B r a m a ll Lane Ground o f the Sheffield United
        F o o tb a ll Club Ltd.

        W h ilst the r e s p o n s ib ility fo r s e le c tin g v e n u e s i s o b v io u sly that o f the F ootb all
        A s s o c ia t io n , it s e e m s on ly c o m m o n s e n s e to the County C ouncil that m a tt e r s such a s
        w h e th e r a ground h o ld s a C e r tific a te u n d er the Safety o f S p orts G rounds A c t , 1 9 7 5 ,
        and the p o lic in g c o m m itm e n ts o f the lo c a l p o lic e fo r c e w ould be fa c to r s w h ich would
        b e taken into a c c o u n t.

         T h e on ly footb all ground in South Y o r k sh ir e c u r r e n tly holding a C e r tific a te u n d er the
        A c t i s , o f c o u r s e , the H illsb o ro u g h Ground o f the Sheffield W ednesday F ootball Club.
        W h ils t the B r a m a ll Lane ground i s o b v io u sly o f a high sta n d a rd , it h a s n e v e r b een
        in s p e c te d in d e ta il u s in g the c r it e r ia o f the Guide to Safety a t S horts G rounds in v ie w o f
        i t s non d esig n a tio n to date by the S e c r e ta r y o f S ta te. T he County C ou ncil i s attem p tin g
        to r e a c h volu n tary a g r e e m e n t w ith a l l the South Y o r k sh ir e F ootb all C lubs a s to w o rk s
        r e q u ir e d to b rin g th e ir g r o u n d s into lin e w ith the c r it e r i a , but th is i s n a tu r a lly a
        p r o tr a c te d p r o c e d u r e .

         I a ls o understand that the South Y o r k sh ir e P o lic e w e r e not c o n su lte d in ad van ce on the
        p r o p o s a l to u s e the B r a m a ll Lane g rou n d , and h a v e , in fa c t, w r itte n to the A s s o c ia tio n
        on the m a t t e r .




                                                                  /It m ay be . .




    r                                                                               n
        E . A . C roker, E s q .,
        S ecreta ry ,
        T h e F o o tb a ll A s s o c ia t io n ,
        1 6 L a n c a s t e r G ate,
        L on don.          W2 3LW                                                   j
E.   A . C roker, E s q . ,                          -    2   -                       30th A p r il, 1980



It m a y w e ll be that a r e p la y a t B r a m a ll Lane w ill not b e n e c e s s a r y , but
th e County C ou n cil w i s h e s to p la c e on r e c o r d it s v ie w s on the in a d v isa b ility
o f s e le c tin g n o n -c e r tific a te d g ro u n d s fo r F . A . Cup S e m i-F in a l R e p la y s,
and it s c o n c e r n a s to the ap p aren t la ck o f c o n su lta tio n .

                                                         Y o u rs fa ith fu lly,




                                                         C h ie f E x e c u tiv e .
