                         Part VII
                       Appendix 'C'




 WEST MIDLAND POLICE




    TRANSCRIPT
        OF
     INTERVIEW
        AND
WRITTEN SUBMISSION
   Superintendent
Roger. L. GREENWOOD
                                                                         STATION

NAME:           ROGER L
                GREENWOOD

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     POL SUPT




                                       WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

                                RECORD OF TAPE RECORDED INTERVIEW



        Person Interviewed                          REGINA -v-

        Roger GREENWOOD                             Roger GREENWOOD

        Place & Date of Interview                   Signed              Date

        Fumval House, Sheffield

        Friday 29 June 1990 (290690)

        Time

        Commenced    1237        Concluded   1252   Court

        Tape Reference Number(s)                    EXH Ref.

        MJF 5     1/1 & 2/1

        Interviewing Officer                        Other Person(s) Present

        Det Chief Supt 6930 FOSTER                  Richard HQARE, Solicitor

        Det Chief Insp 2514 TOPE                    Barlow, Lyde & Gilbert



        DECLARATION: This record consisting of        pages is the exhibit

        referred to in the Statement made and signed by me.

                           SIGNATURE

                           Officer's Name                      Rank    No.

        SIGNATURE of Officer preparing record

        (If different to above)




                                                                                   1357
GREENWOOD               ROGER L


                 Officer's Name                          Rank       No.



Tape    Direct Speech Rank

Times   & No or Inititals                           Record

        of Accused



00.09       DCS 6930              This interview is being audio tape

                                  recorded and is being conducted in an

                                  interview room at Fumival House,

                                  Fumival Gate, Sheffield.       I am

                                  Michael FOSTER, Detective Chief

                                  Superintendent of the West Midlands

                                  Police.    Mr GREENWOOD would you

                                  introduce yourself please ...

            RG                    Yes.   I am Ro....

            DCS 6930              and your date of birth please.

            RG                    Yes.   I am Roger GREENWOOD.    I was

                                  b o m on the

                                                  I am a Superintendent in

                                  the South Yorkshire Police, presently

                                  stationed at Doncaster.

            DCI 2514              I am Detective Chief Inspector Kevin

                                  TOPE of the West Midlands Police.

            R HQARE               I am Richard HQARE, Barlow, Lyde and

                                  Gilbert.

00.41       DCS 6930              Thank you.     At the conclusion of this

                                  interview you will be given a notice

                                  explaining what happens to that tape.

                                  Do you understand?    On the 15th of
GREENWOOD   ROGER L                                             3


                      April 1989 (150489) a disaster

                      occurred at Hillsborough Football

                      Stadium and ninety-five people died.

                      Following a Public Inquiry and Report,

                      the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire

                      Police consulted with the Director of

                      Public Prosecutions and as a result

                      West Midlands Police vrere requested to

                      do a criminal investigation.     This

                      investigation came at the same time

                      that certain members of the public

                      decided to make specific allegations

                      against named police officers.    You

                      are one of those officers and you have

                      already been served with the

01.17                 Regulation 7 Notice dealing those

                      specific complaints. The nature of

                      those complaints and the particular

                      duty you were performing at

                      Hillsborough on the 15th of April

                      1989 (150489) suggest that you may

                      have contributed to the deaths of

                      seme of those that died.   Also that

                      you may have failed to perform your

                      lawful duty as a police officer on

                      the 15th of April at 1989 (150489) at

                      Hillsborough.   I will explain the

                      specific allegations to you, but do

                      you now understand the nature of this




                                                                    1359
GREENWOOD              ROGER L


                                 interview which raises matters of both

                                 the criminal and disciplinary nature?

01.54                            Before you answer I need to formally

                                 caution you.   You do not have to say

                                 anything unless you wish to do so but

                                 what you say, but what you do say, may

                                 be given in evidence.   Do you

                                 understand what I've just said?

            RG                   Yes.

            DCS 6930             I will remind you that you are not

                                 under arrest and that you need not

                                 remain here unless you wish to do so.

                                 In addition, you are entitled to the

                                 legal representation of Mr HQARE,

                                 your solicitor is present with you.

                                 Do you understand what I've just

                                 said?

            RG                   Yes.

02.21       DCS 6930             I would wish to put certain questions

                                 to you in respect of the incident that

                                 took place on the 15th of April 1989

                                 (150489).   Are you willing to answer

                                 any of the questions that I put to

                                 you?

            R HQARE              Mr GREENWOOD has prepared a statement

                                 based on the video evidence and

                                 documentary evidence that has been

                                 made available which deals with

                                 answers to the questions that you have
GREENWOOD              ROGER L


                                 intimated that you would wish to put.

            DCS 6930             Would you wish to present that

                                 document to me Mr GREENWOOD?

02.58       RG                   Yes that's the original document

                                 signed by me.

            R HQARE              That's is the only signed copy of that

                                 document.

            DCS 6930             I have been given by Superintendent

                                 GREENWOOD a document that is dated the

                                 27th of June 1990 (270690). In giving

                                 me this document do you understand

                                 that it will be presented to the

                                 Director of Public Prosecutions and

                                 may be used at any future proceedings

                                 that may take place?

            RG                   Yes I understand that.

            DCS 6930             And you are willing to acceptthat?

            RG                   Yes.

03.32       DCS 6930             Thank you.   For the benefit of the

                                 audio it is correct to say that I have

                                 had the benefit of reading this

                                 document prior to the formal

                                 presentation of it today.   It does

                                 raise to me issues that I would still

                                 require to deal with in interview

                                 terms and to ask certain questions of.

                                 If I put any questions to you again

                                 at this present time are you now

                                 willing to answer any of those
GREENWOOD              ROGER L


                                 questions?

            R HQARE              The statement that has been prepared

                                 has covered so far as is possible all

                                 the matters that you have raised in

                                 our previous discussions and we do not

                                 believe there is any further necessity

                                 for more information to be given.

            DCS 6930             I understand, thank you.

04.28       DCS 6930             In that case all I need to say to you

                                 is that the facts will be reported to

                                 the Director of Public Prosecutions,

                                 and he will consider the evidence and

                                 see if it justifies whether any

                                 criminal proceedings should be

                                 instituted for the offences of

                                 Manslaughter or for Failing to do your

                                 Duty, an offence known as Culpable

                                 Malfeasance.   Do you understand?

            RG                   Yes.

05.02       DCS 6930             The time now is 12.43 (1243) and the

                                 date is the 29th of June 1990 (290690)

                                 and the interview is now terminating.

                                 Would you please switch off the

05.13                            recording.
                        Part VII
                      Appendix 'C'




WEST MIDLAND POLICE




    TRANSCRIPT
         OF
     INTERVIEW

    Superintendent
Roger.L.GREENWOOD

     ( Discipline)
GREENWOOD              ROGER L




00.09       DCS 6930             This is a discipline interview being

                                 held at Fumival House, Fumival Gate,

                                 Sheffield.     The time now is 12.45 pm

                                 (1245) on the 29th of June 1990

                                 (290690).    I am Michael POSTER,

                                 Detective Chief Superintendent, West

                                 Midlands Police.

            RG                   I am Roger GREENWOOD, Superintendent,

                                 South Yorkshire Police, was b o m on

                                 the

                                 and I'm stationed at Doncaster.

            DCS 6930             Thank you.

            DCI 2514             Detective Chief Inspector, Kevin TOPE,

                                 West Midlands Police.

            R HQARE              Richard HOARE, Barlow, Lyde and

                                 Gilbert.

00.43       DCS 6930             You will recall Mr GREENWOOD that you

                                 were served with Regulation 7 Notices

                                 under the Police Discipline Regulations

                                 1985 (000085) and I'd like to go

                                 through those forms now.    The first

                                 form that I present to you is a form

                                 that is headed Northamptonshire Police

                                 and I think was served upon you by Mr

                                 COOPER, Assistant Chief Constable of

                                 Northampton.    Would you look at that

                                 form and agree that that's the form

                                 that was served on you.
GREENWOOD              ROGER L


01.19       RG                   Yes that's correct.

            DCS 6930             If your solicitor would like to have

                                 a look of it as well.   Thank you.

            DCS 6930             I'd like to go through this form now

01.38                            with you.   It says that Mr Trevor

                                 HICKS of

                                                   Middlesex, has

                                 complained that at the football match

                                 between Liverpool and Nottingham

                                 Forest on the 15th of April 1989

                                 (150489) at the Hillsborough Football

                                 Ground you neglected to discharge your

                                 duties in that you (a) Failed to

                                 prevent a dangerous build up of

                                 supporters outside the gates, (b)

                                 Failed to control the movement of

                                 supporters subsequent to the opening

                                 of Gate C, and (c) Failed to respond

                                 to the developing tragedy and was

                                 slow to effect a rescue operation.

                                 If established these complaints could

                                 disclose possible offences against

                                 the Polic... the Police Discipline

                                 Regulations 1985 (000085).   The form

                                 then goes on to say at this point

                                 here, you are not as the Regulation

                                 explains obliged to say anything

                                 concerning the matter, but you may if

                                 you so d... so desire, make a written
GREENWOOD   ROGER L


                      or oral statement concerning the

                      matter to me or in this case to the

                      Chief Constable of Cumbria Police.

                      The Chief Constable of your Force has

                      delegated that responsibility.     You

                      are, however, warned that if you make

                      such a statement to me or to the Chief

                      Constable, the statement may be used

                      in any subsequent disciplinary

                      proceedings.    You have the right to

                      consult a friend at all stages of the

                      investigation and service of this form

                      did not at that time necessarily imply

                      that di... disciplinary proceedings

                      will follow and the same applies now,

                      in which case we are doing the the same

                      interview.    The fact that I'm going

                      through this form does not mean that

                      disciplinary proceedings will be

                      instituted.    Those are the allegations

                      that were put to you, and in normal

                      circumstances I would have been saying

                      to you that I would have covered all

                      of the questions in the initial and

                      previous criminal interview that I

                  would wish to complete for this.        I

                  would still now give you the same

                      opportunity that I would like to ask

                  you questions in respect of the




                                                                 1365
GREENWOOD              ROGER L


03.29                            allegations made.   You have presented

                                 me with a statement covering what you

                                 have said is everything that you wish

                                 to give to me.    Do you wish to say

                                 anything in relation to those

                                 allegations?

            R HQARE              There are specific comments contained

                                 in the statement that relate to these

                                 particular allegations.

            DCS 6930             There's nothing   else you wish to add?

            RG                   No.

            R HQARE              No.

            DCS 6930             The second complaint Regulation form

                                 that was served upon you was actually

                                 served, I think you remember by

                                 myself, and that related to a

04.07                            complaint made by Mr Leslie JONES of

                                                             Liverpool,

                                 he being the father of one of the

                                 deceased, Richard JONES, and he made

                                 the following allegations in respect

                                 of your duties at the ground on the

                                 15th of April (150489), (a) That you

                                 failed to carry out your assigned

                                 duty by placing yourself in a position

                                 by the players' tunnel using your

                                 radio and your eyes you should have

                                 been aware of the dangerous situation

                                 and controlled your officers
GREENWOOD   ROGER L                                            11


                      accordingly, (b) You failed to give

                      instructions to your officers to

                      monitor the pens for overcrowding in

                      relation to crowd safety at your

                      briefings, (c) You were totally

                      ineffective in mounting a rescue,

                      that is you made no attempt to

                      organise the police officers in a way

                      which would have helped bring about a

                      successful rescue operation, and (d)

                      That you failed to send officers to

                      the rear of Pens 3 and 4 to relieve

                      pressure when you were in control of

                      the area - this was when you knew

                      Gate C was being opened to allow

                      supporters in.   Again I remind you

                      of the areas on the form that are

                      important, that you have the right to

                      consult a friend at all stages and

                      that service of this form does not

                      necessarily imply that disciplinary

                      proceedings will follow.   It is

                      served to safeguard your interest.

05.20                 You are not as the Regulation explains

                      obliged to say anything concerning the

                      matter, but you may if you so desire

                      make a written statement to me or an

                      oral statement concerning the matter

                      or to the Chief Constable of Cumbria




                                                                    1367
GREENWOOD              ROGER L


                                 Police.   The Chief Constable of your

                                 Force has delegated that re... that

                                 situation under this inquiry.     You

                                 are, however, warned that if you make

                                 such a statement to myself or the

                                 Chief Constable the statement may be

                                 used in any subsequent disciplinary

                                 proceedings.   Do you understand that

                                 form?

            RG                   Yes.

05.50       DCS 6930             Is there anything that you wish to

                                 add in respect of the allegations made

                                 by Mr Leslie JONES?

            R HQARE              Mr GREENWOOD has prepared a statement

                                 which deals specifically with the

                                 allegations made by Mr JONES.

            DCS 6930             Again in respect of both matters you

                                 know that I have read the prepared

                                 statement that you've given to me and

                                 I would have wished to have put

                                 further questions to you in respect of

                                 these allegations.    Would you be

                                 willing to answer any further

                                 questions in response to these

                                 discipline allegations?

06.19       R HQARE              The statement that has been prepared

                                 was prepared in the light of the

                                 questions that you wished to put and

                                 it is not felt that any further
GREENWOOD              ROGER L


                                 information would assist.

            DCS 6930             Thank you.    Is there anything else

                                 you wish to say at all?

            RG                   No.

06.35       DCS 6930             In that case it falls for me to say

                                 that the facts will be reported to

                                 your Chief Constable and it will be a

                                 matter for him, in consultation with

                                 the Police Complaints Authority, to

                                 decide whether any disciplinary

                                 offences have been committed.   Do you

                                 understand?

            RG                   Yes.

            DCS 6930             I will serve you with a notice which

                                 is in respect of the tapes and the

                                 situation in respect of than.   The

                                 time now is 12.52 (1252) on the 29th

                                 of June (290690) and the interview is

                                 now terminated.   Will you switch off

07.08                            the tapes please Mr TOPE.
                        Part VII
                      Appendix 'C




WEST MIDLAND POLICE




WRITTEN SUBMISSION
   Superintendent
Roger.L.GREENWOOD
Ijjident    106     260790 OP49Q9         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER   S9A

                                                                       1/89     Station
Surname               GREENWOOD

Forenames           ROGER L

Age                 45                       Date of birth
Address


Occupation          POL SUPT

Telephone

IC                  Height                   Build
Hair colour

Hair type

Eyes                                         Complexion
Facial hair

Glasses             Use                      Accent
Number of Pages

Dated               270690                                                       Signed

          ANTECEDENTS



           I, am Roger GREENWOOD, a Superintendent with the South Yorkshire

          Police.     I have been a Superintendent since May 1986 (000586).       I am

          at present the Sub-Divisional Commander for Doncaster Sub-Division

           (Al). I have been a Police Officer for 26 years.        I joined the West

          Riding Constabulary in 1963 (000063).        I have been attached to 'F'

          Division which covers Hillsborough.        I was there as an 'F2' Inspector

          in 1980-81 (000080) (000081) and as 'FI' Chief Inspector in 1983-86

          (000083) (000086).

          Since I was appointed Superintendent in May 1986 (000586) I have been

          involved in all three Semi-Finals of the FA Cup that have taken place

          at Hillsborough, that is in 1987 (000087), 1988 (000088) and 1989

          (000089).      In 1987 (000087) and 1988 (000088) I was responsible for the
                                                                     PAGE
                                                                     S9A

 L^PPings Lane end.     In 1989 (000089) I was the Ground Commander.



 PREVIOUS FOOTBALL COMMAND EXPERIENCE



 %   experience of policing football crowds dates back to 1975 (000075)

 when I was an Inspector stationed at Rotherham.     I was involved in the

 policing of the regular Saturday matches of Rotherham United.       When

attached to 'F' Division, first as an Inspector (1980-81) (000080)

 (000081), and then as Chief Inspector (1983-86) (000083) (000086), I

was involved in the regular Saturday matches. During my time with 'F '

Division I had some, albeit limited, contact with the Club.      As Chief

Inspector I attended certain meetings in the absence of the

Superintendent, but Inspector Calvert was the main officer responsible

for liaising with the Club.

Whilst I was an Inspector I attended the 1981 (000081) Semi-Final

between Tottenham Hotspur and Wolverhampton Wanderers.      At this match a

crushing incident occurred.     I do not recall the exact duties that I

was assigned to but I do recall that I was on the perimeter track

almost directly below the Police Control Box.     In other words, what

would now be the South Pen.

On that occasion the problem was behind the perimeter fence to the

left, underneath the Control Box.     People were being crushed up against

the fencing.     I recall that I became conscious of the crushing at seme

time after the match had kicked off.     I broadcasted by personal radio

to the Police Control Box informing them of the situation and asked for

authority to open the gates.     I received no response.   Ccnrmunication by

radio under those conditions is difficult.     I did open a gate and a

colleague opened another gate.     This was sufficient to ease the

problem.     This incident occurred before the radial fences were

installed.     In my opinion the crushing occurred because there were too




                                                                               7
                                                                               J
 many people at the back of the terracing.   These people had been

  transferred frcm the Spion Kop and also contained some late arrivals.

 The pressure of those at the back had caused the crush at the front.

 As I recall, the cause was the introduction of Tottenham Hotspur

 supporters frcm the Spion Kop and latecomers.   Based on my experience

 I would have expected the Control Box to have monitored the numbers

 entering the terracing.   This would have been done visually as the

 closed-circuit televisions had not been installed.   I attended the

 de-briefing meeting on the 11th April 1981 (110481) following the 1981

 (000081) match.

 I was not aware of the internal memoranda frcm Mr HEROLD to Mr SMITH

 and Inspector CALVERT indicating that the admission and packing of

 spectators was the primary function of the stewards and not the Police.

 I was also not privy to the notices of meeting after the 1981 (000081)

match nor the 'F' Division policy document nor the letter frcm James

BROWNL/DW to the Chairman of the Club.



RECENT SEMI-FINALS in 1987 (000087) AND 1988 (000088)



In 1987 (000087) and 1988 (000088) I was responsible for the

United and Liverpool supporters. Under phase 1, I was responsible for

policing them frcm their point of arrival, by whatever means, to the

moment they entered the grouiKi at the Leppings Lane end. Under phase

3, I was responsible for their return and subsequent departure.   Phase

2 covers the game itself, excluding the last 10 minutes.   During that

phase I enter the ground and would act as a supplement to the Ground

Cormander on the instruction of the Overall Canmander.

The 1987 (000087) Semi-Final was on a Sunday and the game was

programmed to kick off at 12.00 noon (1200); in fact the kick-off was

delayed because of problems with the Coventry supporters at the Spion
 Kop arriving late after a hold up on the motorway.     I was positioned at

 the lappings Lane end.     The same plan, tactics and strategy for the

 lappings Lane end were adopted for 1988 (000088) as for 1987 (000087).

 In 1988 (000088) officers were stationed in Leppings Lane at the ends

 of the side roads that were barriered, officers were also stationed on

 the road outside.   The procedure was that as the fans arrived they

would pass by a presence of Police Officers.     I also monitored the

 fans. I supervised three or four train loads fran the Station by means

of a Landrover and loud hailer system.     I had a roving commission.       The

traffic was also being monitored from the motorway.

Under normal circumstances, after the last two special trains had

arrived and the fans had reached Leppings Lane, I would remain outside

the turnstiles.   So far as I am aware at the 1988 (000088) match there

were no crowd problems.     In 1988 (000088) I saw nothing that would make

me consider that there should have been a change in policy for the 1989

(000089) match.



BRIEFING FOR THE 1989 (000089) MATCH



For the FA Cup Semi-Final held at Hillsborough on the 15th April 1989

(150489) I was allocated responsibility for the Football Stadium.       I

was the Ground Commander.    As the officer in charge of the ground my

area of responsibility was the pitch, the security around the pitch and

anything in relation to the public but not in terms of monitoring the

numers of people in the pens.     I would however go into a pen if I was

aware of an incident occurring or I was requested to do so by the

Control Box.

Prior to the event I attended two planning meetings, also the briefing

for senior officers, Inspectors and above, on Friday the 14th April

1989 (140489) at Hillsborough and the full briefing on the morning of
                                                                  PAGE      5
                                                                  S9A
 the match.     The first meeting was given by Chief Superintendent Mole

 and the second meeting by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield who also

 gave the briefing.    The main object of the meetings was to develop and

 confirm the planning arrangements and strategy for policing the match.

At the first meeting some of the emergency and other services were

 represented.

The question of overcrowding was considered at the second meeting in

relation to the number of Liverpool supporters who might be expected in

the Spion Kop area and their transfer to the Leppings Lane terracing.

I raised it because I was concerned that the Leppings Lane end would

become overcrowded if fans in such large numbers were transferred to

that end.     In 1981 (000081) a transfer occurred from one end to the

other and I believe latecomers were also allowed in.     This resulted in

the overcrowding and crushing to which I have previously referred.

When it was suggested at the second meeting that a transfer would again

be necessary I raised an objection on the grounds of the 1981 (000081)

incident.

On the Friday after the main briefing, I then briefed the Inspectors

under my conmand.     I briefed the Inspectors not only on public order

but also public safety and specifically referred than to the 1981

(000081) incident and its consequences.     I specifically instructed

them not to transfer Liverpool supporters from the Spion Kop to the

leppings Lane end of the ground contrary to the instructions contained

in the Operational Order.

From my experience monitoring the entry into the Leppings Lane terrace

was something that was done from the Control Box with the assistance of

the Police Officers at that end of the ground.    That was my

understanding as the Ground Corrmander in 1989 (000089).   I had a Chief

Inspector and two Inspectors in the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

If there was a problem in the terrace then I would expect them to tell




                                                                                1374
                                                                     PAGE   6
                                                                     S9A

the Control Box.   I also have a roving commission in the ground which

includes, but not exclusively, the Lappings Lane end.     I would not

expect the Chief Inspector or Inspectors to inform me of a problem

necessarily.   I would expect them to inform the Control Box.

According to the Operational Order the two Inspectors outside the

turnstiles were under my control but practice and custom would not

treat them as such.     They came into my control as the Ground Commander

under phase 2 when they came into the ground.     The Control Box was

responsible for monitoring the numbers of supporters.     There was also

an Inspector under my control in the West Stand, together with a serial

who would be able to assess the build up and who would report direct to

the Control Box as required.     I expected individual officers to keep

their eyes open.   I considered the role of serial men and Inspectors

was to be supplementary to the role of the Control Box in terms of

monitoring the crowd.     If the serial men or Inspector saw something

that caused them concern, any incident, any problem, then that would be

a supplementary means in addition to the Control Box to identifying the

problem but it was not their specific role.      It is my understanding

that the Control Box would be specifically monitoring the crowd

visually and with screens.



15TH APRIL 1989 (150489)



                      On Saturday the 15th April 1989 (150489) I arrived

09.45 am (0945)       at Hillsborough at about 9.45 am (0945).   I was

                      present when the main briefing was held at approx-

10.00 am (1000)       imately 10.00 am (1000).   After this I went to the

                      Spion Kop with Chief Inspector Beal, Inspectors

                      Booth and Calvert and the serials concerned with

                      policing the Spion Kop.    Together with the




                                                                                1   r*
                                                                                1J/D
 Inspectors concerned, I examined the area which

 had been taped off and set aside for Liverpool

 supporters.   Previous experience had shown that

 Liverpool supporters had obtained tickets meant

 for Nottingham Forest supporters and it was

therefore necessary to segregate the two sets of

 fans.   I anticipated that such a situation would

occur in 1989 (000089) and took measures to deal

with it.   I then briefed the serials as is

reflected in my briefing notes.   The serials were

then further briefed by their Inspectors and I

went with Chief Inspector Beal to the rear of the

Spion Kop as there was a concern about loose

stones being present.

I then made a tour of the ground p>articularly

looking at the upper level of the North Stand as

I was concerned about the location of a betting

booth.   I spoke with some officers from my own

Sub-Division and agreed arrangements for its

supervision.   I then made my way to the North

Stand via Leppings Lane, past the Directors'

entrance, and into the Sheffield Wednesday

Control Room, where I liaised with the staff.

Superintendent Marsh was present and I escorted

him around the ground.   I also liaised with

Inspector Darling and Sergeant Chapman who were

the supervisory officers responsible for the

Constables at the perimeter track.

I was present outside the players' entrance to

supervise and monitor the arrival of the
                                                               PAGE   8
                                                               S9A

                 Liverpool and Nottingham Forest team coaches.

                 After which I again liaised with staff in the

                 Sheffield Wednesday Control Rocm.     I learned

                 from the Sheffield Wednesday staff that Brian

                 Clough, the Nottingham Forest Manager, would be

                 sitting immediately behind the Nottingham Forest

                 team bench as he was banned from the touch line.

                 The seat was pointed out to me and I was told

                 that so as to evade the press he would come out,

                 not with the teams as is normal practice, but

                 after the teams, the officials and coaching staff.

14.30 (1430)    At approximately 14.35 pm (1435) I canmenced a

                tour of the perimeter track.    I walked from the

                central tunnel area past the South Stand to the

                West End of the ground.    The perimeter track

                Constables were in position and I spoke to most

                of them on passing.    When I reached the area

                behind the goal of the Leppings Lane terraces,

                I remember speaking to PC Helliwell and together

                we stood and faced the terracing in the West

                Stand.    By this time it would be nearer to

                2.45 pm (1445) and I saw nothing to concern me.

                The atmosphere in the central pens was carnival.

14.40 -14.41    I recall and have since seen on video a light-

(1440) (1441)   weight beach ball being flipped about in the

                crowd.    I think that I was aware that the middle

                pens were fuller than the side pens.    They were

                not in my view uncomfortable.   They were fairly

                full.    I did not see anything that concerned me

                at that particular time.   There was no problem




                                                                          1377
 in the terracing.

 I saw a young supporter in a green and beige

 striped rugby shirt being hoisted from the

 central pen by supporters in the West Stand up

 into the West Stand.   I tried to attract the

 attention of officers in the stand but suddenly

 the supporter came back to the front of the West

Stand and dropped back into the terracing.     After

a few moments I then walked along the perimeter

track in front of the North Stand and Spion Kop.

I recall looking up to the area at the back which

contained Liverpool supporters.   After I had been

at the Leppings Lane terraces at about 2.45 pm

 (1445) I am not conscious of looking at the area

again prior to the kick-off.   As the teams were

expected onto the pitch I made my way to the

central tunnel along the Spion Kop and up the

side of the South Stand by the uncovered seats to

the tunnel to take up my position there.   That was

the shortest route.

As I toured the perimeter of the ground in the 30

minutes before the match I was visible from the

Control Box.   As the Ground Commander I would not

necessarily expect to be informed about the

problems outside Leppings Lane.   I would only be

informed if there was action that I needed to take.

Conmunication was always difficult because of

crowd noise.   In addition on this occasion there

were technical difficulties of which I was aware.

The broadcasts that I could hear had a staccato
                                                                PAGE     10
                                                                S9A
                effect and were unclear.

                At all times I had my personal radio on.       Between

                2.40 (1440) and 2.55 pm (1455) I had no contact

                with Chief Inspector Creaser.    No messages were

                passed directly to me.     I was not aware at any

                stage prior to the kick-off of problems outside

                the Leppings L a m turnstile.   I was not aware that

                the gates had been opened.

14.59 (1459)   On returning to the central tunnel I was confronted

               by a large number of press photographers who were

               waiting for the teams to arrive.     Shortly before

               3.00 pm (1500) the teams came on to the pitch

               followed by the referee, two linesmen and their

               trainers and coaches.     Mr Clough did not appear

               and the press photographers remained.        I had my

               back to the pitch at this time and I heard the

               whistle go for the kick-off.     The press

               photographers remained and seme of them were on

               the playing area.     They were told to move by the

               Police Officers present including myself.

               Mr Clough came out and took up his seat but still

               seme of the press photographers remained to

               photograph him.     In front of the Nottingham Forest

               dug out was some television camera equipment and

               Nottingham Forest staff complained that it was

               obstructing their view.     It was removed by the TV

               personnel.   I had my back to the playing area at

               this time.   The match having kicked off and the

               press photographers having been moved from the

               front of the tunnel, I then moved into the apex




                                                                              1379
                                                 PAGE     11
                                                 S9A
 of the players' tunnel and surveyed the scene in

 the ground.

 I looked to my left and saw a problem at the

 leppings Lane terracing.     I saw one or two

 spectators climbing over the perimeter fence at

 the leppings L a m end behind the goal.    Two or

 three Police Officers were with them.     At that

 stage I did not know that there had been an

 influx of supporters. I immediately realised that

there must be a ground problem, not fighting or a

pitch invasion as that would not happen so early in

a match.    I immediately went to the Leppings L a m

terracing area behind the goal.     I saw two to

three Police Officers by the gate which I believe

was open.

I surveyed the scene at ground level and could

see quite clearly that people were being squeezed

and pressed against the fence.     The area behind

the gate was heavily congested preventing people

frcm exiting.   The actual terracing was at a

lower level than the perimeter track and one had

to mount one or more steps so as to exit from the

terracing through the gate onto the pitch.       Police

Officers were trying to get the supporters out.

I then got up onto the advertising hoarding and

looked over the top of the fencing at what was

happening in that pen.     I could see that the front

half dozen tows were being squeezed and pushed

towards the fencing.     I was not a big mass of

seething, heaving people.    As I looked further




                                                               1380
                                                 PAGE   12
                                                 S9A

 back at least 2/3 (two thirds) of the crowd were

 watching the match quite unaware of what was

 happening at the front.    One or two supporters

 clambered along the top of the crowd and were

 trying to get out over the perimeter fencing.

There were a few supporters on the pitch at this

stage.

When I got up on to the hoardings I was conscious

that approximately the first six rows of people

right across the pen were in distress.     The

situation was retrievable if the crowd at the

back moved back so as to ease the pressure at the

front.     There was room to do so and the central

tunnel was clear.     I took at that stage the only

option open to me which was to try to persuade

the crowd to move back.     I stood on the advert­

ising hoarding and gestured to the crowd in the

middle and at the back to move back.     I put my

hands in a pushing motion and shouted to than to

move back and then pointed with my thumbs down,

at the front, to illustrate to them that there

was a problem at the front of the pen.

I gained no reaction to my request and more

people started to climb towards the fence.       I

decided the match had to stop.    I broadcasted by

personal radio to the Control Box that there were

potential casualties and that the game had to be

stopped.    I also waived both my arms towards the

Control Box in a signalling motion to the effect

that the game must be stopped.    I did not request




                                                             1 381
                                                                   PAGE    13
                                                                   S9A
                    but I seem to recall a Tannoy message being

                    broadcast asking people to stop poshing.

15.05 (1505)        I then ran on to the pitch to stop the match.

                    This was because I considered it to be an

                    emergency situation.     When I first arrived at the

                    leppings L a m end I assessed the problem as

                    retrievable.   It very quickly became clear to me

                   that there was no response to my pleadings frcm

                    the crowd and that the problem was worsening

                   rapidly to an emergency.     I therefore took this

                   action unilaterally, having received no response

                   frcm the Control Box.

15.05. 31 (1505)   I spoke to the referee.     I told him there was a

                   serious incident and that the game had to stop

                   and that the players had to leave the pitch.      He

                   agreed to do so without argument.

15.06, 15-21       I immediately returned to the fencing.     I could

(1506)             see no improvannt in the situation.     There were

                   more supporters clambering along the top of the

                   crowd and attempting to get over the fence where

                   they were being helped by Police Officers

                   standing on the hoardings. The area around the

                   gate was still jammed.     I moved to the South pen

                   nearer to the Control Box to attract the attention

                   of staff to appraise them of the extent of the

                   problems.    I think it was somewhere in that area

                   that I saw Mr Jackson, the Assistant Chief

                   Constable.   I told him there was crushing and

                   that we had casualties.     I left him in no doubt

                   as to the seriousness of the incident.    I




                                                                                1382
                                                                 PAGE   14
                                                                 S9A

                believed that he would then personally organise,

                as the Senior Officer, the necessary support

                services to assist me in dealing with the

                disaster that was in front of me.

                I then immediately returned to the fencing behind

                the goal.    I believe it was at this stage that an

                officer told me of a fatality.

15.06, 29-35    I then broadcast that potentially there was a

(1506)          fatality.    By this time more supporters had come

                over the fence.    Officers were attempting to get

                into the crowd down the side fencing.    I had to

                concentrate on the disaster itself and to rteal

               with it with the resources immediately to hand.

                I expected the Control Box, who were aware of

                the seriousness of the situation, to take

               control.     I felt as if I was dealing with the

               disaster alone.

15.06          I recall specifically broadcasting for

(1506)         ambulances.     I also remember discussing with

15.07          Sergeant Moreton and Sergeant Eddison the

(1507)         presence of an ambulance which was stationed in

               the area between the Spion Kop and the North

               Stand at the back.     I also decided the gymnasium

               would be used as a clearing station for those

               injured and as a mortuary for those who had died.

               I knew that ambulances had been requested and I

               was concerned that they had not arrived.

               Carmunications were extremely difficult because

               of the noise.    I dispatched Sergeant Moreton to

               get that ambulance to the scene.     There were




                                                                             1383
                                                                PAGE   15
                                                                S9A

               many press photographers present and they were

                hindering the operation of getting people out of

                the pen.    I had to depute an officer to keep them

               at bay.     I also asked PC Smith to get all the St

               John's Ambulance staff to the scene as I knew

               they were positioned at the comer of the grounds.
15.11 (1511)   At about this time I saw Chief Superintendent

               Nesbitt arrive.

               It was impossible to get people through the gate

               because of the crush of people adjacent to the

               fencing.     Officers had by this time managed to go

               down the side railings into the crowd.     I can

               remember telling them that they could now enter

               the pen.     I had previously stopped officers going

               into the terracing as I did not want to create

               more panic and more crushing, and I was also

               concerned for the officers' safety.     When I

               considered it safe I told officers to go into the

               terracing to evacuate the casualties.

               I am aware criticism has been made that I did not

               send officers round the back or into the pen

               itself.     Initially I did not let the officers go

               into the pen frcm the front or side because it

               was not safe so to do.    I felt it was imperative

               to try to get people to move back to alleviate

               the crushing at the front.    In my assessment, the

               density of the crowd increased from two thirds of

               the way down the terracing to the front.    It was

               not those right at the back but the middle section

               that needed to move back to permit any movement at




                                                                            1384
                                                              PAGE   16
                                                              S9A

                all.   I cannot recall giving specific orders to

                send officers round the back but I cannot say I

                did not give those orders.   I was aware that

                officers did enter the pen frcm the rear.     The

                time scale here was a matter of 3-4 minutes

                maximum.   If, initially officers had been sent

                to the rear, the crowd would have been too

                numerous for there to have been an effective and

                instantaneous evacuation and alleviation of

               crashing at the front.   I had to concentrate on

               the front of the pen where the crashing was

               taking place.

15.11 (1511)   I continued to try to get the supporters to move

               back by signalling with my hands.

15.15 (1515)   I made a call on my radio.

15.17, 18-36   I directed the ambulance to gate 3

(1517)

15.19 (1519)   Officers were in the terracing and were attempting

               to take the casualties through the front gates and

               there was clearly insufficient room for two

               officers, together with a casualty, to get through

               the gate.   On my orders a channel of officers

               comprising two lines was formed outside the front

               gate and casualties were passed by officers inside

               through the front gates to officers outside where

               they could be attended to further.   Once again I

               would stress that I was concentrating entirely on

               trying to save life at the scene of the disaster.

               I had to rely on other Senior Officers present to

               deal with the injured and deceased once they had




                                                                          1385
                                                                  PAGE     17
                                                                  S9A

                     been evacuated frcm the pen.

 15.20              I had acquired a loud hailer frcm Inspector

 (1520)             Berrisford and standing on the advertising hoarding

                     I broadcast to the crowd to ease off at the back

                     and allow the casualties to be evacuated.    I used

                     the loud hailer to instruct the officers trying to

                    evacuate the casualties.    I also instructed, using

                    the loud hailer, other officers in the terracing

                    to take casualties, people and bodies out through

                    the rear tunnel.   In this way the area was

                    evacuated.

15•30               I instructed PC Goodwill of FI to accompany me so

 (1530)             as to ensure better communication with other Senior

                    Officers.

                    The loud hailer became faulty and PC Goodwill

                    obtained a replacement.



THE FENCE



As the terracing was at a lower level than the pitch, the spectators

who were being crushed were trapped up to the waist.    Removal of the

fence would not have assisted those people because the spectators

behind would in their panic have surged forward and trampled on them.

Cutting extra gates would again not have helped those crushed at the

front as they were trapped up to the waist and at a lower level than

the pitch with no steps to mount the wall.    At the point where the gate

was constructed the difference in level between the pitch and terracing

was minimized by steps.



PHOTO AGJ/1/2A
                                                                       PAGE        18
                                                                       S9A



 This photograph shows a view that would not have been seen by me.            It

 is misleading in that the effect of sunlight and shadow on the crowd

 distorts the position.



 REGULATION 7 NOTICES

 1-          The Jones complaint.

 With regard to Mr Jones' complaint I say as follows:

 a)          1 ffls i11 roy position by the players' tunnel which is the best

viewpoint.     I used my eyes to monitor the situation in the stadium and

 as soon as I was aware of the problem I immediately went over to that

area.    I had my radio on at all times and received no message.       I did

not know about the problem that was occurring on the terracing.

b)           it was not for me or my officers to monitor the numbers in

the pens.     It was the job of the Control Box.    We on the pitch maintain

a watching brief to assist the Control Box.        If we saw anything to

cause us concern we would notify the Control Box.       I would not expect

always to be told by the Control Box as they deploy people directly.

c)           I dispute that I was ineffective in mounting a rescue.       I

informed the Control Box of the situation and told them to stop the

match when it became obvious to me that it was a very serious

situation.     I, in fact, stopped the match myself.    I organised the

ambulances to be brought over and when I considered it safe ordered

my officers into the terracing.     I then organised a line of officers

at the gate to remove the casualties from the pens.       I tried to

get those at the back to move back to ease the pressure at the

front.   I am satisfied that I did all that I could have done to rteal

with the tragedy at Hillsborough and that the operations under my

control were carried out swiftly and efficiently.       I believe that by

my actions and the actions of officers under my control, life was




                                                                                        1387
                                                                        PAGE       19
                                                                        S9A

 saved and a potentially much worse tragedy was avoided,

 d)           Officers did go into the rear of Pens 3 and 4 to relieve the

 pressure.     In any event I was unaware at this stage that Gate C had

 been opened and that there had been an influx of supporters.          I do not

 believe that officers going into the rear of Pens 3 and 4 would have

 saved lives.    My assessment at the time was that the only way to

 retrieve the situation was to get those in the middle and the back to

move back to relieve the pressure on those at the front.

 2.          Complaint of Mr Trevor Hicks

With regard to the complaint of Mr Trevor Hicks I say as follows:

a)            1 was the Senior Officer inside the ground.   It was notpart

of my brief to monitor the supporters outside the gate.       As the Ground

Commander my responsibility was the pitch, the security around the

pitch and anything in relation to the public but not in terms of

monitoring the numbers in the pens.     I or my officers would deal with

an incident within a pen if asked to do so by the Control Box.

b)           It was not part of my brief to control the movement       of the

supporters into the ground.     I was in any event totally unaware that

Gate C had been opened and that there had been an influx of supporters.

c)           I do not consider that I failed to respond to thedeveloping

tragedy or that I was in any way slow to effect a rescue operation.             At

the time of the kick-off I was positioned at the central tunnel which

is an extremely good viewpoint.     On surveying the ground I saw that

people were coming over the fence at the Leppings Lane end.        I

therefore made my way immediately to that area as I realised there was

a problem.     I had not received any messages by radio.    I irtmediately

saw people at the fence being crushed.      One of the gates was open.         I

got on to the hoarding to have a better look.      The tunnel was clear.

My assessment of the problem was that it was in the first six rows and

that the situation was retrievable if I could get the middle and back
                                                                             PAGE    20
                                                                             S9A

          sections to move backwards.    I therefore signalled to them to do so.

          In my view there was a danger that if too many announcements were made

          there would have been instant panic and bedlam.      I am satisfied that

          this did not occur.    I do not accept that people would have moved back

         had there been an announcement.       At this stage I did not know that Gate

         C had been opened.     I spoke to the Control Room telling them there was

         a problem and the match should be stopped.       I actually stopped the

         match myself.   I informed Mr Duckenfield that there was a serious

         incident and I also spoke to Assistant Chief Constable Jackson.      I met

         him on the pitch and told him the seriousness of what was happening and

         he went back to the Control Box.      I deputed Sergeant Moreton to go and

         get the ambulances at the bottom corner of the pitch which he did.

         When I considered it appropriate and safe to do so, I allowed my

         officers to enter the terracing and organised a line of officers at the

         gate to pass out the casualties.      Officers were helping people over the

         fencing but it was extremely difficult to get people out of the gate.

         I acquired a loud hailer frcm Inspector Berrisford and I used that to

         instruct my officers and also to ask for calm and to try and get the

         supporters at the back to move back.      I could have done nothing more to

         effect a rescue.




                                                           ROGER GREENWOOD SIGNED
 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:              DATE:   270690

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                          1389
