                                                                                        M I R . 15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and tim e raised                                    Number


T itle   L s i J j aV                                                                            &(r   \-4OitU-a.   ^
(Include source and a


      3rs instru
Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Yes/No

         ailu                                                                                                                  Receiver


                                                                                                                         1 ^ 1
Docum ent registered/friUem i as indicated. l ) 9 f V L ^                                                                      Indexer


No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                    Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions
                                             P jlaX
Indexed as indicated                                                                                                           Indexer


No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                 O /M         SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                           Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Number Form
                                         2138




                                                 Ops/EB


                                          27th April, 1989




Dear S i r /Madam,

        Thank you for your letter dated the 17th April,
1989.

     Your comments have been noted and will be
communicated to the appropriate authorities.

     As you are probably aware an enquiry Into the
Hlllsboroogh Tragedy Is being conducted by Lord Justice
Taylor.  I am sure he will take full account of the
matters you have raised In his report.

                         Yours faithfully,




                           J. COLLEDGE
                      Chief Supprltifcendent




______________________ \f
I
St. Helens,
Merseyside.




BM.
                                             e»<,



                                                    St. Helens
                cai
                                                    Merseyside


                                                    17th April 1989




We are a middle aged couple with two teenage daughters.  We were
both in the stand above where all the Liverpool Supporters were
killed.

We left our house at 11.00 a.m. and got into the ground at 2.10 p.m.
At 2.20 p.m. we went into our seats and then walked forward to look
over the balcony at the fans below.   It was obvious to us that there
were too many fans in the area behind the goal and indeed many looked
distressed and many of them were chanting "no more room no more room"
"don't let anyone else in here".    Surely the Police must have had
their surveillance cameras focused on that area and surely if we
could see it was overcrowded at 2.20 p.m. they must have been able
to see it.   Why didn't they tell the Stewards not to let anyone
else into that area and to direct people to the two side areas
where there was room?   Why did they allow people to keep coming
into that area in a steady stream from 2.20 p.m. to 2.50 p.m. WHY ?

My husband went to the toilet at 2.40 p.m. and said there were
thousands outside and he could see 8 group of about 100 to 200
being allowed to run down the street as fast as they could towards
the crowds that were already there.

Then of course the event which if you wanted to be kind you would call
"gross incompetence and bad management" but if you were being really
truthful and honest you would call wicked, was allowed to happen.
The Police opened a 16 foot gate and let the crowd rush in as if this
was not bad enough, nobody had their ticket checked to see if they
had a correct ticket or in fact any ticket at all, this was at a
match that was supposed to be all ticket, I myself was frisked when
we went in and my bag was searched and my husband was also searched.
Then to make matters even worse the Police and Stewards allowed the
crowd  to rush towards the first entrance they saw which was of course
the tunnel leading directly into the already overcrowded area.

Why was the gate opened to let everyone in irrespective of whether
they had a correct ticket or not ?   Why were they allowed to rush
towards the most crowded area of the ground ? Why were they not
directed towards areas with more empty spaces ?

Now we have heard the Police opened the gate to alleviate pressure outside
which we just cannot comprehend was a valid reason knowing the
state of the ground inside.   Why was there so much pressure outside ?
Why couldn't the Police control it ? I s n ’t that what they are there for?
Why weren't there more Police outside ? Why were 100 to 200 fans allowed
to run down the road towards the rest of the crowd trying to get in
to the ground ?   Why did Police on horseback not make the croud queue in
an orderly fashion as the Police at Anfield do week in and week out in
far worse conditions i.e. the alleways to the fesop and the main road
outside the ground ? Why were the Police outside the ground if not to
control the fans ?    Why didn't the police inside communicate the position
to the Police outside ?
Lastly of course there is why were Liverpool allocated less tickets
than Nottingham Forest.    We have twice as many regular supporters as
N0ttingham Forest and were given 4,000 or whatever less tickets than
them.    In fact people who got into the ground when the gate was
opened by the Police had tickets which they had bought from Nottingham
Forest fans.    The Police say it uias easier to control us and the
traffice if uie were given the Lickers Lane End.    This has been proved
to be totally untrue as there uias no croud control outside and most of
the people arrived late because of traffic problems, not to mention
Police holding up coaches and checking for alcohol, and being made
to walk riles from their coaches to the ground.    This has happened
many times to us, most recently at Coventry and prior to that at
Aston Villa when Liverpool played Arsenal in the Littleuoods Cup.
So there is no way giving us fewer tickets can be justified.

We will never forget the scenes we saw and people being dragged out
of the paddock below us and thrown on to the pitch and left to die.
People trying to get out through totally inadequate gates and being
pushed back by the Police at first.   People being carried away on
hoarding by the Fans not ambulance men, policemen or stewards.
Why weren't the stretchers there where were they ? Where were the
ambulances ? Why weren t wire cutters used in the fence more quickly ?
Why didn’t the Police react quicker to this terrible situation ?
Why were there no announcements over the loudspeaker made to inform
everyone who didn't know of the problem ?

WHY was this terrible thing allowed to happen ?

We will never be able to forget it anyone  who was there and especially
those who have lost loved ones and friends until we get some answers
to the above questions.

We are enclosing an article which we think answers those questions
but we hope and pray that some one can show us some other reason
to keep us sane.
       private view
            :ean
 attitudes to the fans
NEARLY 100 people                     by 20 to 30 police who pulled
                                      th e m o ff th e ro a d a n d
lo st their lives on                  searched their cars, vans and
Saturday - because                    coaches for drink. For safety
                                      reasons.
they didn’t count.                        On the mam. road into the
      T h e y didn’t count            city a ll the pubs were shut. For
 because they were foot­ safety                reasons.
                                          Your civil liberties go out ■
  ball fans and in the eyes •the window if you happen to
  of authority, -and indeed           have football in your blood. '
  the general public, that                Outside the ground this year
  placed t h e m beneath              police say they saw large
                                      q u eu es form ing. So they
  contempt                 .. - - opened -the gates:* For safety
      A s I - w atched young          reasons.                         ^
  policemen frantically trying            Inside the ground w hen
 •to pump life back into -people turned blue as the life
  corpses on ripped advertis-. was crushed out of them they
  ing hoardings, the shat­ pleaded                 with the1police to let
                                       them out. But they-were kept
  tering numbness of that in              -th e ir cage. For safety rea-
  night in Brussels returned.       . sons.
      There was a difference.             When people -needed medical
  That night in Belgium we • help as they lay on the .pitch
  •were riddled with guilt and drifting near to death, the re­
   shame. At Sheffield it was sponse of the police was to
   just deep, deep pain. -             form a line round the terraces
                                       and across th e. pitch, and to
                                      .bring on th e alsatians. For sa-
            Caricature               . f ety reasons. .
      But, as men slumped • ground,       The alsatians g o t into th e
                                                   but the ambulances
   heavily into their seats didn’t. Hundreds                more police
  .around me and threw their -were drafted in, but the doc-
   heads into their hands, the to rsan d nurses weren’t.
   same-angry word was being              There was no -shortage -of
   spat out through the tears: ■ boys in blue in the stadium,
   Why?                                but there w as a critical short­
   . The answer is: Because you age of oxygenmachines.
   don't count. Because society           But then this was only a
   has allowed itself to view the football match. "You wouldn’t
   football fan as a moronic car- expect the authorities to :have
   iacature.                         " anycontingency plans fo r deal­
     .And the people who make in g with -people being crushed
   decisions are happy- to -play to death in a 50,000 crowd.
   along with this image because'
   it makes their jobs easier.
      Take the police on Saturday.
                                                   Caged in
   Because of them, for th e sec-         No. Just keep th e anim als in
  •ond year running, 28,000 tick­ check in their-cages. That’s all
   ets were allocated to Notting­ you’ve got to worry about.
   ham Forest, -whose average             That way there’ll be no
   attendance is 20,000, while trouble. Everyone will-be safe.
   24,000 tickets were handed to And if th e re is trouble. JWell,
   Liverpool, where th e ^average they’ll probably deserve. it.
    gateis 39,000.                     They’re only football fans.
      There were ticket_j>roblems They’reonly hooligans.             -
   last year and they were for-           I’m not critical of the aver­
    seeable "this “time. The fans      age    policeman    who   was   on
    complained Liverpool FC com­ duty on Saturday. I saw many
    plained to the FA and to the trying to save life-and comfort
  ^police. Nothing changed. The the bereaved.
'^police decision stood —“For sa­         B ut I’m criticising th eir
   fety reasons.”                      bosses. J ’m criticising the
 : It'depends on your definition, people on very big -salaries who
    of safety. Mine does not in- sit round tables and make deci­
~ elude -cramming one end of a sions. ‘
    ground while leaving enough           I’m criticising a society, led
  -space to play -a five-a-side -on by a Government, which ’has
 -the opposite teiracing.            'lo st touch with what -a real
      On Saturday afternoon as I football fan is.-You know, foot­
  Jooked down a t the heart­ ball. T h e n a tio n a l -sport.
  breaking sight of bodies piled Watched by millions of norm al
  <*ip on toe pitch below me, to people <every y e a r— 99pc of
. -any left there were clear gaps whom are .as violent >as the
^an the huge bank which had average: crowd -ait the ?Odeon
    been set aside for the Notting-       Authority hasn’t listened to
  : ham Forest fans.                   football fans. It 'hasn’t wanted
 ‘ The families of the dead will to . It hasn’t had to.-’Because
««not agree with th e police idea society has been happy to-live
Z¥K safety. Many • policemen -with the myth th a t every fo o t­
    w ere assig n e d elsew h ere. ball fan is a potential criminal.
    Ensuring safety.                      Well, nearly 100 -people have
• "As -the Liverpool fans drove ju st paid the <price ’for this ■
" off the M l they were greeted woeful misconception." 1 ' -
HILLSBOROUGH HORROR




                Daity Post, Monday April 1 7 .1989
COPIES OF THIS LETTER AND ARTICLE
HAVE BEEN SENT TO:


Dohn Smith at Liverpool Football Club
Peter Robinson at Liverpool Football Club

Kenny Dalglish at Liverpool Football Club

Lord Justice Taylor at Sheffield
The Leader of Sheffield City Council

The Leader of Nottingham Council

Chief of West Midlands Police
The Leader of Liverpool City Council
Managing Director of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

Chief of Sheffield Police Force
Chief of Liverpool Police Force

Minister for Sport at House of Commons
Margaret Thatcher at 10 Downing Street

Douglas Hurd at 50 Queen Anne's Gate

Neil Kinnock at House of Commons
Roy Hattersley at House of Commons

Shadow Minister for Sport at House of Commons

Dohn Evans St* Helens MP at House of Commons

The Manager Radio City Liverpool
The Manager Radio Merseyside Liverpool

The Editor of Daily Post Liverpool

The Editor of Liverpool Echo Liverpool

The Editor Daily Express Manchester
The Editor Daily Mirror London

The Head of BBC London
The Head of ITV Manchester

The Manager Granada TV Liverpool
Sir Harry Livermore Solicitor Liverpool

Rex Makin Solicitor Liverpool
Graham Kelly Football Association London
Bert Millichip Football Association London

and all our family and friends
