                              LIST OF WITNESSES
                                GHOST STATEMENT



           BENNETT John Joseph              Chief Inspector

    y      BICHARD Trevor                   Police Constable

    ^      CRAWFORD William Cameron         Police Inspector

     y     CREASER Robert                   Chief Inspector

    /      GODDARD Michael                  Police Sergeant

    (y     GREENWOOD Roger                  Superintendent

/ * GUEST Harold                            Ex - Police Constable

y          HIGGINS Shane                    Police Sergeant

    V      HIGGINS Trevor                   Ex - Police Sergeant

           LOCK Douglas                     Sheffield Wednesday Football CLub

           MACKRELL Graham                  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

           McROBBIE Robert                  Chief Inspector

           MOLE Brian Leonard               Chief Superintendent

         V^NICHOLSON C.E.                   Health & Safety Executive

 y         RYAN Michael Vincent             Police Constable

v/         SANDERSON Andrew                 Radio Engineer

    y      SEWELL Stephen                   Police Inspector

n/                                          Ex - Police Inspector

     *


     Ex Police Constable Guest regrettably died during the course

     of the investigation.        His statement is included for the

     sake of completeness.        Much of the evidence he would have been

     able to give has been incorporated into the statements of others.
*
    JOHN JOSEPH BENNETT - CHIEF INSPECTOR                      PAGE 1




    I am a Police Chief Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police.

    On Saturday 15 April 1989, I performed duty as a logistics

    officer at Hillsborough Football Ground for the occasion of the

    semi final match between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.      At

    that time I held the rank of Inspector.

    I commenced duty at 6.00 am at the ground and had responsibility

    for the supervision of the logistical side of the operation.

    I was responsible to any Senior Officer requiring assistance

    with administrative matters, but in practical terms liaised

    directly with Inspector Sewell.

    About 2.15 pm I went to the perimeter track in front of the

    Spion Kop .   At that time I estimate that the Spion Kop was

    about two thirds full, but looking to the opposite   end       of the

    ground there were far fewer Liverpool supporters.    The       two

    centre pens on the Leppings Lane terrace appeared to be about

    two thirds full, there seemed to be few supporters in the outer

    pens and a few supporters well dotted around the West Stand.        I

    was surprised by the lack of Liverpool supporters and made

    specific reference to it to Police Constable Fletcher and noted

    the time as being 2.15 to 2.20 pm.

    We then walked to the property store under the Spion Kop.      It

    was very busy under the Spion Kop.

    After checking that all was in order at the property store, I

    walked with Police Constable Fletcher towards the second

    property store at the Leppings Lane turnstiles.   As I approached
JOHN JOSEPH BENNETT - CHIEF INSPECTOR                      PAGE 2




the Leppings Lane turnstiles it became quite busy with

supporters entering the ground to gain access to the North

Stand.

At the property store matters were quiet with little property

seized from fans.

I left the store intending to return to the gymnasium.     However,

immediately on leaving I was approached by a gateman who was

manning Gate 'A'.   This gate is normally used to allow Police

officers and other authorised people to enter the ground without

using the turnstile.   The gateman was in an agitated state.       He

told me that because the crowd outside the gate was so heavy he

was unable to open the gate to allow authorised access and

accordingly he locked the gate.   I assured him he had taken the

correct course of action, but during the course of our

discussion fans started to appear on top of the gate having

climbed up the outside to a height of about 15 - 20 feet.      I

signalled and called out to them to get off the gate and they

did in fact climb down to the outside.   Because of this

situation the gateman was clearly worried and asked for a Police

Officer to assist him at this gate.

My only view of the crowd at that stage was through the very

small windows in Gate 'A', but I could see there was a large

crowd outside.   I then went to the turnstiles adjacent to the

Gate 'A' but found only one Police Officer who was clearly

unable to leave his post.   It was my assumption that all other
JOHN JOSEPH BENNETT - CHIEF INSPECTOR                     PAGE 3




officers deployed at this position were engaged with prisoners

or escorting those who had gained unauthorised access from the

ground.    There were no supervisory officers present.   A small

number of officers were deployed at the next group of turnstiles
but were fully engaged.

I next went to turnstiles A - G which allowed supporters into

the ground to use the terraces.     Then I saw Inspector White.      He

had with him a number of officers but they were also fully

engaged.   It was clear more officers were required to man the

turnstiles 1 - 1 6 .   I radioed a request to Police Control to

send more men to that location.     The request was acknowledged.

That was the first time I had used my radio, my message was both

transmitted and acknowledged.

For some time prior to using the radio there had been

interference and distortion of messages but all the messages I
had heard had been intelligible.

I returned to turnstiles 1 - 1 6   and would estimate the time as

2.45 pm perhaps with an accuracy of 5 minutes.

On this occasion many officers were present.     I could see

through the turnstiles that a large crowd was present outside

and there was a considerable crush.

Supporters were entering the ground only very slowly through the

turnstiles and there were a number of reasons for this.        One

turnstile operator was elderly and worked slowly.    One younger

operator left his turnstile to remonstrate with a supporter.
JOHN JOSEPH BENNETT - CHIEF INSPECTOR                       PAGE 4




The crush was so great outside that people were having

difficulty in detaching themselves from the crowd to enter the

turnstiles.     The greatest problem, however, seemed to be the

number of people reaching the turnstiles who had the wrong

ticket, who tried to pay to gain admission or who attempted to

gain unauthorised admission.

As those who succeeded in passing through the turnstiles entered

the ground they approached Police Officers directly.     Some were

abusive and offensive, but the over-riding impression I gained

from them was of panic and fear that serious injuries or deaths

were about to occur in the crush outside.

The information passed to me by those supporters coupled with my

somewhat restrictive vision of what was happening through the

turnstiles, convinced me that action was needed to relieve the

pressure on the crowd outside.    I passed a radio message to this

effect to Police Control with a view to action being taken

outside the ground.    I do not recall this message being
acknowledged.

I directed officers to assist supporters in through the

turnstiles as quickly as possible.    I gave the instruction that

everybody should be allowed in with or without the correct

ticket, whether authorised or not.

Within a short time of my first radio message, Inspector Delaney

♦(Sergeant Higgins?) and members' of 'F' Division Crime and

Vandal Squad arrived and began to assist at the turnstiles.
JOHN JOSEPH BENNETT - CHIEF INSPECTOR                       PAGE 5




* Did he give them any advice or instructions?



At that time I became aware of supporters gaining access to the

ground by climbing on a wall and shinning their way along the

top of Gate 'B'.    They were being intercepted within the ground

by Police Officers, but the people gaining access in this manner

appeared to be in considerable danger from electrical cables and

lamps on the top of Gate 'B ' .    I gained access to the roof of

the turnstiles alongside Gate 'B' by climbing on a small brick

structure at the rear of the turnstiles and then climbing to the

roof with the assistance of a Liverpool supporter.      It had been

my intention to prevent people gaining access in this manner.

When I climbed to the roof I became fully aware of the situation

outside the turnstiles.     I could see the areas outside

turnstiles A - G and 1 - 1 6    were completely filled with a crush

of people.   The crowd then extended beyond the perimeter gates

taking up the full width of Leppings Lane extending over the

river bridge to the left and along Leppings Lane to the right

about 50 yards.    Under normal circumstances I would have

estimated there to be a crowd of about 2,000 but, on that

occasion people were so tightly crushed together I estimate

there to have been twice the number.      The pressure from the

crush seemed at its greatest at the turnstiles as the crowd

pushed to gain admission.      I could see Superintendent Marshall
JOHN JOSEPH BENNETT - CHIEF INSPECTOR                         PAGE 6




standing slightly above the ground on the stonework at the head

of the bridge in Leppings Lane.     There were numerous mounted

officers in the area and I recall a radio message for more to

attend.     I believe from the Directors entrance in the South

Stand car park.     When I first climbed to the roof there were two

Mounted Officers trying to control the crowd outside the

turnstiles A - G.     Eventually they left that area and joined

other Mounted Officers attempting to hold the crowd back in

Leppings Lane to relieve the pressure on those people between

the perimeter gates and the turnstiles.

Those supporters who were gaining access by climbing over Gate

'B' were first climbing on top of a fence which separates the

turnstiles A — G from turnstiles 1 — 16.         I saw about 30 young

men sitting outside this fence waiting their turn to climb on to

the wall.    Others were climbing directly to a position near me

from the turnstile enclosure.     On my arrival these people were

swarming over the wall.    I   could see it would not have been safe

to try and force them back     into the crowd.     In view of the

desperate crush below I allowed them to climb on to the roof of

the turnstile, one at a time, and showed to them the safe route

back to ground level inside the turnstiles by the way I had

climbed to the roof.    Some   of these men had difficulty standing

and had been drinking, but     none was disorderly.

A substantial proportion of these people were in possession of

tickets which they were waving to gain access.        Others made no
JOHN JOSEPH BENNETT - CHIEF INSPECTOR                     PAGE 7




eff°rt to justify this means of access.     A small number having

climbed to the turnstile roof tried to pass tickets back to

those outside the turnstiles.    I prevented this happening.     I

became so engrossed in ensuring the safety of these people that

I took no great account of what was happening elsewhere.       I was

aware of snatches of radio messages about opening gates, but I

was not aware of the origin of those messages.



* Did he gain any impression of what they were about?



The crowd outside turnstiles A - G reduced suddenly which could

only have happened by the opening of Gates 'B' and 'C'.     I did

not have Gate 'C' in view but I saw the last of the crowd, about

40-50 entering via Gate 'B', which I saw was open.     Shortly

sfter the crowds outside turnstiles A — G reduced, the same

happened outside turnstiles 1 - 1 6   indicating that Gate 'A' had

also been opened.   When that crowd reduced to such an extent

that it filled about half of the enclosure within the perimeter

gates, I managed to signal to Inspector Handdavis, Mounted

Department and he directed one of his officers into the

enclosure and that officer prevented any more supporters
climbing into the ground.



*   Paragraph here to describe his view of the concourse ie gap

in wall, entrance to tunnel.    Did he have any communication with
#
     JOHN JOSEPH BENNETT - CHIEF INSPECTOR                    PAGE 8




    Sergeant Higgins?     Explain in more detail why he asked for extra

    manpower.     What resources did he see on concourse and did he use

    them in any way?     Did he see position of any barriers which

    could have been utilised to control or direct the crowd?



    I gauge that the mood of the supporters that I came into contact

    with was mixed.    Some were abusive and had been drinking.

    Others were abusive about what they considered to be lack of

    Police action to prevent crushing outside the turnstiles.     Many

    were simply fearful that serious injury would occur at the

    turnstiles.    The majority demanded Police action to reduce the
    crush.

    I did not see the actions of the crowd when the gates were

    opened because it was necessary to ensure the safety of those
    people climbing into the ground.

    With matters under control outside the turnstiles, I returned to

    the ground and was rejoined by Police Constable Fletcher.

    Within a ^ew moments a clear radio message was transmitted

    directing officers on to the pitch in front of Leppings Lane
    terrace.



    * Can he say if he heard any messages directing manpower or

    alerting officers that the gates were to be or had been opened.
+
    POLICE CONSTABLE 1370 TREVOR BICHARD                      PAGE 1




    I am a Police Constable with South Yorkshire Police at present

    stationed at Hammerton Road Police Station, Sheffield.     I have

    the responsibility of operating the static video system which is

    installed at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield.

    In September 1987 I took over duties relating to the video

    system working from the Police Control Box and since that time I

    have attended a 3 day course in relation to the use of video

    systems for Command and Control and as a method of evidence

    gathering.    The original system installed at Hillsborough was

    laid out as a Command and Control System giving a basic all

    round view both inside and outside the ground.    Whilst I have

    been involved with the duties that emphasis has shifted from

    Command and Control to evidence gathering and with that end in

    mind several improvements have been made, the most recent being

    a survey of the Leppings Lane end camera, the intention being to

    move the camera from its present position attached to the roof

    of the West Stand bringing it down to a position just above the
    turnstiles.

    Unfortunately the clerical side of this operation could not be

    completed quickly enough and the planned move for the camera was

    suspended until the summer break.

    On Saturday 15 April 1989, I commenced duty at 10.00 am

    attending at the Police Room at Hillsborough, collecting the

    hand held VHS radio which I used to monitor transmissions via

    Operations Room.   On this particular day channel 1 had been
POLICE CONSTABLE 1370 TREVOR BICHARD                     PAGE 2




designated for all VHF transmission relating to the Semi Final.

After collecting the radio I made my way to the Leppings Lane

terrace where I saw that Roger Holdsworth was working on camera

number 5 which overlooks the Leppings Lane terrace pens. The

picture quality had been substandard for a number of weeks and

Mr Holdsworth was carrying out some last minute alterations to

upgrade the picture.    After he had completed the work the

picture was indeed better than it had been although not up to

the correct standard.    I then made my way to the Control Box

where I met with Sergeant Goddard and Police Constable Ryan.

After a brief conversation I began to check the video system

operating each of the five cameras in turn.   We were later

joined by Superintendent Murray and it was agreed between us

that Sergeant Goddard would operate the personal radio, Police

Constable Ryan the. tannoy and telephone and I in addition to my

duties as camera operator would monitor the VHF set using it if

necessary.   These duties were no different from what would be

carried out on a normal match day.

About 11.20 am Sergeant Goddard carried out radio checks.     Some

personal radios did not reply and the sector Inspectors were

asked to make checks where appropriate.   Throughout this time

various messages were coming in regarding traffic problems the

city side of the ground, Ml motorway, Parkway, etc, diversions

were in force.   This indicated that the Nottingham supporters

were en route in numbers and could be expected at the ground for
POLICE CONSTABLE 1370 TREVOR BICHARD                      PAGE 3




the turnstile opening time of 12 noon.

Just after noon I inserted the 2 VHS video tapes in the two

video recorders.   The time and date system was checked and set

possibly using the ground clock mounted above the North Stand or

by a time check with other officers in the Control Box.     The

tapes were set to run at normal speed, my intention being that

ar"ound 2.30 pm the same date I would insert 2 new tapes which

would then include the build up to the match, throughout the

game, and the supporters leaving the ground.



* I have been shown extracts from one of these tapes item TB2

which I can identify by the exhibit label attached which I have
signed.



A short time later it was discovered that some of the Penistone

Road turnstiles were not manned due to an administrative error,

this was corrected by deploying one of the spare serials.    Some

time between 1.00 pm and 2.30 pm there was concern expressed

regarding the Liverpool fans purchasing Kop tickets from touts

at Leppings Lane turnstiles.   This would mean of course that a

mixture of fans would have to be supervised within the Kop
terrace.

Some time between 1.30 pm and 2.00 pm I began to notice that on

the Kop several Liverpool fans had been placed in the triangle

area near to the North Stand end supervised by several Police
POLICE CONSTABLE 1370 TREVOR BICHARD                      PAGE 4




Officers-   I set camera 4 to monitor the situation noticing that

several arrests were made and that manpower was getting low.       I

remembered that there had been some trouble at last year's match

in the same location and I questioned Superintendent Murray

regarding the number of officers available for deployment on the
Kop.

Superintendent Murray then contacted Inspector Sewell regarding

the manpower situation and he confirmed that 2 coaches each

containing 40 men would be on standby in Penistone Road.

Around 2.00 pm Superintendent Murray and Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield went to speak to the match referee.     Through the

afternoon complaints had been expressed regarding the quality of

personal radio transmissions to the control staff.

At about 2.30 pm the personal radio transmissions became worse

and the civilian radio repair man came into the Control Box to
attempt a repair.

About this time my attention was drawn to the large crowd

outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.   I would estimate around

3,000 people and it was apparent that the number was increasing

by the volume of foot passengers in Leppings Lane itself.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield asked about the large crowd and

it was said that although it was more than normal, it was no

more than was expected for such a football match.

About 2.35 pm the civilian radio repair man stated that he could

n°t     the personal radio system and it was necessary to resort
POLICE CONSTABLE 1370 TREVOR BICHARD                      PAGE 5




to using the radios on a back to back system.

About the same time Chief Superintendent Duckenfield came to the

back of the Control Box and asked me if the crowd scenes at the

Leppings Lane end were being recorded and I replied, "Yes."

A personal radio on Leppings Lane requested more manpower to

Leppings Lane turnstiles.   Sergeant Sorsby despatched 2 horses

from the South Stand car park.

A personal radio message then came in stating that the gates

were being forced, they were bending and buckling.     In my mind I

believed that the gates referred to were 'C' Gate and I kept the

Leppings Lane camera set to that sort of area.



* Why did he think that when clearly on video it is not under
pressure?



About 2.40 pm Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and

Superintendent Murray requested that I contact Operations Room

so that a traffic car with a Public Address System could attend

in Leppings Lane and advise the crowd which were by this time

becoming apparently more hostile.     I also remember around this

time that Sergeant Goddard picked up the personal radio

telephone style handset and after trying to use it, threw it

down onto the desk because it was not working and the personal

radio transmissions were very poor.    I can remember seeing about

5 or 6 officers stood on barrier duty just past the gate 'C'
POLICE CONSTABLE 1370 TREVOR BICHARD                      PAGE 6




towards the South Stand.

About 2.40 pm I remember seeing 'C' Gate open and a number of

supporters enter the ground.     I then said words like, "They've

broken down the gate."     At the same time I indicated to the

staff -*-n the Control Box to watch the Leppings Lane monitor.

After about 20 seconds I noticed that the gate was closed and it

seemed that a mounted officer alone had prevented a big rush of

people through the open gate.     I remember seeing mounted

officers trying to clear space in the crowd.



* At this stage was there any conversation or requests for him

to use the cameras in any way?    Was there any discussion in the
Control Box regarding this event?



The request for additional officers to be sent to Leppings Lane

was made to Inspector Sewell and I remember him offering two

Serials, one of which was the 'F' Division Crime and Vandal,

they were directed to the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

I saw Liverpool fans climbing the walls of the ground onto the

turnstile roofs and I in particular remember several being sat

astride gate 'B' with Police Officers stood below.    I think at

this time a personal radio message was sent regarding the

climbers and an officer replied that he could not reach them.

Around 2.45 pm I remember a personal radio message from

Superintendent Marshall to the effect, "We must open the gates
POLICE CONSTABLE 1370 TREVOR BICHARD                      PAGE 7




or someone is going to be killed, please open the gates."

At this time Chief Inspector McRobbie was in the Control Box
wearing civilian clothing.

I remember seeing an officer on the top of the turnstiles at

Leppings Lane end and Chief Superintendent Duckenfield made

enquiries as to the officer's identity.



  Did he make any other enquiries?     Did he see Inspector White

on concourse or Chief Inspector Creaser at that location?



Another personal radio message was received from Superintendent

Marshall, his voice was very distressed, "You must open the

gates, open the gates."     Chief Superintendent Duckenfield seemed

to pause for thought and then said, "Right if lives are at risk,

then open the gates."     Sergeant Goddard then transmitted, "Open
the gates, open the gates."



  Clarify this if we can — order given immediately?    Any other

conversation ie was there any warnings given that gates were to

be opened?   Did anyone seek advice regarding the consequences?

Were any instructions given to any officers to control or direct
the crowd?



Just prior to this I remember seeing officers behind 'A' Gate,

they were set out in two lines forming a funnel.    Sergeant
POLICE CONSTABLE 1370 TREVOR BICHARD                      PAGE 8




Higgins of 'F' Crime and Vandal transmitted on personal radio,

"There are people being crushed outside 'A' Gate, we must open
 'A' Gate."

I remember that about the time the gates were ordered to be

opened mounted officers outside Leppings Lane turnstiles had

managed to create a void between the turnstiles and the outer

perimeter railings.     In fact, I believed that at one time the

officers managed to close the outer gates.     However, the crowd

outside forced its way through the outer gates and ran into the

ground via 'C' Gate at least.     I remember seeing crowds at the

rear of Leppings Lane terrace just behind the turnstiles.      They

were just stood about not doing anything in particular.

About 2.55 pm Chief Superintendent Duckenfield told control room

staff to get some manpower to the North Stand to stop any

possible rush onto the pitch.     It was at this time that we began

to notice Liverpool fans climbing up into the West Stand from

the terrace area.     They were assisted by people in the stand and

the same problem had occurred the previous year.     A short time

later fans were seen to climb the perimeter track fence.

Officers on the track seemed to be telling the fans to get down

from the fence.     At this point the staff in the Control Box and

I thought that the situation was purely public order.     No

information was coming in to the effect that people were getting
hurt.

A crowd gathered on the perimeter track and Chief Superintendent
#
     POLICE CONSTABLE 1370 TREVOR BICHARD                     PAGE 9




     Duckenfield ordered that they should be moved as quickly as

     possible to the wing sections of Leppings Lane terrace where it

    could be seen that there was space.     Chief Superintendent

    Duckenfield was angry about officers stood around the track near

    to the Kop and the North Stand.     A personal radio message was

    sent to the officers and they were directed to the front of the

    North Stand.   Around this time Chief Inspector McRobbie was sent
    to the pitch to get things sorted out.

    About 3.3 5 pm I checked the video tapes and discovered that one

    had stopped and the second had been switched to operate in the

    18 hour mode which in effect speeds up the action of the scene

    being recorded.     This I can only think was caught by me whilst

    standing at the rear of the video control area.     The videos are

    set at knee height and I believe that as I leant forward this is
    how I altered the time mode setting.

    Sometime later the ground was emptied and around 5.30 pm I

    removed the video tapes and made my way to the gymnasium to

    °ffer assistance.    I was later sent to Headquarters with the

    video tapes and I there saw Chief Superintendent Duckenfield,

    Sergeant Booth, Assistant Chief Constable Jackson, and Chief
    Superintendent Denton.

    I returned to Hammerton Road, booked the video tapes into the

    Property Store and awaited the arrival of AVA, Sergeant Foster,

    who was to attend so that copies of the video tapes could be
    made.
POLICE CONSTABLE 1370 TREVOR BICHARD                     PAGE 10




About 11.30 pm Sergeant Foster arrived at Hammerton Road Police

Station and I explained the faults on the video tapes.

My immediate supervisor would be Superintendent Murray who was
in command of the Control Box.

I can identify the video tapes by the labels attached which I
have signed.
WILLIAM CAMERON CRAWFORD - INSPECTOR                     PAGE 1




 I am an Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police.

On 15 April 1989 when I was a uniformed Sergeant I performed

duty at Hillsborough Football Stadium on the occasion of the

semi final match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.      I was

in charge of Serial 14 which with Serial 13 headed by Sergeant

was under the command of Inspector White.

I had performed duty at Hillsborough Football Stadium on many

previous occasions.   In particular I was on duty for the 1988

semi final.   On that occasion I was in charge of a serial that

was responsible for the West Stand seating area.    One of the

officers of my service then, Constable Lang, had been deployed

at the steps leading from the concourse behind turnstiles A - G

to the seating.   His role had been to assist Stewards examining

seating tickets but his location being close to the blue wooden

gates at the entrance to the tunnel near the stand had led him

at one stage to close one half of the gate for a period from

about 2.45 pm, I do not know how long this was for, to assist in

the prevention of further persons going down the tunnel into

pens 3 and 4, I presume because of congestion in those pens.      I

was aware that Police Constable Lang did this although it was

not as a result of my ordering him to do so.   I believe that he

did it as a result of his being ordered to this by a supervisory

officer at least Inspector rank.   I am unable to say which

officer gave the order or whether it was done orally or via the

radio.   I have a recollection, as I told the Inquest, of going
WILLIAM CAMERON CRAWFORD - INSPECTOR                      PAGE 2




to see Constable Lang to ensure he had carried out the order so

that tends to indicate that I heard the order being given so it
probably was given via the radio.

After the match I did not include this occurrence in my

debriefing notes as I did not consider it to be relevant.

On 15 April 1989 I was present at the briefings given by Chief

Superintedent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray and to his

two serials by Inspector White.     I did not mention the closure

of the tunnel in 1988 at any of these briefings and nor did

Constable Lang who was one of the officers making up my serial
in 1989.

My serial, in accordance with the operational order published

for the match, had specific responsibilites.    In phase one prior

to kick off these were to ensure that supporters entering

through turnstiles A — G were not in possession of prohibited

items (banners, missiles, weapons, alcohol) and also to ensure

order was maintained on the terraces.

We were in position at 11.15 am on the concourse at the rear of
turnstiles A - G.

Several fans had started drifting into the ground by this time

and I noticed that there was about six fans in the centre North
pen.

From then on until approximately 2.00 pm, there was a gradual

increase of fans coming into the ground.    The majority were good

humoured and friendly.   There was no problems at this stage, but
WILLIAM CAMERON CRAWFORD - INSPECTOR                      PAGE 3




I did notice a number of supporters outside the turnstiles

attempting to enter the ground without a ticket.     I saw money

offered to several turnstile operators when I was present.     When

that happened, the fans did an about turn and mingled with the

other supporters who were queuing in an orderly manner outside.

A few supporters without tickets jumped the turnstiles and were

ejected.     Approximately at 2.00 pm, I deployed Police Constable

3232 Burton to supervise the programme sellers behind us because

of the hassle from the supporters.     Police Constable 1002 Wild

was deployed at the snack bar at the rear of the West Stand also
to supervise a number of fans.

Between 2.00 - 2.30 pm, it was obvious there was a fairly large

number of fans outside the turnstiles without tickets.     During

this time I was paying particular attention to the turnstiles,

when it became apparent that a number of operators were taking

payment.     I therefore flitted between A - G turnstiles, with a

view to catching them out.     There were no real problems at this
t ime.

About 2.30 pm there was a large number of fans coming through

the turnstiles, many of whom had been drinking but were not

drunk.     Several cans of beer and lager had been 'binned' in the

litter basket on entry.     The mood of the majority of fans had

changed and they were becoming more aggressive.     The smell of

drink was becoming more apparent.    At this time, I noticed radio

reception was 'poor' and virtually non existent.     I was not in a
WILLIAM CAMERON CRAWFORD - INSPECTOR                       PAGE 4




position to receive any messages because of interference on the

radio and also crowd noise, which by this time had increased
tremendously.

Our serial Inspector, Inspector White, was not present from 2.30

pm and I did not see him again until about 3.30 pm.

I was unable to estimate the number of fans on entering the

ground who came to me and said, "Someone is going to get killed

out there."     A lot more were abusive and threatening.   The mood

worsened between 2.30 - 2.45 pm.     There appeared to be a number

of fans having difficulty getting through the turnstiles because

of the sheer weight of the supporters.     I did not consider the

seven turnstiles adequate for the volume and I did notice

turnstile 'G' which was the one closest to Gate 'C', had

difficulty in operating.    On closer examination, I saw that it

was a double turnstile which was separated by a dividing wooden

partition.    Bolted on to the partition was large wooden blocks

directly facing the turnstiles to prevent illegal entry.     The

sheer weight on this partition had distorted it and the blocks

had jammed against the turnstiles making them inoperative.       A

number of fans had climbed over or under the turnstiles at the
point.

There also appeared to be some difficulty with turnstile 'A'.        A

Police Officer who was on duty outside turnstile 'G' was in

danger of getting crushed and I pulled him over the turnstile

into the ground.    I was subjected to threats and obscenities
WILLIAM CAMERON CRAWFORD - INSPECTOR                     PAGE 5




from a number of Liverpool fans who were shouting, "Get fucking

out there and get something done before someone gets killed."

Their mood was aggressive and it was obvious they had been
drinking.

A large number of approximately twenty fans had climbed over the

perimeter wall onto the turnstile roof.    Several were caught and

ejected.    Whilst ejecting one of these fans I saw a fattish

Liverpool supporter hand a bundle of ticket stubs to one of the

fans on the turnstile roof, who in turn threw them down to the

crowd at the other side of the perimeter wall.

About 2.45 pm, Gate 'C' opened and about fifty fans burst

through the gate.    I ran to the gate with Police Constable 1278

Lang and managed to secure the gate, together with the Stewards.

Despite losing radio contact, I was aware that the situation was

being monitored by the CCTV camera positioned in the South side
of the West Stand.

The noise was tremendous, the mood of the fans near kick off

time was getting worse as they came through the turnstiles, many

of whom would have been ejected normally for their attitude

caused through drink, but the situation at this stage was not
practicable.

Suddenly, Gate 'C' appeared to burst open again, approximately

2.50 pm - 2.55 pm, a large number of fans ran through into the

centre tunnel of the Leppings Lane end.

It was noticeable at this time that the situation had quietened
WIILIAM CAMERON CRAWFORD                                     PAGE 6




down considerably.

Shortly after 3.00 pm, there was a radio/tannoy message that all

officers were required on the perimeter track.

Throughout this tour of duty I was equipped with a Police radio

and an earpiece.     Reception was very poor and there was

considerable interference.    The situation was aggravated by
crowd noise.



* I did not hear any order given over the radio or verbally to

"Open the gates."

* I heard no radio message and was not otherwise told that the

question of opening the gates was being considered.

* I was not asked my view of the likely consequences of opening

Gate 'C' and I heard no one else asked for their view.

* I was not warned to make preparations to direct the crowd from

going into pens 3 and 4 via the tunnel.

* I was not asked my location, manpower availability or barrier

availability prior to Gate 'C* being opened.

* After Gate *C' had been opened I heard no instruction to

prevent the crowd going into the tunnel.

When giving evidence to the Inquest I was asked whether if I had

been asked I would have been able to prevent the crowd entering

the tunnel.    I indicated then that I believed it would have been

possible to close the tunnel in a matter of moments.
WILLIAM CAMERON CRAWFORD - INSPECTOR                   PAGE 7




* Paragraph required here to explain Page 3 of document R170, ie

normally we have had a serial at the centre tunnel to direct to

the North or South pens when the centre pens had been filled.

This was not the case at this match and several of my serials
remarked on this.
ROBERT WALLACE CREASER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                    PAGE 1




I am a Chief Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police.

On 15 April 1989 I had been a Police Officer for 20 years and

had considerable experience of policing football matches.      The

bulk of this experience has been at Hillsborough, where I had

worked at numerous football matches.     These have included

football league and Football Association Cup Semi Finals.

I had been on duty at the Leppings Lane end of the Hillsborough

stadium for the Football Association Cup Semi Final matches held

in the previous 2 years.   The majority of my experience has been

at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

Shortly after the draw for the semi final I was approached and

confirmed my availability for the match to Chief Superintendent

Mole.   I subsequently received an operational order which I
studied in detail.

I was the Sector Commander with responsibilities for the North

Stand, West Stand, Leppings Lane terracing, the rear enclosure

and the Leppings Lane turnstiles both inside and outside the

ground (Inquiry Day 1, Page 88).    My responsibilities were

almost exclusively inside the ground and immediately outside the

Leppings Lane turnstiles (Inquiry Day 1, Page 88).     (He did not

attend briefing on 14 April 1989.    Can he say why not?)

On 15 April 1989 I reported for duty at the ground at

approximately 9.30 am.

The following Inspectors were allocated to my command with areas

of responsibility as indicated below:-
 ROBERT WALLACE CREASER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                      PAGE 2




 Inspector Woodward   - North Stand(upper   and lower level)

Inspector Bullas      - West Stand

Inspector White       - Leppings Laneterrace and   rear   enclosure
Inspectors Sykes

and Purdy             - Leppings Lane turnstiles

Inspectors Delaney

and Beresford         — Reserves



I have previously personally performed duty at all the above

locations at the rank of Inspector.

The pre-match Police briefing was given in the North Stand (Kop

end) and commenced at approximately 10.00 am.       There was input

from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, Superintendent Murray,

Inspector Sewell and Detective Sergeant Charlesworth.

I spoke to each of my Inspectors and mentioned points which I

considered to be of particular importance as far as their own

area of responsibility was concerned.       I knew that Inspectors

Sykes and White both had vast experience of policing at

HiHsborough and intimate knowledge of the duties they had been
allocated.



* We need a paragraph here to explain his answers to Inquiry Day

1, Page 37, ie was he or was he not told by Superintendent

Murray to brief his subordinates regarding the monitoring of the

terraces/pens for overcrowding.      (See also statement S 74).
ROBERT WALLACE CREASER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                  PAGE 3




During the course of the morning I saw, and heard part of a

briefing given by Inspector White to these stewards.     This

briefing took place in the West Stand.



* Paragraph detail regarding visiting control box and being told

by Superintendent Murray of find your own level theory, as per

S 74 - what steps did he take to ensure pens were not filled

sequencially?



It was my information that the first turnstiles would be opened

at 12 noon.     In fact a small number were opened prior to this.

As time progressed towards 2.15 pm it became apparent that a

large number of Liverpool supporters were still outside the

ground in Leppings Lane and in the queues to the turnstiles.        I

noticed at this time that the proportion of supporters who had

obviously been drinking increased.     They were, however, at this

time only a minority and were not causing any disruption.        Many

of the fans who arrived were unsure of the geographical layout

of the turnstiles which gave admittance to the North Stand, the

Leppings Lane terraces and elevated section and the West Stand.

The signs above the turnstiles were not clear and many fans were

confused, a specific example of this was the alphabetic

character displayed above the turnstile and the alphabetic

character shown on the ticket as the gangway to be used for

access to the West Stand were in apparent conflict.     It was

necessary for Police Officers to give constant assistance in

this respect.
ROBERT WALLACE CREASER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                   PAGE 4




At approximately 2.30 pm I could see that difficulties were

being experienced in the build up to the turnstiles which were

allocated to the North Stand, the West Stand and the Leppings

Lane turnstiles - all these three locations are fed from

Leppings Lane.   From this point until after 3.00 pm I continued

to monitor and supervise the Leppings Lane end of the ground on
the outside.



* Perhaps a paragraph in here about: his lines of communication

and per Inquiry Day 2, Pages 58/59, ie problems inside ground he

would report to Superintendent Greenwood, problems outside he

would report to Superintendent Marshall.   He also had direct

contact by radio to control box.

Pattern of communication was:   If Inspectors inside saw a

problem they would tell him and (Inquiry Day 2, Page 59A) if he

had a problem he was unable to deal with he would report
upwards.



I was with Inspector Sykes when he caused the flow of traffic to

stop in Leppings Lane in order to facilitate more opportunity

for the ever increasing pedestrian traffic to make progress.



* Perhaps he could go into a little more detail on why.'



I have considerable experience of policing this particular area
ROBERT WALLACE CREASER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                  PAGE 5




and I could see that the build up of supporters was later than

usually the case and there appeared to be larger numbers.        The

operation was frustrated more so by the presence of a

considerable number of fans who had arrived in the vicinity of

the ground, but were not in possession of tickets entitling them

entry to what was an "all ticket" match.     Furthermore, many

Liverpool fans arrived at the Leppings Lane end of the ground in

possession of tickets which entitled them admission to the Spion

Kop and attempted to seek approval to enter at the Leppings Lane

end with friends who had legitimate tickets for that area.

The situation outside the turnstiles particularly those leading

to the Leppings Lane terraces, was such that by approximately

2.40 pm a situation had arisen whereby there was a large crowd

of supporters who were all pushing towards the turnstiles, but

the turnstiles could not accept them quickly enough to permit

entry to the ground.   The mood of this crowd was changing from a

good natured crowd to a frustrated crowd who could perhaps see

that they had little chance of gaining access prior to the start
of the match.

Within this crowd there were at least two or three Police horses

who were attempting to stop the pushing.     It has always been my

experience that horses are able to control such a situation, but

it was obvious in this instance that this was not the case.       A

Police Constable was allocated to the outside of each of the

turnstiles for the Leppings Lane terraces.    These officers were
 ROBERT WALLACE CREASER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                 PAGE 6




given the task of preventing supporters entering the ground in

possession of weapons, banners, alcohol etc.     This searching

action did not impede the rate of flow of spectators through the

turnstiles.    Because of the intense pressure from the surging

crowd, it was necessary to withdraw those officers from that
position.



  Did he know that extra resources had been sent to him, ie

mounted and reserve Serial number 20 by Inspector Delaney?     Did

he tell anyone of the problems - Control Box, Mr Marshall, Mr

Greenwood, his Inspectors on concourse?



With a view to reducing the area covered by the Police horses, I

instructed officers to close the gates which are situated away

from the turnstiles next to the river - I did this because fans

were using this gate to get around the horses.

The crush within the crowd was such that people were suffering

and there was the possibility of severe injuries taking place.

I saw two or three bodies of young persons passed over the heads

of members of the crowd, these people either had, or were close
to fainting.

At approximately 2.45 pm I joined Inspector Sykes in Leppings

Lane and we adopted a strategy of forming a line of Police

horses at the rear of the crowd with a view to preventing the

queues at the turnstiles becoming larger.   This took some time
 ROBERT WALLACE CREASER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                   PAGE 7




to arrange.     There were gaps between one Police horse and the

next one and I attempted to arrange for a Police Officer to

 'plug' each gap.    Many supporters approached this line and

forced their way through, despite firm advice not to do so.        I

even saw a supporter crawl under the belly of a horse in order
to breach the line.

I could see that some people were climbing over the top of the

turnstiles in order to gain admittance to the stadium and at one

point I recall seeing Inspector Bennett ('F' Division) on top of

the wall above the turnstiles serving the Leppings Lane

terraces.     Some minutes later I attempted to contact Police

control by radio, but could not do so; there appeared to be a

fault with my particular radio in that it was receiving, but I

could not transmit.    I approached Police Constable Buxton who

was at this time in a Police Landrover.     This vehicle was parked

in Leppings Lane and the officer was giving instructions to the

supporters by means of a public address system.     He was urging

the spectators not to push forward.    I requested Police

Constable Buxton to suggest to the control room that

consideration be given to delaying the kick off time of the

match (his radio appeared to be functioning well).



* Perhaps a bit more detail regarding this request, ie did he

not consider using Buxton's radio to tell

Greenwood/Marshall/Control Box of his problems?
 ROBERT WALLACE CREASER - CHIEF INSPECTOR                 PAGE 8




   In his recollection he then tells of the gates opening.    We

need more detail in view of the times we now know, ie where was

he?   Why did he not go inside, following crowd in to see his

command through on concourse and terrace?

  He does explain that the opening of the gates relieved the

tension on the outside.     Therefore, what did he do between 2.52
pm and 3.06 pm?



A short time later, I would estimate just after 3.00 pm, there

was a request for all officers to attend inside the ground to

deal with an apparent invasion of the surface playing area.       I

did not hear the specific radio transmission, but I did hear

officers around me saying words to the effect of "All officers

inside - pitch invasion."    I immediately attended inside the

ground and went to the rear of the goal at the Leppings Lane end
of the stadium.



  At no time was I told that the exit gates were to be opened,

nor was I asked for any advice regarding the consequences of

such a decision.   I did not receive any subsequent instructions

regarding the control of the crowd once the gates had been

opened or to utilise the serials under my command in any
specific manner.

 At the 1988 semi final I had the same command responsibility -

Did he know of closing of tunnel?    What were the arrangements
for filling the pens in 1988?
POLICE SERGEANT 616 MICHAEL GODDARD                       PAGE 1




I have been a member of FI Sub Division, for some eight years and

throughout that time have worked football duties as a Serial

Sergeant, the Police Room Sergeant and for the last four years

have worked as the Police Control Sergeant at the Sheffield

Wednesday Football Ground at Hillsborough under the command of

Superintendent Freeman (now retired) and Superintendent Murray.

I peformed this duty for the 1987 Semi Final Coventry v Leeds,

the 1988 Semi Final Liverpool v Nottingham Forest and was again

in the Control Box for the 1989 Semi Final between Liverpool and

Nottingham Forest.   In addition to the three above mentioned

games I have performed the same duties at ALT, the big matches

held at Hillsborough over the past four years.

My duties at FI Sub Division are as supervision of Community

Constables and I share an office with Inspector Sewell.

Therefore I am very aware of the planning and requirements

necessary to Police matches at Hillsborough.

On Saturday 15 April 1989, I commenced duty at 8.00 am in Ground

Control which is situated in an elevated box between the South

and West Stands and which overlooks the Leppings Lane terraces.

Present at this time was Police Constable 1035 Ryan with whom I

have worked this duty for the last four years.   The two other

members of the Control Box team are Police Constable 1370 Bichard

and Superintendent Murray who was in command of the Control Box

and the four of us have worked together for the full season.

There are specific duties allotted to the members of the Control
POLICE SERGEANT 616 MICHAEL GODDARD                         PAGE 2




Box, I control all the radio messages.   Police Constable Ryan has

the tannoy and telephones of which there are three viz.     Internal

club phone, Police phone for internal and external use and a

private phone for external use only.

Police Constable Bichard is assigned to the video recorders and

cameras within the ground and to the use of a VHF hand set which

has direct access to Force Operations Room.

All the tasks mentioned are interchangeable.

During the early morning Roger Holdsworth tested camera 5 which

is on the West Stand/Leppings Lane terraces due to a fault on the

camera.   The picture quality he obtained although not of normal
standard was acceptable.

Tannoy tests were made by Police Constable Ryan within the ground

and were found to be in order.

Also in use in the Control Box is a message book in which any

incident during a game would be noted.



* Where is this book now and at the time exactly what was in it?



However on Friday 14 April 1989, I had seen Superintendent Murray

who informed me that the Chief Superintendent, Mr Duckenfield,

required a specific message book.   I discussed this with

Superintendent Murray regarding an additional officer being

present in the box to log such messages but we came to the joint

conclusion that this was not feasible due to the size of the box
 POLICE SERGEANT 616 MICHAEL GODDARD                        PAGE 3




 ^nd that we would do the log between us

On the morning of the 15th I opened the log but it was later

taken over solely by Superintendent Murray because of individual
duties by myself and the two others.

At 10.00 am Police Constable Bichard came to the box and at the

conclusion of the briefing Superintendent Murray arrived.

At 11.20 am I began radio checks to Serial Sergeants and

Inspectors.    I remember being constantly interrupted during this

check and didn't finish it until approximately 11.45 am.

Between approximately 12 noon and 2.00 pm there were many radio

messages received and transmitted, most of them being in relation
to fans at public houses.

Throughout the morning things were no different to the previous

year's semi final.   At an unknown time but certainly after the

turnstiles had been opened Chief Inspector Creaser came into the

Control Box and asked Superintendent Murray about the Leppings

Lane terraces and it was stated by Superintendent Murray that the

standing fans would find their own levels in the pens rather than
trying to fill one pen at a time.

At approximately 2.00 pm Superintendent Murray left the Control

Box in order to see the referee which is normal practice.

He returned around 2.15 pm together with Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield.

I noticed that the Nottingham Forest end (Spion Kop and South

Stand) were filling well and coming to capacity but the Liverpool
POLICE SERGEANT 616 MICHAEL GODDARD                        PAGE 4




and North, West Stands on Leppings Lane terraces were

comparatively empty and I assumed there should have probably been

more people in those areas at that time.   I did see that the

centre pens directly behind the Leppings Lane goal were filling

quite well but there was ample room in them.   This observation

was mentioned in the box because I believe we all felt that in

comparison to the Forest end, Liverpool seemed empty.



* Was he or anyone else in the Control Box asking for or

receiving figures from Police Constable Guest in Club Control

Room, is it usual for him to do so.   How is it done radio or
phone?



By 2.30 pm Police Constable Bichard I believe made mention of

large crowds in Leppings Lane outside the ground and on looking

upwards at the TV screen I saw large numbers of Liverpool

supporters outside the ground which I would estimate at
3 - 4,000..

Only once before have I seen such numbers and that was when

Sheffield Wednesday played Coventry City in an FA Cup 6th Round

match in 1987 when the Coventry fans came to Sheffield in their
thousands.

Around this time radio messages were coming thick and fast and

any times from this point can only be estimated approximately.

A request came from the Leppings Lane end asking for Leppings
POLICE SERGEANT 616 MICHAEL GODDARD                        PAGE 5




kane to be closed to traffic due to the volume of persons in the
road.

The radio system was operating on talk through and at around 2.35

  2.40     pm I received calls that my radio transmissions were poor

and breaking up.     Within seconds of hearing this a civilian

communications officer was at the control and began looking at

the equipment.     He changed the Tulip Microphone for a telephone

handset but the fault remained.     After a very short time the

back—up set with the telephone handset with central depression

was taken into use by myself.     The fixed ariel lead meant that

the base station had to be placed under the desk.     As a result

the base station had to remain under the desk and this meant that

the microphone lead would not reach above the level of the desk

top making it difficult to use.    After only two or three calls

with the handset, which were not acknowledged, I believed that it

was faulty and I remember throwing the handset on to the control

desk.    I took a normal hand held radio and from that time all

transmissions were relayed in that fashion.    We were on talk

through so the use of a hand held radio provided the same
service.

At 2.40 pm? a call came from Superintendent Marshall requesting

that the Leppings Lane gates be opened because of the volume of
persons outside.



* Was any action/conversation made on this request?
 POLICE SERGEANT 616 MICHAEL GODDARD                        PAGE 6




Further call from Superintendent Marshall asking for gates to be
opened (means Gate C) .



* How does he know Gate 'C'?

Stated that people were being crushed against turnstiles and if

gates were not opened someone would be killed.

I remember something being said about large numbers of non ticket

holders who would get in and cause serious problems for

legitimate ticket holders.    Mr Marshall again came through asking

for gates to be opened.    This was not a request but an order.



* Can he assist as to order of these events which he clearly has
got wrong.



Mr Murray asked Mr Duckenfield for his decision and he okayed the
gates to be opened.



*How long did this take?   Was there any other conversation

between Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Murray?



'C   9ate was opened but believed at this time it hadbeen     forced

and someone said "They've broke through." I cannot remember if

this was a radio message or said in box.

Mounted officers retrieved the situation and only a fewpersons
POLICE SERGEANT 616 MICHAEL GODDARD                         PAGE 7




got through.   More manpower was deputed to Leppings Lane

including mounted.   Mr Marshall again asked for gates to be

opened a second time.     The gates were opened and many more people

went through than the first time.     Would estimate many hundreds

went through this time.



* Who gave the order — ie did he and how quickly — was there any

conversation regarding consequences?     Enhance regarding Lord

Justice Taylor Day 1, Page 85 A—D.     Was the location of any

ground commanders requested, advice sought on consequences or

instructions given to control influx of supporters either prior

to or subsequent to the order being given to open the gates?      Was

there any warning to anyone that the gates were about to be
opened?



Radio traffic was heavy and there was much distortion.



* The order to open the gates was given immediately by myself.

No one in the Control Box queried the location of the relevant

ground commanders or the concourse serials either before or after

the order had been given.

* Similarly no contact was made with the Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club or its officials either prior to or subsequent to

the opening of the gates.

* No one in the Control Box countermanded my decision to carry
POLICE SERGEANT 616 MICHAEL GODDARD                       PAGE 8




out Mr Duckenfield*s decision immediately.



At approximately 2.52 pm Sergeant Higgins of 'F' C and V came

through saying "The gates at 'A' have got to be opened as if not

somebody will be killed."    On receipt of that I said words over

the radio, "If that is the case we have no option open the
gates."

The 'A' gate was opened and access to North Stand only was

gained.    By the time 'A' gate opened the gates at 'C' had been
closed.

During this time I am unable to say whether it was before or

after the gates being opened Police Constable 1863 Buxton came

through asking for the kick off to be delayed.    As he said this

the Liverpool team took to the field and I replied, "It's too

late one team is already on the field."



* Was there any comment on his decision by those in the box?

Enhance as per answers to Lord Justice Taylor Day 1, Page 80 D
onwards.



I saw that in the Leppings Lane end there was ample room in the

pen nearest the Control Box and the centre pens appeared full but

not out of the ordinary for a big match of this kind.    I did see

swaying in those pens but again this is a regular occurrence on

big match days.   I was not aware that the game had started when a
POLICE SERGEANT 616 MICHAEL GODDARD                        PAGE 9




track officer on the Leppings Lane end came through with an

unreadable message.    I then saw a few people climbing the fencing

in the central pens area to get on to the pitch and at that time

my first thought was that there was a pitch invasion.

Within seconds people started coming on to the track via a

perimeter gate, although there was not a large flood.     Even at

this stage I did not realise the enormity of the problem and made

comment about a Policewoman who was on the track serial by Gate

1.   I would have anticipated that she would have opened this gate

to put the persons on the track back into the outer pen.     Chief

Inspector McRobbie was in the Control Box at this time and said

words to the effect, "I'll go and sort it out."

It was about this time that I saw Superintendent Greenwood behind

the Leppings Lane goal.    It was obvious he was trying to transmit

but without success.   I saw then he was waving his arms in a

cross, across his body.   Many officers were now on the perimeter

track helping people from the central pens.

It was approximately 3.05 pm when Superintendent Greenwood came

through   'Stop the match, Stop the match" and I saw Superintendent

Greenwood run on to the field of play.     I didn't see the match

stopped nor the players leave the field.

All personnel were directed to the perimeter track at the
Leppings Lane end.

It was obvious that the supporters used the centre tunnel to gain

access.   I do not even remember the tunnel gates being closed
POLICE SERGEANT 616 MICHAEL GODDARD                      PAGE 10




before (was it recorded in previous years log?) and the only

times a serial manned the tunnel was a few years ago when both

home and away supporters were allowed to use the Leppings Lane

terraces and West Stand.   The reason for the Police presence was

segregation of fans and had nothing to do with safety.
 ROGER GREENWOOD - SUPERINTENDENT                         PAGE 1




 I am a Superintendent in the South Yorkshire Police presently

the Sub-Divisional Commander for Doncaster Sub-Division.

My experience of policing football crowds dates back to 1975

when I was an Inspector stationed at Rotherham.     My experience

of policing Hillsborough ranges from 1980/81 and 1983/86 in the

rank of Inspector and Chief Inspector respectively.     I have also

policed the previous semi finals in the rank of Superintendent.

In connection with the FA Cup Semi Final to be held at

Hillsborough on the 15 April 1989 I was allocated responsibility
for the Football Stadium.



*   Paragraph in here explaining his duties ie how he saw

division of responsibility between him and Marshall and how he
saw Chief Inspector Creaser's role.

Should also mention his change in role from 1988.     Did he know
of the closing the tunnel in 1988.



Pri°r to the event I attended a briefing for Inspectors and

above which was held at Hillsborough on Friday 14 April 1989.

After this briefing I briefed Inspectors under my command.

On Saturday 15 April 1989 I arrived at the ground at about 9.45

am and was present at the main briefing which was held at

approximately 10.00 am.   After this I went with Chief Inspector

Beal, Inspectors Booth and Calvert and the Serials concerned

with policing the Spion Kop to the Spion Kop, where with the
 ROGER GREENWOOD - SUPERINTENDENT                          PAGE 2




 Inspectors concerned I examined the area which had been taped

off and set aside for Liverpool supporters.   At last year's Semi

Final a few hundred Liverpool supporters had obtained tickets

for the Spion Kop, which was allocated to Nottingham Forest

supporters, by whatsoever means and had had to be segregated

from the Nottingham supporters by a cordon of Police Officers.

There was friction between both sets of supporters particularly

when Liverpool scored and Police Officers had come under threat

to their personal safety.   Officers had had to draw their

truncheons to control the situation.   I anticipated that such a

situation was likely to occur at the 1989 Semi Final.

I then made a tour of the ground.

I was present outside the players' entrance to supervise and

monitor the arrival of the Liverpool and Nottingham Forest team

coaches.   After that I again liaised with the staff in the

Sheffield Wednesday Control Room.   I learned from the Sheffield

Wednesday staff that Brian Clough, the Nottingham Forest

manager, would be sitting immediately behind the Nottingham

Forest s team bench as he was banned from the touch line.      The

seat was pointed out to me and I was told that so as to evade

the press he would come out, not with the teams as is normal

practice, but after the teams, the officials and coaching staff.

I estimate that it would be about 2.35 pm when I went on a tour

of the perimeter track.   I walked from the central tunnel area

passing the South Stand to the West end of the ground.   The
ROGER GREENWOOD - SUPERINTENDENT                          PAGE 3




perimeter track Constables were in position and I spoke tomost

of them on passing.     When I reached the area behind the goal of

the Leppings Lane terraces, I remember talking to Police

Constable Helliwell and together we stood and faced the

terracing and the West Stand.     There was a carnival atmosphere

in the central pens, a light weight beachball was being flipped

about in the crowd.     I saw a young supporter in a green and

beiged striped rugby shirt being hoisted from the central pens

by supporters in the West Stand up into the West Stand.        Once in

the West Stand I saw him move first to the left and then to the

right and I thought to myself, because I'd seen this happen many

times before at half time, when was he going to go to the back

and disappear into the crowd but he didn't and I believe that he

realised he had been seen by us.

After a few moments I then walked along the perimeter track in

front of the North Stand to the front of the Spion Kop.    I

recall looking up to the area at the back which    contained

Liverpool supporters.

I looked at my watch and saw that it was about 2.50 pm and that

as the teams would be coming out onto the pitch before very

long, it was time for me to take up a position in the central

tunnel.   I therefore made my way to that location.

On returning to the central tunnel, I was confronted by a large

number of press photographers awaiting the arrival of the teams.

After a short time the teams ran onto the pitch followed by the
#
    ROGER GREENWOOD - SUPERINTENDENT                             PAGE 4




    referee and 2 linesmen and trainers/coaches.        Mr Clough did not

    appear at this stage and the press photographers remained.

    I heard, with my back to the pitch at this time, the whistle go

    for kick-off.     The press photographers remained and some of them

    were on the playing area.     It was necessary they move and they

    were told to do so by the Police Officers present.        Mr Clough

    came out and took up his seat but still some of the press

    photographers had remained to photograph him.        In front of the

    Nottingham Forest's dug out was some television camera equipment

    and the Nottingham staff complained that it was obstructing

    their view.     This was moved by television personnel.     The match

    having kicked off and the press photographers gone from the

    front of the tunnel I then surveyed the scene in the ground.



    *   Paragraph here - Had he heard any messages or been informed

    of any problems at the Leppings Lane end?     (i)    Of the request

    for the gates to be opened (ii) asked for any observations on

    such request in terms of likely consequences of such a decision,

    action to be taken (iii) of his intention to give the order and

    to make any preparations to direct the crowd in any particular

    way including diverting them from entering pens 3 and 4.

    Did he hear the Control Box transmissions asking him to go to
    terrace?



    I looked to my left and saw one or two spectators climbing over
ROGER GREENWOOD - SUPERINTENDENT                             PAGE 5




the perimeter fence at the Leppings Lane end behind the goal.

Two or three Police Officers were with them.     I immediately

realised that there must be a crowd problem, not fighting or a

pitch invasion because that would not happen so early in a

match, and so I immediately went to the Leppings Lane terracing

where I saw two or three Police Officers by the track gate which

I believe was open.     From ground level I looked at the crowd in

the pen (Pen 3) behind the goal and saw quite clearly that

supporters were being squashed against the fencing.     The area

behind the gate was heavily congested preventing persons from

exiting.     I should mention that the perimeter fence gate is not

wide enough to allow a mass exit of persons being in the order

or a normal doors width.     The actual terracing is at a lower

level than the perimeter track and one has to mount one or more

steps so as to exit from the terracing through the gate onto the

pitch.     Police Officers were trying to get supporters out.     I

then mounted the advertising hoarding and from above fence level

surveyed the whole of the crowd in the pen.     I could see that

there were also people behind the front row who were squeezed

and being pushed towards the fencing.    As one looked further

back, the crowd, probably more than two thirds, were watching

the match quite unaware of what was happening at the front.        One

or two supporters were clambering along the top of the crowd and

were trying to get out over the perimeter fencing.     There were a

few supporters on the pitch at that stage.    My immediate
 ROGER GREENWOOD - SUPERINTENDENT                           PAGE 6




 assessment was that there was a chance the problem could be

alleviated if the crowd at the middle and back of the terracing

moved back so as to ease the pressure at the front.      There was

room to do so and the central tunnel was clear.      I therefore

gestured to the crowd in the middle and towards the back with

both hands in a pushing motion shouting at them to move back and

also with both index fingers pointing down to the front of the

crowd so as to indicate to them there was a problem at the

front.   I gained no reaction to this and more people started to

climb towards the fencing.    it was apparent at that stage that

the match could not continue.     I therefore determined that the

match should stop and after broadcasting by personal radio to

the effect that there were potential casualties and that the

game be stopped, from the top of the fencing waved both my arms

towards the Control Box in a signalling motion to the effect

that the game must be stopped.     I then ran onto the pitch past

the Liverpool goalkeeper who I recall was still facing down the

field of play, seemingly unaware of what was going on around

him.   it took me a little while to attract the referee's

attention by shouting but I recall play then come to a halt as

he had awarded a free kick.     I told him that we had a serious

incident and that he must stop the game and take the players off

the pitch.   He agreed to do so without argument.



* Paragraph concerning his recollection of the working of the
ROGER GREENWOOD - SUPERINTENDENT                           pAGE ?




radio, whether he sent or received any messages in the period

2.45 - 3.00 pm?   Did he hear the request to open gates?    When

did he first learn that a crowd had entered the ground via exit

gate?   Did he receive any information from Creaser or any other
of his Inspectors at the Leppings Lane end?
HAROLD GUEST                                               pAGE 1




NEW INTRODUCTION TO COVER HIS RETIREMENT AND STATUS ON 15 APRIL
1989.

During the previous four years I had worked all football matches

a*- Hillsborough Football Ground.   My duties consisted of working

in the video room in company with Chief Security Officer, Mr
Lock.

Under the ground regulations in respect of the amount allowed in

each section of the ground, it is my duty to check with the

computer, the number of persons who have entered and then the

number of persons outside the ground about to enter, to make sure

that no more persons are allowed into that area than the

regulations set.   If there are, to inform Control to arrange for

turnstiles to be closed and for the persons outside the ground to

be moved to an area where there is sufficient room to accommodate

them.   This is very important at a no ticket match where the

numbers attending are not known in advance.

On a ticket match this role becomes a watching brief with the

main concerns being persons turning up at the match without

tickets.   The video room is situated near to the players'

entrance on the South Stand.   My duties are to liaise with the

Club and the Police.   Any problems which may arise on behalf of

the Club are passed over to Mr Lock, and those which involve the

Police are forwarded by radio or telephone through to the Control
Room.
HAROLD GUEST                                                PAGE 2




* Does he have a club radio?



In this room there are twenty TV monitors which are covered by

cameras which are strategically placed around the ground to cover

all 95 turnstiles.   There is also a TV monitor which can be

operated by a switch which will operate and show any view by the

cameras operated from the Police Control Box.    There is also a

computer which shows all 95 turnstiles and can tell at any time

during a match how many persons have passed through each

turnstile at   any given point.

Each section   of the ground is shown in separate columns, each

column shows   a number of turnstiles for that area   and how many

persons have   passed through each turnstile and at the bottom of

each column the total is shown for that area of the ground.

There are six areas of the ground recorded on the computer and at

the end there is a total shown for the full attendance in the

ground.   The computer scans all turnstiles and is updated every
two and a half seconds.



* To explain print out operation ie does monitor stop operating

while print out in progress?



On Saturday 15 April 1989, I was on duty for the Semi Final

between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, and commenced my duties

at 10.00 am on that date.   At about 12.45 pm, after the
HAROLD GUEST                                              pAGE 3




turnstiles were open, I switched all video recorders on to record

all the fans as they were entering the ground via the turnstiles.

During the afternoon leading up to the kick off time at about

2.15 pm I noticed that the crowd appeared to be slow in arriving

at the turnstiles.   I am not sure of the size of the crowd but

believe it to be 25,000 and 30,000.



* Can he explain how he had passed figures to Control Box, to
whom   and by what means.



At 2.40 pm, that same date, I checked with the camera which

covers the Penistone Road area and noticed that there were very

few people in the streets and on checking the computer it was

showing 19,000 plus in the Spion Kop.   When each area of the

ground gets near to capacity the totals start to pulsate, the

total capacity for that area of the ground being 21,000, which

told me that nearly all the Nottingham supporters were in the

ground and it was near to full capacity.

I then switched to the camera that was covering the Leppings Lane

end of the ground and noticed that there was a large gathering of

fans in that area.   I could see that the fans were spread from

the turnstile entrance right back into Leppings Lane, fully

blocking the road.   I would estimate that there would be between

3,000 and 5,000 fans.   I made a check of the computer and saw

that the figures for the West Stand were pulsating and showing
HAROLD GUEST                                               pAGE 4




near to capacity and the Leppings Lane figures were showing

approximately 7,000 which would be near to capacity and the

computer would be at a point to start pulsating.   The figures on

the computer start to pulsate when the capacities get to within
15 percent of the total.



* Did he know turnstiles 9 — 10 being used for North Stand?



As I looked at the scene I could see the crowd getting larger and

many at the back of the crowd were surging forward pushing

violently towards the turnstiles.   From that point I could also

see Police officers trying to get the crowd into some sort of

order but they were being pushed to one side out of the way.      I

saw several missiles being thrown towards the Police.   A large

contingent of the fans were climbing the walls over the top of

the turnstiles, and they were landing on the asbestos roofs on

the inside of the ground and jumping on to people who were on the

inside of the ground to break their fall as they landed.

On the South Stand of this area, I saw a mounted Policeman being

pushed on his horse towards a large double door which leads into
the rear of the West Stand.

During all this, I could hear several officers, including

Superintendent Marshall, requesting further assistance in that

area, for the double doors to be opened in order to let fans into

the ground to save a major incident outside, also for the match
HAROLD GUEST                                               pAGE 5




to be delayed for a further fifteen minutes.     At this point I

noticed that what I now know to be Gate 'C' was open, and there

was a surge of about 1,000 fans running into the ground.     I could

tell from the noises on the radios from the officers in that area

that the Liverpool fans were very boisterous and excited and

appeared to be heavily intoxicated with drink.

I then turned to the camera that was inside the ground and

covered the area of the West Stand and it was obvious that the

situation was getting out of hand and people were being pushed up

against the fencing on the perimeter of the ground.



* Clarify with him which camera?   The recording one or the actual
Police monitor?



At the point where things seemed to be getting out of hand

outside the turnstiles, I tried to use my personal radio in order

to contact Police Control that further Police assistance was

required urgently at the Leppings Lane end of the ground, but

each time I tried to use the radio I was blocking others already

using the radio, so I did not try further to use it.



* To be asked did he have a club radio and did he try to use
that?



I then tried to use the internal telephone system to contact
 HAROLD GUEST                                              PAGE 6




Police Control but again each time I tried the line was engaged
and I could not get through.



  Did they know that West Stand over capacity - did Lock know?



At this point Mr Lock then left the video room in order to

organise some safety measures with the security personnel.      Also

present during this time in the video room was a Mr Roger

Holdsworth.     He is the person who installed all the videos and

computer system.    As he could also see what was taking place, he

also left the room in order to assist in any way he could.

I could see that    all available officers were being sent to this

area of the ground to assist with the injured and dying.

I can say that during the time prior to the major incident the

Police personal radios were working well but during the day there

appeared to be some distortion and some messages could not be
read clearly.

During the incident, I was trying to concentrate on messages

being received on the Police radio network but did not listen to

what was being transmitted on the back to back radio system owned

by the Club, as I knew Mr Lock would deal with any situation that

had developed.    After the incident I made a note of all the

people that had entered the ground as shown on the computer at
3.00 pm and they are as follows:
HAROLD GUEST




Spion Kop                   19,906

North Stand                  8,109

South Stand    covered       4,740

South Stand     uncovered    3,255

Leppings Lane                7,038

West Stand                   5,618

TOTAL                       48,666

These numbers would not give a true reading of the exact amount

of persons entering the ground due to the gates being opened.

It is my usual practice to pass the computer figures to the

Police Control Box usually speaking to either Police Constable

Ryan if I used the telephone or Police Sergeant Goddard if I used
the radio.

On the 15 April 1989 these figures were being passed by me until
approximately 2.40 pm.



* Can he remember who he spoke to and by what means?   Should also

be asked if the phone in the Club Control Room was in use at the
relevant times.
POLICE SERGEANT 1066 HIGGINS                                 PAGE 1




I am a Police Sergeant in the South Yorkshire Police.

On Saturday 15 April 1989 I was a member of the 'F' Divisional

Support Group and was detailed for duty at the Sheffield

Wednesday Football Ground for the semi final match to be played

on that day.    My duties were with Serial number 20 which was a

reserve serial based at the ground.     My immediate supervisor was
Inspector Delaney.

At 11.15 am on that day I was on standby duty in the gymnasium
with my full unit.

At 2.00 pm I was with Inspector Delaney at the corner of the

Spion Kop and North Stand.    At this time I could see that the

majority of Nottingham Forest fans were in the ground but the

West Stand was virtually empty.     The West Stand terrace middle

section was half full of Liverpool fans, however there was still

plenty of room.    In the North Stand there were about four to

five hundred fans.    With Inspector Delaney I remained at this

location until about 2.40 pm.     By this time the Kop end was full

and the North Stand filling up.    The West Stand and terraces
were still half empty.

At 2.40 pm we received a message from match control to attend

Leppings Lane end where there was trouble at the turnstiles.        I

went over the air to see if my full unit was required.     The
reply was   'full unit.'

With Inspector Delaney, I gathered the unit and went via the

rear of the North Stand to Gate A.
POLICE SERGEANT 1066 HIGGINS                                  PAGE 2




At this time the Liverpool fans were shouting and swearing and

some physically remonstrating with officers of my unit to get

more horses and officers outside the turnstiles.

I could see fans climbing over the gate walls to my left and

then helping others up.   These then jumped down into the open

area at the rear of the West Stand and terrace.

People were lifting children through the turnstile to the North

Stand and many were complaining of chest injuries.

Children, men and women were crying and shouting.    Nearly all

verbally attacked ourselves saying someone is going to get

killed outside if nothing is done.   A small woman dressed in

bright red, aged about 50 plus years started screaming and

shouting physically having a go at officers present inside and

myself.   She was pulled away by three men of similar ages.

A short time later she returned and started again.

I went over the air to request the assistance of Mounted

Officers to ease the crush outside. * (Was that actioned?)

We were trapped inside and could not get through to assist.

The gate had to be held by two stewards, they were having to

push up the top bolts as continuing pressure and shaking of it

loosened them.   It was similar for the bottom bolts.

This continued for some time and at one stage I thought the gate
was going to be forced again.

I went over the air and requested that Gate A be opened to save

life an^ limb, stating that if it was not opened someone would
 POLICE SERGEANT 1066 HIGGINS                                    PAGE 3




be killed.

A reply came back over the air to open the Gate A.      I am not

sure but I think Superintendent Marshall gave me the authority
by radio.

Prior to opening the gate, I gathered my unit and made a single

file on the wall side, myself being nearest the gate.       I then

told another unit to do likewise on the turnstile side of the
gate.

I then ordered this gate to be opened, the steward at first

refused.     I explained my actions to him.   The steward then

shouted through the glass spy panels to the fans telling them he
was opening the gate.

I shouted to them to stop trying to force the gate as we were

going to open it.    The steward then showed them the key

demonstrating he was going to use it to open up.

The lock part was opened first then the top and bottom bolts.

Seconds before the opening I shouted to the two lines to steady

the fans down and try to stop any stampede.

On opening the gates there were shouts of relief and comments to

the effect that it should have been done earlier as they all had

tickets which they were waving in the air.

Together with one of my unit, I forced my way through this crowd

shouting at them to stop pushing and take their time.

After a few minutes I saw Inspector Sykes.     I informed him why I

had opened the gate.    By now there was only about 50-70 waiting
POLICE SERGEANT 1066 HIGGINS                               PAGE




to enter through this gate.

Inspector Sykes then shut this gate.   I remember talking to a

fan and he said its past three have they kicked off.   I did not
know.

A message was sent over the air to the effect all officers were

to go to the ground or pitch.   I cannot remember the actual
words.
TREVOR HIGGINS                                              pAGE 1




I am Trevor Higgins,



Until July 1988 I was a Police Sergeant in the South Yorkshire

Police stationed at Wombwell of Barnsley Division.

On Saturday 9 April 1988, I was detailed to supervise a serial of

constables performing duty at Hillsborough Football Stadium.     The

two football teams taking part were Liverpool and Nottingham
Forest.

The serial was delegated duty at the rear of the West Stand and

in particular to control fans entering pens 3 and 4 *(explain

further with reference to order), that is the centre pens of the
stand.

During the game and because of the amount of fans within pens 3

and 4 I received instruction to close the gates to the entrance

and thereafter direct fans to the two outer pens of the stand.       I

cannot recall where the instruction came from.    Under normal

circumstances instruction came from a Serial Inspector or via

radio from control.    I cannot say from which the instruction
came.

Bearing in mind the time lapse and having attended several

matches at Hillsborough, it is difficult to relate detail

regarding this particular match.

On that day I was directly responsible to Chief Inspector Creaser

and then Superintendent Marshall who was the Commander inside the
ground.
TREVOR HIGGINS




* Can he say who gave the order.     Expand on how the closure was
carried out.

* Can he say who knew?     Chief Inspector Creaser?   Others?
Inspectors on concourse?
DOUGLAS JOHN LOCK                                         PAGE 1




On 15 April 1989, I was employed in the capacity of Chief

Security Officer by the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

Prior to that I had served 30 years with the Police Service,

retiring in the rank of Superintendent in the South Yorkshire

Police on 28 February 1985.     At the time of my retirement I was

based at Hammerton Road Police Station and from 1982 until I

retired I was under the direct command of the Chief

Superintendent in charge of policing the Hillsborough Ground.

During that spell I had a good deal of contact with the

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, mainly with the Secretary.

During my 3 seasons in charge, we never had an FA Cup Semi Final

played at Hillsborough and to my recollection, the largest crowd

we had was one of about 48,000 people for an evening match with
a 7.30 pm kick off.

In my post as Chief of Security at Sheffield Wednesday Football

Club I was involved with general matters of crowd safety and I

was of course familiar with the Green Code, the Safety of Sports

Grounds Act 1975 and the recommendations of the Popplewell
Inquiry.



* Paragraph here to describe layout, signing and Gates at

Leppings Lane end and his knowledge of turnstile allocation.

* Needs here to describe the club computer system, in particular

the grouping of crowd capacities ie totals of 1 - 8 , 8 - 16,

A - G et c .   Also needs to describe how computer flashes on
DOUGLAS JOHN LOCK                                           PAGE 2




sections when 85% of capacity is reached.    Also needs to explain

the printer ie can it print while screen is operational.      Also

how and why print out was made at 3.00 pm prompt.      Also why and

how 9 - 1 6 were well over capacity at this time when he says it
was 2,500 under at 2.50 pm.

* Needs to explain club video and recording system perhaps with

some detail of which video fitted which screen ie number and

turnstiles on screen with number on video recorder.

* Needs   to explain the tannoy system and override.

* Needs   to explain the club radio system and who had club
radios.

* Needs to explain briefly the internal telephone communication
system.

* Needs   to explain if he can the stewarding system and how he

understood   their duties, possibly in relation to those set out

in the Green Guide which he professes knowledge of.

* In relation to ghost statement of Guest - Can he set out

Guest's role and duties as he understands them?   Can he produce

the club video tape of Gate 'C'?



On 15 April 1989, I arrived at the ground at approximately 9.45

am and carried out my normal duties, ie liaising with Police,

Stewards and other club officials etc.

By 2.00 pm I was in the Club Control Room and at regular

intervals the Police Control Box staff would radio in *(which
DOUGLAS JOHN LOCK                                           pAGE    3




radio, Club/Police?)    (on one occasion they used the internal

telephone) to check with us what the size of the crowd was as

demonstrated on the computer screen and myself or Police
Constable Guest would tell them.



* When this is done on other matches to whom do they give the

figures.    PC Ryan?   PC Bichard?   PS Goddard?   Superintendent
Murray?



It was noticeable that the North Terrace areas of the ground

were filling up first.    This was obvious from the monitors and
the computer.

Between 2.30 pm and 2.40 pm it was noticeable that a significant

number of fans were arriving at the Leppings Lane end of the
ground.

I recall that there had been an announcement over the Police

radio that Leppings Lane had been closed to traffic because of
the build up in that area.

I looked on the monitor at the Leppings Lane picture and recall

the impression I had was that immediately outside the turnstiles

in the area of the metal gate there was a very tight crush of

people.    Just behind them was an area which did not seem so

densely packed and then further behind again in Leppings Lane

there seemed to be a solid crush of people coming along.
DOUGLAS JOHN LOCK                                         PAGE 4




* We need to know - Did he or Guest notice at this time that the

turnstiles were not operating properly as Murray had?     It was

their job to monitor turnstiles and they were the only ones with

specific equipment to do so.   Did he hear Murray trying to

contact him on radio regarding this problem?



Then suddenly Gate 'C' opened and a crowd of spectators burst

through and Police Constable Guest said something like, "The

gates gone."   I immediately left the room in a hurry, as I was

concerned that this could cause problems and that further help

might be needed in manning that gate or other gates around the
ground.

After making sure the players' and directors' entrances were

secure, I went via the players' tunnel to the pitch where I saw

the Club Secretary, Graham Mackrell.   I told him my concern as

to what had happened at Gate 'C' and he said, "Leave it to me"

and turned and went back towards the Leppings Lane end.    I

recall looking and seeing that each of the North and South

'wings' of the Leppings Lane terracing were not over crowded but
the centre pen seemed very full.



* Did he at this stage try to contact Police Control on his
radio?



I went back to the Control Room where Police Constable Guest
DOUGLAS JOHN LOCK                                        PAGE 5




informed me that the Police had in fact opened the gates.



* We want to know here 1)   Did he make any attempt to contact

Police Control by radio/telephone?   2)   Was he informed by

Police Control or did he hear any information on the club radio

about the Police decision to open the gates?

* Was he made aware at any time that the gates were going to be

opened?   Did he take any steps or was he asked by Police to

organise or re-organise the stewarding at Leppings Lane as a

result of seeing the gates open in the control room?

* Can he produce the computer print out of the turnstile counts?

* We require a paragraph here to deal with his experiences at

the ground as a controller doing Superintendent Murray's job and

his experiences of blocking off the central tunnel in previous

years — (all included in his inquest evidence), including in

particular his knowledge of the 1988 opening.
GRAHAM HENRY MACKRELL                                     PAGE 1




I am employed as the Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday Football

Club.   I am a qualified accountant and a Fellow of the

Association of Certified Accountants.   I joined Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club in the latter part of 1986.

When I joined the club it had already an established system for

dealing with safety matters, licensing by the Local Authority

and requirements of the Act and the Green Guide generally.     The

club retained Consulting Engineers, Eastwood and Partners and on

15 April 1989 I was the Safety Officer as per the Safety at

Sports Grounds Act 1975.

Douglas Lock at that time had special responsibility for

security matters.   He had primary responsibility for the

recruitment, training and supervision of Stewards and Gatemen.

I am aware of the fact that Stewards are given written

instructions at the beginning of each season as to the general

duties they are required to perform and which emphasises the

fact that the Police are responsible for public order

situations.   I can produce a copy of these instructions if
required.

I have always considered Douglas Lock to be a very able and

reliable Security Officer, perhaps uniquely experienced in the

sense that he was previously a Superintendent with the South

Yorkshire Police Force in which capacity he had a good deal of

responsibility for supervising the policing of Sheffield

Wednesday Football Ground at Hillsborough.   He is a man who has
GRAHAM HENRY MACKRELL                                      pAGE   2




written and had published articles on policing of football

matches and because of his background he has also been of

assistance to me in liaison with the South Yorkshire Police.

I am also primarily responsible for liaison with the Police in

relation to the    policing of matches at the ground. The club

signs an annual    contract with the South Yorkshire Police

Authority for the provision of Police officers on match days.

There is an annual meeting called by the Police with

representatives of all 5 Yorkshire Clubs who come under the

jurisdiction of the South Yorkshire Police.    They are Sheffield

Wednesday, Sheffield United, Doncaster Rovers, Rotherham and

Barnsley Football Clubs.    At that meeting there is usually a

general discussion relating to policing and football, and it is

invariably my practice to attend with a member of the Board of

Directors.   In addition to that annual meeting there is regular

liaison with the Police throughout the Season.    Thus, for

example, when the Fixture   List is published in June of each     year

I send a copy tothe Police for their comment prior    to

commencement of the Season and they may have a particular

request in relation to matches on the Fixture List.

For matches played at Hillsborough the Police Liaison Officer

(Inspector Sewell) would normally contact me a week or more

before the match was to take place.   For a normal match where an

unusual crowd was not expected the contact would be made

probably to find out such details as which turnstiles we
 GRAHAM HENRY MACKRELL
                                                           PAGE 3




 intended to open, what time they were to be opened etc so that

 he could be sure that our plans for manning the turnstiles and

 stewarding the ground complied with his knowledge of arrival

times for visiting fans etc.    If it were a particularly large

match where we would expect, for example, a large number of away

supporters as well as home supporters then the degree of liaison

will naturally increase as a good deal of more detailed planning

has to go into the policing of it from the point of view of

providing extra Police Officers and, from the club's point of

view, deployment of Stewards.      Inspector Sewell was assisted in

his liaison duties by Detective Constable Charlesworth, and I

would have a degree of contact with him as well.

The average gate in 1989 at Hillsborough was about 20,000 fans.

In my dealings with the Police over the years, in relation to

Hillsborough policing, I would say that they have made it plain

that they regarded the function of Stewards from the club as

directing people to their seats, and manning gates around the

ground.   They very much regarded the Police being in charge of

crowd control generally, both inside and outside the ground, and

indeed the written instructions to Stewards which we issue every

year take these factors into account.     They were drafted by

Douglas Lock and approved by me, and I have no doubt he drafted

them having regard to his own experience as a Superintendent
with the South Yorkshire Police.

I would say that in my experience in the context of policing
GRAHAM HENRY MACKRELL                                      PAGE 4




within the ground, the Police are most concerned about the

question of segregating home and away fans.      It is my belief

that they regard that as the primary means by which they avoid
crowd trouble.

There are contingency plans agreed with the Police, to deal with

an emergency situation at the ground.     Arrangements with the

Police basically cover evacuation of the ground in an emergency

and all Stewards are trained in that procedure.      Their task is

simply to man and open the gates to allow     people out of the

         i-n an orderly fashion.   To my knowledge these emergency

procedures were tested during match days to ensure that they

worked properly, and the test procedure would involve the

broadcast of a message over the tannoy by the Police Operator,

which would act as a signal to the Stewards and the Police

Officers to take their positions for dealing with an emergency

situation.    In that context I would explain that the tannoy

system is one where the Police Control Room has the ability to

operate it as well as the     Club Disc Jockey/Announcer, but the

Police have an override facility so that they can cut across any

announcements being made by the Club Disc Jockey in order to

broadcast a message.    The procedure for emergencies involved the

Police control of the tannoy system and I cannot envisage a

situation where emergency messages would be broadcast by club

staff.   If, for example, I became aware of an emergency which

necessitated a tannoy announcement, I would report that to the
GRAHAM HENRY MACKRELL                                   PAGE 5




Police so that they could make the announcement, rather than
make it myself.



* Who announces the teams and can the tannoy be overridden
during the announcement?



As to contingency plans for coping with spectators coming into

the ground, this is done on specific occasions when the Police

would be aware that visiting supporters who may have an all

ticket arrangement, might have a contingent arriving without

tickets or, for example, where they might expect a large number

of spectators to arrive who would be seeking to pay cash at the

turnstiles.   They would then have arrangements with us for

turnstiles to be opened to admit such spectators or, in the case

of an all ticket match, they would have arrangements made to

remove spectators without tickets from the vicinity of the
ground.

I have stated that Stewards are instructed to man all exit gates

from the ground, but the exception to that is the gates in the

perimeter fencing which allow access onto the pitch.   During the

period that I have been with Sheffield Wednesday I cannot

remember any instance where those gates were manned by Stewards

  it is Police who are normally stationed along the perimeter.

I cannot remember however any instance where there was express

discussion and agreement with the Police that they would be
GRAHAM HENRY MACKRELL                                    pAGE 6




responsible for manning those perimeter gates instead of Club

Stewards - it is just something that has always happened in

practice during my time with the club.    Overall I would say that

there is very close liaison between the club and the Police and

this is particularly so having regard to the relationship

between Douglas Lock and the South Yorkshire Police.

The Police brief our Stewards on a sectional basis — ie the

officer dealing with policing in the West Stand area will brief

the Stewards who are working in that area and likewise the

officer in charge of the Spion Kop will brief the Stewards in

that area and so on.    The Stewards will also be briefed by

Douglas Lock on match day, and since he has direct supervision

of those Stewards I leave that aspect to him although I am

generally aware of what goes on and have in fact from time to

time attended briefing sessions.

FA Cup semi finals have been held at Hillsborough in 1987 (Leeds

v Coventry City); in 1988 and 1989.   These latter two games have

both involved Liverpool Football Club and Nottingham Forest

Football Club.   In 1987 the match was moved to a Sunday at the

request of the Police because they anticipated there might be

difficulties with Leeds United supporters.   Chief Superintendent

Brian Mole was in charge of the policing as indeed he was for

the 1988 game.   That match took place on Sunday 12 April 1987

and a few weeks before there was a briefing meeting arranged at
the request of the Police.
GRAHAM HENRY MACKRELL                                     pAGE ?




* The club was issued with a Safety Certificate in compliance

with the Safety at Sports Ground Act 1975 on 21 December 1979.

I can produce a copy of this certificate which I have identified
by the label I have signed.

* Explain fully the arrangements he made with Mole (Page 89 Lord

Justice Taylor) including did this include altering use of gates
9/10.



My own recollection of the semi final which took place in 1988

is that everything went extremely smoothly, there were no

problems in getting the fans into the ground on time for kick

    that year, but my memory is that the Liverpool fans in

particular arrived earlier that year than they did for the 1989
semi final.

The draw for the FA Cup semi final took place on Monday 20

March.   I was telephoned by Steve Clark, the Competition

Secretary of the Football Association, that morning before the

meeting of the FA took place.    He asked me to contact the Police

to confirm that if Hillsborough were awarded the semi final

between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, that they would once

again insist upon the Nottingham Forest fans being accommodated

in the Spion Kop and South Stand areas.   As a result I spoke on

the telephone to Chief Superintendent Brian Mole who confirmed

that that would be the case.    I was aware of the Police reason

for so insisting - it enabled them to have more effective
 GRAHAM HENRY MACKRELL                                     PAGE   8




control over the flow of fans into the ground, since the

Nottingham Forest fans, in journeying from Nottingham, would

normally arrive at the Penistone Road end of the ground via

Junction 34 of the Ml and Liverpool fans would exit the Motorway

so as to arrive at the Leppings Lane end via the A61 Junction 36
of the Motorway.

I telephoned Steve Clark and confirmed what Chief Superintendent

Brian Mole had told me.     The semi final at Hillsborough was

later confirmed by telephone and this enabled us to put

arrangements in hand for the printing of tickets etc.



* Paragraph here to explain fully the turnstile and ticketting
arrangements he made for 1989.



I now turn to events that occurred on the day of the match, 15
April 1989.



     Can he describe concourse, in particular relationship of Gate

 C     to tunnel and signing, including signing to the wing pens.



During the hours leading up to the start of the game I was busy

dealing with a variety of organisational matters.     As is my

normal practice I would, from time to time, walk out of the

office and check the position in the ground itself.     Thus, for

example, on more than one occasion I walked down the players'
GRAHAM HENRY MACKRELL                                     PAGE     9




tunnel to see how the spectators were building up, and my

principal recollection is that Nottingham Forest were filling up

their end of the ground at a quite early stage, but Liverpool
supporters were not.

I visited the Leppings Lane end shortly after 2.00 pm, but I

cannot put anything like an exact time on it.     However my

recollection of the situation at Leppings Lane at that time was

that the number of Liverpool supporters was starting to build up

- there was a substantial group of them present but I would not

say that the area was packed solid.     I can say that nothing

about the scene at that time struck me as unusual or potentially
dangerous.

Subsequently I was in and out of the office (I had placed myself

in Sharon Lane's office that afternoon) at intervals and on more

than one occasion I would have walked down the players' tunnel

to see what was happening on the pitch and on the stands and

terraces, from inside the ground.     It was still the case that it

was noticeable that Liverpool fans were slower building up in

the North Stand and the West Stand areas than the Nottingham
Forest fans.

As I recall, I was out on the pitch when the Liverpool team came

out, and just after they came onto the pitch Douglas Lock came

UP to me and told me that Gate 'C' had either been opened or

broken down at the Leppings Lane end and as I recall he told me

that about 300 - 400 people had entered through the gate.      I
GRAHAM HENRY MACKRELL                                      PAGE 1Q




said I would go and see what the problem was and I immediately

pushed my way through the photographers in the area and walked

up the players' tunnel.    At that stage the Nottingham Forest

team were also on the pitch, but the photographers were waiting

for the arrival of Brian Clough, I believe.

I walked out of the ground and around through the sterile area
to Gate 'C' at Leppings Lane.



* What did he observe when he got there?



I imagine the match must have kicked off at about   that time     but

I cannot be certain.    Once the teams were out on the pitch the

noise from the huge crowd inside the stadium was such that it

would be difficult to tell from outside whether the kick off had

taken place and in any event I was concentrating on the problem
in hand.



* At this time I was in possession of a Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club radio but had heard no transmissions from the

Police Control Box to myself or any members of my staff.        I was

certainly unaware at this time of any intention by the Police to

open the exit gates and I was not asked for my advice on such a
decision.



As to access to the ground generally, for an all ticket game, I
GRAHAM HENRY MACKRELL                                     PAGE




would expect each turnstile to admit at a rate of about 800 per

hour with a good operator on it.    I am aware that for spectators

for the standing area at Leppings Lane on 15 April we expected

to have full capacity (10,100) and their tickets would indicate

that they should gain entrance through turnstiles A - G.    With 7

turnstiles operating I appreciate that it would take a period of

time before all spectators could be admitted.    However given

that the turnstiles were to be opened no later than 12 noon for

a kick off at 3.00 pm and given the experience of the previous

year where there had been no difficulty with spectators getting

into the ground (albeit some will always arrive late) I did not

anticipate that there would be a problem on 15 April.

I would expect the Stewards manning Gate 'C' (there were some 3

in number) to assist in the orderly dispersal of spectators once

they had come through the turnstiles, for they would normally be

coming through at such a rate that it would be possible for

Stewards to direct them in a particular way.    Similarly the gate

in the dividing wall at the rear of the West Stand which divides

the area behind the turnstiles A - G from the area covered by

turnstiles 11 - 16 would be manned by Stewards, even though it

was open throughout that afternoon, and those Stewards would

also direct spectators towards the standing area in pens 5, 6

and 7 in the North West corner.    I would not expect our Stewards

to be standing on the terraces themselves because it is not an

easy task to ask a Steward to stand on the terraces surrounded
GRAHAM HENRY MACKRELL                                   PAGE 12




by away fans for any football match.   Those terraces are

normally patrolled by Police with the assistance of visiting

Stewards where appropriate.   I know that there were Liverpool

Stewards in attendance at this game.

In conclusion I have been asked to comment on the provision of
loudhailers for Stewards.

Prior to the incident the club provided no loudhailers for the

use of Stewards, but I was aware that the Police had them for

their own use.   The tannoy system was in my view the way to deal

with any announcements that needed to be made to the crowd and

the system is such that announcements can be directed to

particular sections of the ground including out into the

Leppings Lane area to people outside the turnstiles.

I have been shown a copy of a 'print out' from the club's

turnstile computer timed at 3.00 pm.   I can say that this is a

true copy and can identify it by the label which I have signed.
ROBERT IAN McROBBIE - CHIEF INSPECTOR                     PAGE 1




I am a Chief Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police and at

present deputy to the Sub-Divisional Commander at 'Fl' Sub-
Division.

I was posted to 'F' Division on 3 April 1989 as Chief Inspector,

Administration.   As such I was not included in the operational

order for the semi final to be played at the Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club on Saturday 15 April 1989.     I did however attend

the match with the authority of my Chief Superintendent as an
observer.

On the day I attended the ground and the 10.00 am briefing and

then carried out other duties until about 2.00 pm when I went to

the Police Control Box where I was informed by Sergeant Goddard

that Mr Murray had gone to see the referee.

At about 2.30 pm I looked on the monitor and was aware there

seemed to be a build up of supporters.     I remember asking

Superintendent Murray about this and he explained that due to

necessary segregation of fans access to the North Stand, which

had been allocated to Liverpool supporters, could only be done

by Leppings Lane entrance.   This meant that the entrances on

Penistone Road to the stand which would naturally be used were
unavailable.

I recall a suggestion that the tannoy should be used to request

fans to move forward to create room at the rear to prevent
crowding.
ROBERT IAN McROBBIE - CHIEF INSPECTOR                     PAGE 2




People began to tell us that the radioed reception and

transmissions were poor when an engineer attended to see to the
radios.

I can remember Superintendent Marshall asking for Leppings Lane

to be closed and officers being deployed to assist at Leppings

Lane, including a Police Land Rover with Public Address
equipment.

Around this time approximately 2.45 pm, I can remember a radio

message requesting the gates to be opened.   I remember thinking

you can't open the gates or you lose control over who is

admitted and may cause a difficult public order situation for

Police inside the ground.   The gates were not authorised to be

opened on this occasion.



* How come?   Was there any conversation   — was there a refusal —

was the request simply ignored?



I then saw people climbing over the turnstile walls and pointed

this out to the controllers.   I then saw what I now know to be

Gate 'C' open and a surge of people rush into the ground.    I

said, "The gates have been forced."

Control of the gate appeared to have been regained very quickly

with the assistance of a Mounted Police Officer.   People however

were still climbing into the ground.
ROBERT IAN McROBBIE - CHIEF INSPECTOR                      PAGE 3



* Was there any conversation or comment at this time?

Did he view terrace pens 3/4?

* Where did influx go?

What was his assessment at this stage?



Superintendent Marshall   again requested the gates to be opened.



* This next section requires some corroboration if it is at all
possible?



It seemed to me that the Superintendent *(Does he mean

Superintendent or Chief Superintendent?) would have to prevent

the start of the game as the fans would not all get in but I

thought there is no way anyone can get to the referee or team

managers to do this at this late stage.

As I was thinking this, the crowd erupted as one of the teams

ran onto the pitch.   I don't know which team it was.    I saw on

the monitor that control appeared difficult outside the ground.

At this point Superintendent Marshall requested the gates to be

opened as there was going to be serious injury or someone killed
outside if they were not opened.

Superintendent Murray was standing with a personal radio in his

hand asking Chief Superintendent Duckenfield for a decision.        I

recall Chief Superintendent Duckenfield thinking aloud and

saying, "If there's likely to be serious injury or death

outside, I have no option than to open the gates."   He told
ROBERT IAN McROBBIE - CHIEF INSPECTOR                    PAGE 4




Superintendent Murray, "Open the gates."

Superintendent Murray gave the general instruction over the
radio to open the gates.



* Can he say - was there any further discussion, did Murray

advise Chief Superintendent Duckenfield further - was there any

indication of consequences — did anyone including himself look

at the monitor to view both the general and manpower situation

on the concourse? - Is he sure Murray gave the instruction?



On the monitor I saw what I now know to be Gate 'C' open and
fans come flooding in.



* Any comments in Control Box — Did he remember Buxton's request

to delay kick off, Higgins request to open Gate 'A' - Ryan using
tannoy etc, etc.



The game had started when I looked back onto the playing area.

I then noticed fans behind the Leppings Lane goal and on the

instructions of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield left the

Control Box and went to the pitch to assist.



* Was there prior to or consequent to the order to open the

gates any advice sought, warnings or instructions given with

regard to controlling or directing the influx of fans?
ROBERT IAN McROBBIE — CHIEF INSPECTOR                  PAGE 5




I subsequently left the Control Box and took various roles in

the subsequent rescue operation of Liverpool fans who had been

injured or had died in pens 3/4 of the Leppings Lane terrace.

It is to my knowledge that a total of 95 fans died within those
pens.
CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT BRIAN LEONARD MOLE                    PAGE 1




I am a Chief Superintendent in the South Yorkshire Police.

In October 1985 I was promoted to the rank of Chief

Superintendent and appointed Divisional Commander of the

Sheffield North Division where I remained until the 27 March
1989.

During my time in the Sheffield North Division, as Deputy

Divisional Commander and Divisional Commander, I was deeply

involved in the planning and command of operations associated

with Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and in fact in 1987 was

the officer commanding the semi final between Coventry City and

Leeds United and in 1988 the match between Liverpool and
Nottingham Forest.

So far as both the 1987 and 1988 semi finals are concerned, I

was directly responsible for the planning and liaison with the

management of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the

Football Association.   On both occasions negotiations were

entered into concerning the allocation of seating areas to

opposing fans and the decision was taken that one team would be

allocated the South Side and the Kop and the other team the

North Side and the West Side and Leppings Lane Terraces.      This

decision was based on the geographical location of the stadium

and was in an effort to ensure complete segregation of

supporters to prevent confrontation and public disorder.

Consideration was given to other methods of deployment, but on

balance it was felt that this was the most appropriate
#
    CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT BRIAN LEONARD MOLE                     PAGE 2




    separation.



    * Paragraph - I have been shown a copy of the Operational Order

    for the 1988 Semi Final, which I prepared and which I can say

    is a true copy.     I identify it by the label attached which I
    have signed.

    * A paragraph here should address the agreement between Mole

    and Mackrell (see Lord Justice Taylor (Mackrell) Page 89 on)

    regarding overflow from A —G being taken up by West Stand
    turnstiles.

    Did he know of the use of gates 9-10 for North Stand and

    aPprove       it, appreciating the computer counts for sections

    would be wrong.    Why post serials to 1-8 and 9-16 in 1988 and
    1989 if he knew.

    Did Murray know of these agreements if they were infact
    adopted.

    * Murray says that shortly after joining Division, he was

    spoken to by Chief Superintendent Mole and his role in the

    activities at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club were explained

    to him (See Murray Discipline Interview Page 16).     Can Brian

    Leonard Mole confirm or enlarge on this expressing his opinion

    of Murray's duty and maintaining safety etc.     (See Inquest D2
    20D and D2 23B and C ).

    He should also explain if he can how it evolved that a

    Superintendent should be in control box.     (See South Yorkshire
♦
     CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT BRIAN LEONARD MOLE                     PAGE 3




    Police SO's guide).     Only needs be a Sergeant or above.



    The de-brief system is as follows, firstly once a serial is

    stood down the serial sergeant is required to complete a de-

    krief document.   This document known as a sheet contains

    information as to any incidents that have occurred during the

    operation such as arrests, persons injured, use of truncheon by

    Police officers or any course of conduct outside the normal
    scope of the operation.

    The de-brief sheet is then immediately passed by the Sergeant

    to the logistics team who review each de-brief sheet before
    releasing the serial.

    My own supervisory officer de-brief then took place some three

    to four days after each semi final.    It is right to say this

    de brief extended to include representatives of every Division

    or Department involved.    I can state that in both 1987 and in

    1988 the de-briefs did not disclose any suggestion that

    supporters had been injured due to overcrowding or crushing.

    In addition, I cannot recall any other agency reporting to me
    such a problem.

    As regards the tunnel being closed in 1988 by Police Officers

    that is the sort of incident I would have expected to have been

    on a de-brief sheet.    I was not made aware of the problem in

    1988 and as a result my planning for 1989 was not influenced.

    Other aspects of my planning did change because of the result
 CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT BRIAN LEONARD MOLE                    PAGE 4




 of the 1988 de-brief including the removal of air cover and the

 removal of one serial from Hillsborough precinct.

 It was this that resulted in my view that 1988 was a success

and formed a sound base for the 1989 match.

In connection with both the semi final in 1987 and 1988, this

policy was followed and the operations were successful.

In 1989 during the week prior to Monday 20 March 1989, I was

approached by Mr Graham Mackrell, the Secretary of the

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, who indicated that once

again he might be asked to stage the semi final, possibly

between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.   He asked if I would

be able to confirm that we could Police such an event and I

indicated that we would receive any proposal in a favourable

manner should the situation arise.   I again indicated that if

we did stage that event, I would ask that the same segregation

procedures were utilised as in previous years and that

Liverpool would be allocated the North Stand, West Stand and

Leppings Lane Terraces and Nottingham Forest the Kop and South
Stand as in the previous year.

On Monday 20 March 1989, I was again contacted by Mr Mackrell

who confirmed that he had been asked by the Football

Association to stage the semi final between Liverpool and

Nottingham Forest.   He did say that the Football Association

had asked if the allocation of seats could be reversed in that

they would like more facilities for Liverpool fans.    I once
CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT BRIAN LEONARD MOLE                    PAGE 5




again pointed out the reasons for the decision taken the

previous year and after confirmation of the Assistant Chief

Constable (Operations) Mr W W Jackson, I confirmed that there

was no possibility of change and that that was the only manner

in which I would be prepared to Police such an event.     Mr

Mackrell indicated that he would have to take the matter back

to the Football Association before the final decision was
reached.

I believe it was later that same day that Mr Mackrell contacted

me and said that the Football Association had accepted the

position and that we would be asked to Police the semi final on

the 15 April 1989 and that the ticket allocations would be in

accordance with our plans of the previous year.



* Some explanation required here if possible regarding

allocation and turnstiles, and did Murray know of these

agreements if they were infact adopted.



As a consequence of this information I spoke to Superintendent

Murray and Inspector Sewell at Hammerton Road Police Station

and at 3.00 pm that day made arrangements for a meeting to be

called for Wednesday 22 March 1989 in order that early planning

discussions for the event could take place.

Conscious of the fact that I was scheduled to take command of a

new Division on the 27 March 1989, I called upon the proposed
CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT BRIAN LEONARD MOLE                      PAGE   6




new Divisional Commander, Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield,

to attend that meeting in order that continuity might remain

and he could continue with the planning which would be in his

domain.    The meeting took place at 10.00 am on 22 March 1989 at

Hammerton Road Police Station and involved all interested

Par"ties, including the head of Operations and Traffic

Divisions, the Senior Officers who would be involved in the

operation, the Support Staff responsible for preparing the

Operational Order and representatives of British Rail, Public

Transport and the Highways Authority of the County Council.



* Can he say whether Murray was at this meeting.



At that meeting initial plans were made concerning action to be

taken.    The meeting closed and I took no further part in the

planning meetings concerning this matter.    Following upon the

meeting I spoke to Superintendent Murray and Inspector Sewell

concerning the manpower levels used at the previous year's

event and asked them to examine the position for this year and

to determine if any reductions or increases were appropriate,

taking into account our findings the previous year.    The

findings the previous year indicated that some officers were

under employed and I was conscious of the need not to repeat

such a situation if that was the case and if there were no

other factors which might dictate their need for this future
CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT BRIAN LEONARD MOLE                    PAGE 7




match.   The only other action I took concerning this matter was

to maintain liaison with Mr Mackrell during the next few days

and in particular to make reference to the need for clear

indications of tickets by colour coding and appropriate colour

coded systems on turnstiles to ensure easily recognisable
access to the stadium.

In the knowledge that Mr Duckenfield would be commanding this

event, I personally selected the Sector Commanders who would be

working to him and as in the previous year utilised the system

using three sectors, those being the Ground, the Liverpool

supporters outside the ground, the Nottingham supporters

outside the ground.   In this connection I selected

Superintendent Greenwood as the Ground Controller,

Superintendent Marshall to be responsible for the Liverpool

supporters and Superintendent Chapman to be responsible for the

Nottingham supporters.   All three officers had a wide

experience in policing football matches and in fact had been

Sector Commanders at the semi final the previous year.     The

only difference was that Mr Marshall and Mr Greenwood reversed

roles and this was because Mr Marshall, having been my Deputy

for some time, had a better knowledge of the visiting

supporters end of the ground, ie Leppings Lane, than Mr

Greenwood, who had been away from the Division for some time

all be it for many years he had policed matches at

Hillsborough.   In addition, Superintendent Murray was
CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT BRIAN LEONARD MOLE                   p




identified as the officer in charge of the ground control

communications and this officer was in fact the man who

regularly took up that position at First Division matches
throughout the season.
CHRISTOPHER EDGAR NICHOLSON                               PAGE 1




I am a Doctor of Engineering PhD, I am a Chartered Engineer and

I am a member of the Institute of Metallurgists.     My position is

Deputy Director of the Research and Laboratory Services Division

of the Health and Safety Executive based in Sheffield.

Following the disaster at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989, I and

members of my staff carried out investigations for the purpose

of the public inquiry giving the findings as a report.     I also

gave oral evidence at the Inquest.

I have seen a copy of the transcript of the evidence I gave.        I

have not subsequently been given cause to wish to revise any of

the context of the report or my evidence.

In particular I can say that an analysis of the video recording

(RJH2) enabled a count to be made of the people who entered Gate

'C.' (Inquiry 54 86E).   There were one hundred and thirty

persons who entered on the first opening.     One thousand eight

hundred entered on the second opening and ninety on the third.

Adjusting these counts with a percentage of persons who might

have been missed in the count gives a best estimate of one

hundred and fifty for the first opening, two thousand for the

second and ninety for the third.     The third opening led to an

orderly entry and it was felt that the count was accurate.     The

total number of persons calculated as entering the ground via

Gate 'C' is (one hundred and fifty plus two thousand plus

ninety), two thousand two hundred and forty as best estimate

with a maximum of two thousand four hundred and eighty.(Inquiry
CHRISTOPHER EDGAR NICHOLSON                                    PAGE 2




54 87A).

The number of persons entering via turnstiles A - G as indicated

by the computer print out timed at 3.00 pm is seven thousand

four hundred and ninety four.     (Inquiry 54 87D).    Tests

indicated that the turnstile mechanisms seemed to have worked

accurately when compared with a visual count using a video

showing the turnstiles operating, except that turnstile 'G' was

not accurate in that it broke down in the course of the

afternoon.     The best estimate of persons having entered via the

turnstiles A - G by 3.00 pm was given as seven thousand four

hundred and ninety fourwith a maximum of seven thousand          six

hundred and forty four.     (Inquiry 54 87E).

Thus it is possible to calculate the total number of persons

entering the ground via Gate 'C' and turnstiles A - G as being

(two thousand two hundred and forty plus seven thousand four

hundred and ninety four) nine thousand seven hundred and thirty

four best estimate into a maximum of ten thousand one hundred

and twenty four.     (Inquiry 54 96E).

An estimate was made of the occupancy of Pen 3 using

photographs.    It was calculated that there were one thousand

five hundred and seventy     six people in Pen 3 at 3.03   pm.

^Inquiry 54 96E).    That   is a density of 8.38 persons per square

metre, about 50% more than the density of 5.4 per square metre

mentioned in the Green Guide.    The figure for a crowd capacity

of 5.4 per square metre in Pen 3 would be one thousand and
CHRISTOPHER EDGAR NICHOLSON                               PAGE 3




fifteen.    (Inquiry 55 10E).   This figure is based purely on

area.    If account is taken of length of barriers actually in the

pen the figure would be eight hundred and twenty two.

An estimate was made of the occupancy of Pen 4 using

photographs, but the photograph was not as useful for Pen 4

(Inquiry 54 98C) and consequently the assumption was made that

the density was about the same as that in Pen 3.     (Inquiry 55

2F).    This assumption was supported by the available

photographic evidence.    It was calculated that there were one

thousand six hundred and seven persons in Pen 4 at 3.03 pm that

is a density of 8.38 persons per square metre.     At a density of

5.4 persons per square metre the figure would be one thousand

and thirty six.    (Inquiry 55 74D).   This figure is based purely

on area.    If account is taken of length of barriers actually in

the pen the figure would be eight hundred and seventy one.

Clearly those centre pens were easily on any view overcrowded.
(? 74E).

On 15 April 1989 the spectators were intended to enter the

stadium through 83 turnstiles of which 23 (28%) were sited in

Leppings Lane.    If the stadium was to be filled to its maximum

capacity of 54,324 persons then 45% (24,447 persons) of this

capacity would be admitted from Leppings Lane.

The 7 turnstiles serving the West Terraces (10,100 capacity) had

the highest average admission requirement of 1443

persons/turnstile of any group of turnstiles serving the
CHRISTOPHER EDGAR NICHOLSON                            PAGE 4




stadium.

The longest delays in admission would be encountered by persons

required to enter through turnstiles in Leppings Lane and larger

crowds would form in that area than in other entrance areas to
the ground.

On the basis of Research and Laboratory Services Division's

measured average rate of admission of 660 persons/turnstile/hour

through turnstiles A to G, between 2.08 pm and 2.50 pm and the

number of persons who had already been admitted through those

turnstiles at 2.50 pm, they estimated that if Gate 'C' had not

been opened it would have taken until about 3.40 pm to admit a

total of 10,100 persons through those turnstiles to the West
Terraces.
 POLICE CONSTABLE 1035 MICHAEL VINCENT RYAN                 PAGE 1




I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police stationed

at 'F' Divisional Headquarters, The Common, Ecclesfield.      I

have worked in this same Division since joining the Police in
1969.

I have, during this time, been involved in the policing of

numerous football matches of all categories at Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club.   For about the last five seasons, I

have worked in the ground control located between the South and

West Stands and have done so for the majority of games,

including all those of a major nature.   This Control Box

overlooks the terraced area of the West Stand.

At 8.00 am on Saturday 15 April 1989, I commenced duty, with

Police Sergeant 616 Goddard, at the Ground Control at Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club in relation to the Liverpool Football

Club -v- Nottingham Forest Football Club Cup Semi Final.     At

the time I carried out certain routine checks, including tests
of the public address system.

All appeared in order.

During the morning   I spoke with Mr Lock, the Club's Security
Advisor.



* How and what about?



At 10.00 am the briefing commenced and after the briefing

Superintendent Murray attended at Control.
POLICE CONSTABLE 1035 MICHAEL VINCENT RYAN                     PAGE 2




My duties that day were mainly to deal with the telephones and

the public address system in the Control Room.      Sergeant

Goddard was to operate the radio, although these jobs could

obviously overlap during the day.      There are three telephones

in the Control Room.    One is a direct outside line; the second

an internal Sheffield Wednesday Football Club telephone; the

third is an extension from Hammerton Road Police Station.         The

public address system is an extension from that operated by the

DJ in the box below Police Control.     The Police have the

facility to override any transmission.

The ground for this purpose is divided     in North, South, West

and the Kop (East).    Facility is provided   to speak separately

to spectators in each of these sections or all at the same

time.   There is also facility to speak    to the rear of these

Stands and turnstile areas.

About 11.15 am the majority of the serials were out from the

briefing/meal.   A message from Mr Lock was passed to the effect

that although turnstiles were not due to be opened until 12

noon, operators were starting to arrive and some turnstiles

could be opened at Police request.

At 11.20 am radio checks were commenced and at this time the

majority of serials were in location.     Coaches were also

starting to arrive.    There were numerous radio and telephone

messages being passed at this stage.

In addition to the radio and Ground Control operating on
 POLICE CONSTABLE 1035 MICHAEL VINCENT RYAN                 PAGE 3




Channel 25 there was a Club radio giving direct contact to Club

officials.   A VHF set monitoring Channel 1 which was the

designated channel for traffic involved in this operation was

monitored by Police Constable Bichard.   Further sets were

available to monitor Channel 19, the designated channel for

Criminal Investigation Department personnel and also Channel 35
which was for 'FI1 Control.

As time progressed radio and telephone traffic increased and

although it became very busy it appeared about normal for this
type of occasion.

Spectators were entering the ground steadily throughout this

period.   As far as I recall there had been no major problems at

any turnstiles involving delays or queues.



* Was it usual for the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to

relay details of crowd figures?   If so by what means and with
whom did he have contact?



About 2.10/2.15 pm I looked around the ground and could see

that the Spion Kop and the South Stand were almost full.     These

were the areas allocated to Nottingham Forest supporters.

The North Stand, West Stand and Leppings Lane areas, allocated

to Liverpool had still not been filled and there was still room
in all sections of these areas.

From about 2.30 pm a number of spectators were growing outside
POLICE CONSTABLE 1035 MICHAEL VINCENT RYAN                       PAGE 4




the Leppings Lane end of the ground.        Telephone and radio

traffic was constant at this time.     Radio

transmission/reception was very poor.       A civilian member of the

Communications Department, Andy Sanderson, attended at Ground
Control.

He informed me that he had been monitoring the radio and that

there was a fault and it was necessary to change the radio.

I'm not sure what he did but throughout this procedure messages

were still being received for the majority of the time,

although it was not possible to transmit.

The change over took only a few minutes, possibly three or

four.   I recall that the hand telephone set would not work when

Sergeant Goddard tried to use it.    Andy checked the radio,

there was still no   response. I told him     to switch on the    talk

through facility.    When this was done radio communications       were

restored by the use of a personal radio on talk through as an

alternative to the   hand set. Throughout     this time queues had

continued to build   up in Leppings Lane. It was then that I saw

that the turnstiles, the approaches and Leppings Lane itself

were full of supporters as far as I could see on the monitor.



* Had he had any reports from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

Control Room regarding turnstile figures?



In my experience I have never seen so large a crowd gather so
 POLICE CONSTABLE 1035 MICHAEL VINCENT RYAN                  PAGE 5




quickly so late outside these or any other turnstiles.

I would estimate the numbers as several thousands.       In addition

to this very few people appeared to me to be entering the

ground through the turnstiles.       Radio messages were still

constant and at this stage there were reports of crushing

outside the turnstiles.       Extra serials of officers and mounted

section were deployed,    a   message was passed over the public

address system for the information of Liverpool supporters at

the turnstiles.   I cannot remember the exact words I used but I

asked them to stop pushing; that people were being crushed and

that there was still room in the ground for them to be
accommodated.

This I repeated several times.      It apparently had no effect as

reports were still being made over the radio of the seriousness
of the situation at the turnstiles.

Whilst this was taking place messages were still being passed

by telephone into the Control Room.



* From whom and about what?



During this time requests were made for the turnstiles/gates to
be opened due to the crushing.

 C   Gate was at this stage opened, although by whom I do not

know.   A number of supporters entered through the gate before a

mounted officer held back the crowd and the gate was then
POLICE CONSTABLE 1035 MICHAEL VINCENT RYAN                     PAGE   6




closed.



* Was there any conversation in the Control Box regarding this
event?



A short time later a radio message was received, I believe from

Suuperintendent Marshall, directed to Control with words to the

effect of 'Open the gates or someone will be killed.'      I

believe that a further similar message was also passed by a

different officer to the same effect, although I cannot be

certain of this or who the officer was.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, who was in control, then gave

the instruction that the gates be opened and the message

subsequently passed over the radio.



* By whom and in what manner?   How long did it take Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield to make the decision?     Prior to or

subsequent to it was the location of any Ground Commanders

sought?   Was any warning given or advice requested regarding

consequences of opening the gate?     Were any instructions given

to control or direct the spectators entering?



The gates were opened and a large number of the crowd entered.

The problem at the turnstiles was then apparently eased.

I cannot be certain of the exact time this happened but I would
 POLICE CONSTABLE 1035 MICHAEL VINCENT RYAN




estimate it at shortly before the match was due to commence.      I

did not particularly notice the game start but play was under

way when supporters started climbing the fences onto the

perimeter track at the Leppings Lane end.



* Was he conscious of the teams being announced and can he
over-ride this facility?



Officers were on the perimeter track and were apparently trying
to prevent this.

There were no more reports of any problems or any indication

visible to me as to why this should be occurring.   The numbers

climbing over increased and large numbers were spilling onto

the playing area.   Instructions were given for the match to be

stopped.   This was done by Superintendent Greenwood going onto
the pitch and speaking to the referee.

A number of officers had been deployed intothe Leppings    Lane
end from other parts of the ground.
ANDREW SANDERSON                                          PAGE 1
POLICE COMMUNICATIONS ASSISTANT




My day began in Headquarters at 0800 hours.    From there we

transported some radio equipment to Hillsborough, this being

spare equipment to be left in the Police Control Room.     On

completion of taking this equipment into the Control Room, I

attended the briefing.   On completion of the briefing I remained

in the area of the gymnasium, where the issue of the radios was

being conducted.   My responsibility on the day was to make

myself available in case of communication problems.     I was in

possession of a radio with an ear receiver for the whole

duration of the day.

At around 1400 hours I began to hear the radio breaking up.      At

first I assumed it to be interference but when it continued

intermittently I made my way over to the Control Room

accompanied by Chief Inspector Beal.    This being around 1420

hours to 1430 hours.

On arrival at the Police Control Room I first changed the

'tulip' microphone for a 'hand phone/first m i c ' taken from the

spare W15U 'Base Station.'   The fault continued, so during a

'stop' in communications I plugged in the spare W15U 'Base

Station' to the mains supply and changed over the aerial

connection.

The fitted 'Base Station' had been working on 'talk through.'

This is a ground to ground radio facility, so one radio can

communicate to another radio.   Therefore I switched the spare
#
    ANDREW SANDERSON                                          pAGE 2

    POLICE COMMUNICATIONS ASSISTANT




     'Base Station' to 'talk through', giving exactly the same

    communication as the fitted 'Base Station. '

    The spare 'Base Station' was situate on the floor underneath the

    bench.     The box containing the spare 'Base Station' has a

    physical size of 27" x 11" x 11" high by 11" deep, the mains

    lead and aerial lead are only of sufficient length to connect to

    the spare 'Base Station' in situ and therefore I was unable to

    place it on top of the Control Room bench.     This in turn meant

         the first mic/hand phone, which is connected by a curly

    lead, only just came about the level of the bench and the

    operator was obliged to bend down to use it.    The loud speaker

    to the spare 'Base Station' is incorporated into the set and

    therefore reception was at floor level.    A hand held Motorola

    personal radio was therefore used by the operator.    This enabled

    him to stand upright to transmit, the reception was via the loud

    speaker in the hand held radio itself and it gave the Control

    Room equal opportunity for transmission.

    The time was now about 1448 hours    *(Can he confirm this in
    anyway?)

    After checking the system was working correctly I left the

    Control Room but remained at the bottom of the steps by the

    gate, where I stayed for the rest of the afternoon.    Many

    messages were coming over the radio, I remember the request to

    open the Leppings Lane gate, that being around 1450 hours.      I
ANDREW SANDERSON                                           PAGE 3

POLICE COMMUNICATIONS ASSISTANT




also remember a request to delay the game, as there was still

large crowd outside (Leppings Lane end).   Time unknown.
STEVEN ROBERT SEWELL - INSPECTOR                        PAGE 1




Since October 1987, I have been the fifth Inspector at 'FI' Sub-

Division and from that time I have had responsibility for the

preparation of the 'FI1 football orders.



* On 14 January 1989 a Football League match took place at

Hillsborough between Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and

Liverpool.   I have been shown a copy of the operational order

for that match which I can say is a true copy and which I can

identify by the label attached which I have signed.

In that order the officers on serial 10 are instructed tofill

the Leppings Lane pens as directed by match control (Can he give

any further details why this should be so).



I was involved with the organisation of the 1988 SemiFinal    for

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

On Monday 20 March 1989, the draws for the 1989 semi finals took

place and again Liverpool and Nottingham Forest were drawn to

play.   I believe it was later on that day that Chief

Superintendent Mole informed me that the semi final between

those two teams was due to be staged at Hillsborough

The previous match order for the 1988 semi final was studied and

as this was a successful operation, it formed the basis of the

1989 semi final.   I have been shown a copy of that order which I

identify as a true copy and further identify by the label

attached which I have signed.
STEVEN ROBERT SEWELL - INSPECTOR                          PAGE 2




Briefs were prepared with Chief Inspector Beal, these were all

discussed in detail with Superintendent Murray and approved

subsequently by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

Basically, the serials were the same as for the 1988 semi final.

The Operational Order was approved and circulated on 6 April

1989, to all Senior Officers of Chief Inspector and above

involved in the operation.



* Paragraph here to expand on his visit to ground prior to match

with Superintendent Murray when they spoke to Mackrell.



A pre-briefing was arranged for sub-sector Inspectors and above

on Friday 14 April 1989 at Sheffield Wednesday Ground.

On that pre-brief, Inspectors were handed an Operational Order

and details of serials under their command together with their

duties.   They were also given serial orders for their respective
Sergeants under their command.

At the pre-brief, these officers were briefed by Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield on policy, by Superintendent Murray

on what was required at the match and by myself on

administrative and logistic matters.   The individual sector

commanders then briefed their men taking them to all relevant

parts of the grounds to examine locations pertinent to their
duties.

I personally made arrangements for the stewards to be briefed in
#
    STEVEN ROBERT SEWELL - INSPECTOR                             PAGE 3




    their respective stands at 11.15 am on 15 April 1989.        This was

    arranged in conjunction with Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,

    with Mr Mackrell, Club Secretary and Mr Lock, Security Officer

    at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

    During August 1988, I had attended a steward's meeting at

    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and briefed     all the stewards

    regarding emergency evacuation and other problems     and the gate

    men had been briefed by my deputy, Police Sergeant Goddard,

    during August 1988, whilst I was on leave.

    On 15 April 1989, I commenced duty at 'FI' at     7.00 am.

    At 10.00 am that day I attended the briefing in the North Stand.

    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield set the scene, Superintendent

    Murray gave the order of the day and what was required.

    Detective Sergeant Charlesworth gave details of intelligence.         I

    again gave details of logistics and administration.



    * I was obviously present at both briefings and can say that the

    subject of safety was mentioned by impressing on those present

    that we were responsible for the safety of supporters both

    xnsxde and outside the ground and that the safety of supporters
    was of paramount importance.



    At 12.30 am approximately I liaised with Mr Lock, Security

    Officer, in the club video room and by 2.45 pm I was in the

    vicinity of the gymnasium and Police Room area.    About this time
STEVEN ROBERT SEWELL - INSPECTOR                            PAGE 4




I was aware of a message from Match Control that there were

problems at Leppings Lane and that further manpower was required

in that area.   About this time there were problems with radio

reception.   I recall Police Sergeant Goddard's (Control) voice

was having a 'warbling' effect.    I thought my radio battery was

faulty.   However other officers were experiencing difficulty and

it was obviously a radio fault and not my particular radio.      I

got the impression that Control were receiving calls, but

officers outside were having difficulty in receiving Control.

It was apparent by the tone of Police Sergeant Goddard's voice

that urgent assistance was required at Leppings Lane.       I

returned to the gymnasium and informed Control that there were a

large number of 'D' Division officers on standby who were

available for deployment.



* How by radio or phone?    Where were these officers, in

Gymnasium or expected to arrive?



I got from Control that officers were required at the track,

Leppings Lane end, West Stand and 'A' Gate.



* Can he elaborate on what he received and what his instructions
were.



I grouped the serials together and as the Sergeant in charge
 STEVEN ROBERT SEWELL - INSPECTOR                              PAGE 5




left the gymnasium, I got Police Sergeant 467 Sewell on

logistics in the gymnasium to record who was being deployed and

where to.    The following Sergeants and serials of approximately

eight men in each were deployed       as follows
 (All 'D' Division)

Police Sergeant     2916      Track

Police Sergeant     1055      West Stand

Police Sergeant       915     Track

Police Sergeant     2379      West Stand

Police Sergeant       916     'A' Gate

Police Sergeant       993     'A' Gate

I radioed to Control where these officers were being deployed,

but I am unable to say if Control received my messages.         All the

above officers were deployed at 2.50 pm.       It was obvious from

Control that they required further manpower to the Leppings Lane

end.   I do recall some radio message about the gates being

opened and that people were on the track.       I then regrouped 'E'

Division Crime and Vandal from Penistone Road turnstiles, who

were a reserve serial and deployed them through Control to

Leppings Lane track at 3.00 pm.

Further serials from 'D' Division arrived in the region of 3.00

pm, these were deployed as follows:-

Police Sergeant 690     )    and serial to

Police Sergeant 628     )    Leppings Lane track.

Followed by Police Sergeant 1379, Police S e r g e a n t P o l i c e
STEVEN ROBERT SEWELL - INSPECTOR                       PAGE   6




Sergeant 7, Police Sergeant 1415 and a number of 'D' Division

Police Constables to the track.
HENRY WHITE - POLICE INSPECTOR

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE (NOW RETIRED)




On 10 December 1989 I was retired on medical grounds from South

Yorkshire Police having completed twenty seven and a half years
service.

On 15 April 1989 I was a uniform Inspector on duty at

Hillsborough stadium.     My responsibility was, in accordance with

the operational order at Appendix A(ii), to be in charge of Sub

Sector 7 of Sector IB.     My immediate superior was Chief

Inspector Creaser who was in charge of Sector IB.     His immediate

superior was Superintendent Greenwood as the senior officer

responsible for policing inside the ground.

I was equipped with a Police radio and had two serials 14 and 15

under my control.     Each serial consisted of a Sergeant and ten

Constables.     The duties of these two serials are shown in the

operational order and basically was to supervise spectators who

had entered the ground through turnstiles A - G and 9 - 1 6      while

they were on the concourse between the turnstiles and the

terraces.     Each serial also had a responsibility before the

match started to maintain order on the terraces.     It will be

appreciated that these responsibilities could not be discharged

without splitting the serials into different geographical

locations and in the event the serials remained performing duty
on the concourse.

Since 1985 I had performed duty on a regular basis at the

stadium usually at the Leppings Lane end although I was not on
HENRY WHITE - POLICE INSPECTOR                             PAGE 2

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE (NOW RETIRED)




duty for the 1988 semi final.      I was obviously familiar with the

geography of the ground and the procedures that operate there.

On 15 April 1989, I knew the game was an all ticket match and

that Liverpool supporters had been allocated tickets for the

North Stand seating area, the West Stand seating area and the

West Stand terracing.     The turnstiles to be used were turnstiles

A - G for the terracing, 1 - 1 0   for the North Stand seating and

11 - 16 for the West Stand seating.



* Should be asked how he knew of split between 1 - 1 0    and 11 -
16.



About 2.40 pm I went with a Constable and his prisoner to the

Police Room.     On leaving the Police Room about 2.45 pm I heard a

radio message requesting Police horses to be sent to the

Leppings Lane end.     On returning to the concourse behind

turnstiles 11 - 16 I saw Inspector Bennett on the roof of the
turnstiles.

About this time I became aware of the amount of people on the

concourse behind turnstiles A - G which I was able to see by

looking through the gaps in the wall separating the two areas of

the concourse.    I went onto the concourse behind turnstiles A -
G.

While I was standing near the back of the turnstiles A - G I was
HENRY WHITE - POLICE INSPECTOR                            PAGE 3
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE (NOW RETIRED)




approached by a Liverpool supporter who spoke to me.     While this

was happening Gate 'C' was opened and a large group of

spectators entered.     I went through Gate 'C' while this was

happening and was engaged with Inspector Delaney, Inspector

Purdy and Sergeant Morgan pulling people from the crush in front

of turnstiles A - G and under the iron bar that is a

continuation of the perimeter wall containing Gate 'C1.

Quite suddenly the crush eased.     I saw Gate 'B1 had been opened.

I saw Sergeant Sorsby on his Police horse come up to the

railings and using the horse as a barrier we were able to filter

out of the agitated crowd fans who produced tickets.     I told the

stewards on Gate 'C' to take the stubs.

Throughout the events that I have described it did not occur to

me to seek to limit the access of supporters coming through Gate

 ^ •     It did not occur to me to attempt to divert them or

prevent them going to the tunnel under the West Stand leading to
the terracing.

I did not hear any order on the radio to 'Open the gates'.       It

follows that I did not hear any order directing any Police

action to control the crowd coming into the ground through the
gates.

I did not inform Police Control of the opening of the exit
gates.
