    r:




.
                                                                      © O K lS u U .
At 09^5 hours on Saturday 15th April 1989, as per the instructions, I kttended

at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club for briefing regarding the football

match.


Following briefing, I undertook the duties on serial 6 under the supervision of

Police Serg^rnt 760 Cressey from headquarters.    Our duties were to patrol the

Oughtibridge,Grenoside areas of the city in a Ford Transit van engaged on public

order patrol.   Our specific task was to monitor public houses and similar places

regarding groups of supporters who may be drunk etc.    Our designated meal time

was         hours at Claywheels Lane traffic office.


As instructed, we remained on patrol in and around the aforementioned areas. We

received no calls from either match control or members of the public regarding

any public order situations during this time.


The only contact we hrd with football f»ns was *s we were parked on a public

hous^ c*r park (which was closed) on the A61 at Grenoside.    In the main, these

fans were Liverpool supporters who enquired of 3 things: 1/ Where could they

get alcohol prior to kick off, 2 / Where could they urinate, or alternatively

where was there a public toilet, and 3/ Where was the ground.    These fans were

all in private cars and it was commented upon that several of them smelled of

drink but it is fair to say they were not drunk and generally they were good

humoured.


We remained on patrol in the area until approximately 1^.30 hours, when because

the radio transmissions from match control centered upon crowds at Leppings

Lane, we made our way to the junction of the A61, Penistone Road -nd Foxhill

Ro ad.


Just prior to 15*00 hours, we heard match control asking for all available

personel to make their way to Leppings Lane - no reason, as far as I can

recollect was given. We did as requested.



                                                                     Cont/..
                                                                            a * 5' a H


Within 2 or 3 minutes, we arrived at Leppings Lane. There was a large crowd

at the gates all waiting to «nter the ground via the turnstiles.    I saw

officers from the mounted section,(which I beleive were Liverpool officers),

controlling the crowd to the best of their ability which was difficult with

the throng that were there.


I recollect seeing a youth crying because, as he alleged, he had been trodden

on by a horse. The youth was limping but did not appear serious enough to

warrant medication.


We remained at Leppings Lane until we were instructed to resume for meal but

to remain available if required.   I could not put a figure on how many Police

officers were there at this time, but judging the amount of personel carriers

on scene there were sufficient.


Shortly after 15-15 hours, we arrived at Claywheels Lane for meal. I am sure

our vehicle was one of, if not the first vehicle there, we were however

followed by approximately 1 0 - 1 2 motor-cyclists shortly afterwards.


I remember being the first in the mobile canteen, and whilst in the process

of being provided with a meal, Sergeant Cressey shouted   that we were

required to re-attend at Leppings Lane as there was some sort of crowd trouble.


We immediately went to Leppings Lane and I saw that the crowd appeared to have

swollen in numbers. I do not know if these were late arrivals or fans who had

left the ground after the incident.   I do know that most were agitated and the

situation was potentially volatile.


Our serial, after the Sergeant consulted with an Inspector on the gate, went

striaght to the gate where a great number of people were gathering which was at

the rear of the West Stand.


Once there, members of the crowd were shouting abuse at officers. Most of the

fans appeared to be in a distressed state.


                                                                   Cont/••••
I soon realised that the officers who were there were standing over approximately

six dead bodies.    Their commander, Inspector Gordon Sykes, instructed us to

stand with his men and not to let anyone have access to the bodies. The remaining

officers assisted by foo.tball fans were busy recovering more bodies and injured

people from the West stand.    The death toll at our location quickly rose to

11   .
I recall telling a photographer who had made his way around the back of the

Police line in order to photograph the dead insitu, to move away for his own

safety. It was clear that his actions was upsetting the relatives and friends of

the dead and injured.


Throughout this time, a great number of injured fans were recovered from the

West stand. All of these were sat at the bottom of a wall at the rear of the

West stand.   They appeared to be mainly rib and chest injuries.    Most were in

shock.


I knew that ambulances were arriving on the scene, but before they reached our

position, they were used by other officers futher along the line who were nearer

to Leppings Lane.    It seemed that the numbers o f injured was ever increasing,

but no ambulances were getting through.    I saw one constable who appeared young

in service, electing his driving services to one ambulance crew who were tending

to a youth who appeared on the brink of death.    The constable kept this up for

a long period during the afternoon, and I consider had he not have done, then

we would have been struggling to keep the ambulances moving.

By now I had learned of the magnitude of the situation and was aware that although

the injured were being attended to by off duty Doctors, they were not being moved.

I made a suggestion to Police Sergeant 2777 Johnson, that we use the Police

Personel carriers outside the ground to convey the walking wounded to hospital.




                                                                      Cont/..
                                                                        't of 5



Sergeant Johnson agreed and the vehicles were brought into the area where the

injured were sat. These vehicles with Police officers driving, were used as

ambulances.


Now that the injured were being moved at a constant rate, the dead bodies, which

still numbered 11 were covered with tarpaulins or similar and barriers were

placed around them.   This allowed several of the officers to assist in aiding

the injured, and in general leaving the way clear for other rescue vehicles.

After a short time, Inspector Peter Webster appraoched where I was standing and

requested me to attend at the grounds gymnasium to collect a quantity of adhesive

labels and sudden death forms (Gen 18's).    This I did and once there I saw a

great number of dead bodies in the gymnasium which was a temporary mortuary.


I collected what was asked of me, and returned to the rear of the West stand,

enroute, I was approached by a Liverpool supporter who gave me his name and

telephone number (which was later endorsed on the extended incident of the

command and control system applicable to the incident). He said " I SAW WHAT

HAPPENED, AND NO WAY ARE THE POLICE TO BLAME. IT WAS THE LADS JUMPING OVER THE

WALL 11   I thank him and told him that someone would no doubt be in touch with

him.


Once back at the rear of the West stand, I assisted collegues in removing the

dead into ambulances and Police vans, to be transported to the gymnasium.


We remained in the area of the West stand as there were still a great number of

people milling around.   These included off duty doctor and nurses who had

responded to a media request.


We were requested to transport an off duty nurse to the Northern General Hospital

to assist over-stretched staff.


                                                                    Cont/..
After returning from the hospital, we were directed to Penistone Road, near a

local supermarket, to a report of a fight between rival football fans.      We

responded together with other officers.      There were no fans and consequently no

fight taking place.


Whilst in this area we were appraoched by 2 Liverpool supporters who had

travelled to the match by coach from North Wales.      These two men said they

had organised the trip and after the match was abandoned, they returned to

their coach.      They could account for all but 2 from their party. They had

been to the Northern General Hospital to locate them without gain. The men were

asking directions to the Eoyal Hallamshire Hospital to see if they could locate

the missing men there.      Rather than explain where the hospital was, because from

where we were it was a complicated route, we transported the men to the hospital.


After depositing the men there, we commenced to travel back to the football

ground, however enroute we were requested to return the vehicle we were using

to Claywheels Lane as it was required by other officers for transport duties

back to their respective division.

We returned to Claywheels Lane shortly before 19-00 hours the same date and after

being told there was nothing more for our serial, I retired from duty about

1.9 .1 5 hours.




Police Constable 2521 Clarke
Force Operations Room
Headquarters - Sheffield
Sheffield 768522 - ext 3290
