SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
MEMORANDUM
                                        For the attention of                   Your   FP19/2/4/JTHR/
 To       Chief Fire Officer
                                                                               Ref.   MEA

                                        Please contact D . Vaughan             Our
From      Chief Executive                                                             DV/AA/583/5
                                        Tel.           Ext. 422                Ref.


Subject   Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
                                                                               Date      23/12/81
          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.




          I attach copy of a letter dated 14th December and plan from
          Messrs. Eastwood & Partners (the Club's Consultants) relating to
          the proposed erection of pairs of gates at the bottom of the two
          staircases at the rear of the West Stand at the Hillsborough
          Stadium.

          Perhaps you will kindly let me have your comments on the proposal
          from a means of escape point of view, as well as confirming thate^V
          you regard the radial fences and security gates (also referred (h                         l O
          to in the letter) as being satisfactory.                         l\

                                                                                              C "
          Divisional use.

                                                                                                          fa




                                               3Q §TH YORKSHIRE
                                              COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
                                                                   ...        *%*
                                                               t   Vs..   k




                                                                   *»*f V
EAS TW OOD & PARTNERS                                                                                                                        BOWMAKER HOUSE
               C o n s u lt in g      E n g in e e r s                                                                                       23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                                                             SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W. Eastwood                      B.Eng.. Ph.D ., F.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                                                           Tel.: (0742) 583871
                                 F .l.Struct,E„ F.G .S., M .C ons.E .

A. A. Wood                       B.Eng.. Ph.D ., C.Eng.. F.I.C.E.,
                                 F.l S tru ct.E „ M.I.W.E.S., M .C o n s E

A. G. Burdett                    G .M , B ,S c,(E n g ), C.Eng., M .I.C.E.

R. C. A, Eastwood                B .Sc.. C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .l.Struct.E.

Associates:                                                                                                                                                         unmet*m
Geoffrey Spir                    C.En*., M.I.C.E.. M.I.M«cti.E.
                                             -         .                       .„   . ...
C. S. Greaves                    B.Ent „ C .E n*,, M.I.C.E., M .I.5truct.E,                 ~~

A. J . Clough             ~      B .A ., C .En*., M .C.I.B.S.. M .I.M .ch E.                                        Ou/_fieu         JEEZJAS/SR/3^563
J . A. Strange                ^ C.En*., M .I.Struct.E.                                                              Y our   R «f !
Consultant:
A. L. Percy       ’              M .T ech.(H on.),       C.Eng., F.I.C.E.
                                 F.I.Struct.E., F.I.Mun.EE^ M .R T .P.I.
                                                                                                                         n dec mi
                                                                                                                         w s m m 57o i \ h


 South Yorkshire County Council,                                                                                                         14 December, 1981
 County Hall,
 Barnsley,
                                                                                                                                                        J. -   Ve
 South Yorkshire.
 S70 2TN


 For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan

 Dear Mr. Vaughan,

                          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                        Radial Fences at Leppings Lane End
                                           and Security Gates

               The work on the radial fences and security gates
  indicated on our drawings 3563/1-3 which we sent to you on
              'tember 1981,                      is now substant                                         v      oi> I i; i ,
               Three first team home games have been played since the
 fences were erected.                                       We have not heard any formal comments
 from the Working Party about the operation of the fences and
 their access gates but w e understand that representatives of the
 South Yorkshire Police have inspected the work and they are
 satisfied with the new arrangements.
               To increase security it is proposed that pairs of gates
 are installed at the bottom of the two staircases at the back of
 the West Stand.                             Two copies of oui                                      ’ 'wing 3563/4 are enclosed
 showing details of the gates.




                                                                          ^                  Yours sincerely,



                                                                                        an3      - 1 ^o :T 1 3 4 5 3 1        .      -   .
                                                                                                                                                                      —
 c.c.          Eric England.
                    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

              Note of a Meeting of the-Officer Working Party     ^
            (Sheffield District) held at t~V»p r>ivi<rion          f
                                                                   -
               Fire Station, Sheffield, onfXth October, 19j!i^ ;•

PRESENT:          Ms.            (South Yorkshire Police)     , y( ^
                  P .|       (South Yorkshire Police)          -A ••
                  R. Herold (South Yorkshire Police)                 j
                            |(South Yorkshire County Fire Service) - — --- — -— -
                  K. Jones (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                  J. Ray (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                              (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                  D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1.     Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to consider the request of the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club Ltd. (contained in correspondence circulated to each
of the disciplines represented on the Working Party) to temporarily increase
the number of turnstiles on the Penistone Road side of the ground by taking
out the 21 ft. exit gate and installing six additional turnstiles, pending
the carrying out of a permanent scheme in the 1982 close season.

2.     Additional Turnstiles

The Police representatives pointed out that public order and public safety
problems were caused on occasions outside the ground (mainly at evening matches)
by spectators spilling out onto Penistone Road whilst trying to gain admission
to the ground. These problems had been discussed with the Club, and had
probably resulted in the request now before the Working Party. However, whilst
putting the case for additional turnstiles, the police representatives stressed
that in no way did they consider this should be done at the expense of means
of escape, should the Working Party consider that this would be the result of
the Club's temporary proposals now under consideration.

The Fire Service representatives reported that they had carried out a site
inspection, and pointed out that the existing five exits in question were only
just adequate in the event of a maximum capacity crowd (using the Green Guide
calculations).

The Working Party discussed a number of options which might be open to the Club,
pending the carrying out of the permanent proposals in the 1982 close season.

IT WAS AGREED that, whilst the Club's permanent proposals were welcome in
principle, the temporary proposals for six additional turnstiles on the   *
Penistone Road side of the ground (by removing the existing 21 ft. exit gate)
could not be supported.

IT WAS ALSO AGREED that, in order to be constructive, the following options
should be brought to the Club's notice:-

(a)    a reduction of 3,840 in the Spion Kop capacity should the Club wish
       to proceed with the temporary proposals;
(b)    the construction of some form of easily removeable turnstiles to enable
       the existing 21 ft. exit gate to continue to be available;

(c)   the construction of new turnstiles in the area of the Stadium between
      the end of the South Stand and the Penistone Road, possibly for use solely
      at evening matches where large attendances are envisaged should the
      Club wish to normally retain the exclusivism of the South Stand area.

3_.   Police and First Aid Facilities

Whilst neither the Club nor its Consultants had replied todate to the
representations made regarding the new police and first facilities, the Police
representatives reported that it appeared that some progress was being made and
that the subject had been discussed at a recent Board meeting.

IT WAS AGREED that, in the absence of a firm indication from the Club as to when
the new police and first aid facilities are to be provided, Mr. Vaughanshould
draw to the Club's attention that the North Stand capacity is determined by
the evacuation time of 8 minutes originally agreed using the non-combustibility
standards of the Green Guide. If the existing police and first aid facilities
are to remain, then the evacuation time will have to be reduced to the
combustible standard evacuation time of 2 \ minutes. Naturally, this would
entail either a reduction in the number of spectators admitted to the North
Stand or an increase in the number of exits from the Stand.
                                                                                                                                    O&r;
>-#A STW O O D                         & PARTNERS                                                             BOWMAKER HOUSE
                   C o n s u lt in g    E n g in e e r s                                                      23 KINGFIELD ROAD
        i
                                                                                         /                    SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
   W . Eastwood                    B .Eng., P h .D ., F.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                       Tel.: (0742) 583871
                                   F .I.S tru ct.E , F.G .S., M .C ons.E .

   A. A. Wood                      B .Eng., P h .D .. C .E ng„ F.I.C.E..
                                   F .I.Struct.E .. M .I.W .E.S., M .C ons.E

   A. G. Burdett                  G .M „ B .S c .(E n g ), C .E ng„ M .I.C.E.

   R. C. A. Eastwood              B .S c„ C .Eng., M .I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E .

  Associates:
   Geoffrey Spir                  C .E n*„             M .I.Mech.E.

   C. S. Greaves                   B .E ng., C .E ng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.

   A. J.‘ Clough                  BJ i „ C .E n g ., M .CJ.& .S., M J.M ech.E.
                                                                                               Our Ref:    WE/CW/3115
   J . A. Strange                 C.E ng., M.LStruct.E.                                        Your Ref:   DV/LG/583/5
   Consultant .*
   A. L. Percy                    M .T ach.(H on.), B.Se., C .E ng., F.I.C.E.,
                                  F .I .S tr u c tJ „ F.I.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.1.




         Chief Executive,                                                                                  25 August, 1981
         South Yorkshire County Council,
         County Hall,
         Barnsley,
         South Yorks.
         S70 2TN


         For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


         Dear Mr. Vaughan,

                                        Safety of Sports Ground.s Act, 1975
                                   Sheffield Wednesday Foot'ball’ Club Ltd.

                            Thank you for your letter of 20 August.                                          You comments
         concerning the roof of the South Stand are noted and we will
         make a point of visually inspecting the trusses after-
            exceptional snow or gales.
                                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                  Yours sincerely,




            c.c. Mr. E. England




                                                               Registered in England - No. 1134531
            South Yorkshire County Counctfy
            F. A. Mallett, LL.B., Chief Executive                     County Hall
                                                                      Barnsley
            J.C. Harris, M.A., LL.B, (Cantab), County Secretary       South Yorkshire S70 2TN
            Department of Administration                              Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                      (S TD 0226) 86141
                                                                      Telex: 547675


            Our Ref:   DV/LG/583/5          YourRef:   WE/KH/3115     Date: 20th August, 1981.




Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

You will recall that you raised certain points in your letter dated
18th June relating to the Hillsborough Stadium.

So far as the deflection of the roof trusses in the South Stand are concerned,
the Officer Working Party agree that the likely causes are somewhat
conjectural but equally it is possible that the situation could worsen in the
future.

Bearing in mind that an acceptable monitoring method would be inconvenient
and costly to the club, it is suggested that a visual inspection during the
customary visits, and possibly after exceptional gale or snow loading
conditions, would provide a practical monitoring system.

You also referred to the suggestion that a monitoring device to be sited
adjacent to the batteries providing the emergency power supply for the public
address system should be provided.  This suggestion was originally made
following a visit by the County Fire Service to the ground having revealed
that the batteries were discharged and that none of the ground staff present
at that time knew anything about the system. Access to the public address
cubicle to check the monitoring light in there could not be gained.

However, the procedures since introduced would seem to overcome this problem.

                                                Yours faithfully,




                                                Chief Executive.




 Dr. W. Eastwood,
                                                             n
 Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
 Consulting Engineers,
 Bowmaker House,
 23 Kingfield Road,
 SHEFFIELD,                                                       I
                                                              ■tit
Chief Executive
                             Mr* D, Vaughan

Chief Fire Officer                                      \ w % $ M a mfmi\


Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club                          1*7*81


In reply to your aeiaorandua dated 19th June 1981 I would like to confirm
that the provision of a monitoring light on the "battery charging system was
only a -suggestion. It was aade however, because, as pointed out in the letter
ffcoo Eastwood and Partners the batteries vrere found to "be discharged*
Investigation by Station Officer          of *C* Division Fire Prevention
department,revealed that none of the ground staff present at that time knew
anything shout the system and access to the public address system to check
the.monj/lorin/T light could not be gained.




Qhief7 Ifire O fficer
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNC

                                    For the attention of              Your   FP19/2/4/     1
To     Chief Fire Officer                                             Ref.   RG/JHB        1

                                    Please contact D. Vaughan        Our
From   Chief Executive                                                       DV/AA/583/5
                                    Tel.           Ext. 422          Ref.


       Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975                              Date       19/6/81
       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club




       Referring to the Note of the Officer Working Party’s visit to the
       Hillsborough Stadium on 8th June, I attach copy of a letter dated
       18th June from the Club's Consultant, Dr. W. Eastwood.

       I have not enclosed a copy of his letter to the Building Surveyor
       relating to the monitoring at the deflection of the steel roof trusses,
       as this concerns solely the Building Authority and I have taken this
       aspect up direct with them.

       I should be glad of your comments on the third paragraph of the letter
       relating to the provision or otherwise of a monitoring device adjacent
       to the batteries providing the emergency power supply for the public
       address system.




                                                                 _   O*
                                            SOU£H YQ ZhSH C'd
                                        C Tf*V l   r'>   t- .
                                                   fR.S $F?y\r
                                   i*
                                                                                                                 i   BOWMAKER HOUSE
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS
                                                                           t^os.-tmcnt of AUrrt,duration         !   23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                 Consulting    Engineers
                                                                                                                 I   SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
                                                                                 J9JUN19M
W. Eastwood               B.Eng., Ph.D ., F.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                                      I   Tel.: (0742) 583871
                          F .I.Struct.E,, F.G .S., M .C ons.E .
                                                                       {    COUNi'f HALt,
A. A. Wood                B.Eng., Ph.D ., C .Eng., F.l.C.E,,
                                                                                   YORKSHIRE S?0 2fN
                                                                  ,!
                          F.I.Struct.E ., M .I.W .E.S., M X o n s .

A. G. Burdett             G.M ., B .S c.(E n g ), C .Eng., M .I.C.E.

R. C. A. Eastwood         B .Sc., C.Eng., M .I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E .

Associates:
Geoffrey Spir             C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.

C. S. Greaves             B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.                                                     WE/KH/3113
                                                                                                 O ur R e f :
A. J . Clough             B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S., M.I.Mech.E.

J . A. Strange            C.Eng., M.I.Struct.E.                                                 Y ou r R e f :
C on su /tant:
A. L. Percy               M.Tech,(Hon.), B.Sc., C.Eng., F.l.C.E.,
                          F.I.Struct.E., F.I.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.f.




The Chief Executive,                                                                                                  18 June 1981
South Yorkshire County Council,
County Hall,
Barnsley,
South Yorkshire,
S70 2TN.



For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


 Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                                     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                  Mr. England has passed to me a copy of the note
written following your visit to the ground on 8 June 1981
 and has asked me to look into the two matters raised
 in note 2a and 2e.
                  The first paragraph of note 2a implies that there
 had been an agreement to monitor deflection of the steel
 roof trusses.                     This I think is a misunderstanding.                                                 I
 personally had undertaken to look into the possibility^
 and the Club is not aware that it had entered into any
 commitment.                  I have looked at the roof again and have now
 written a letter to the Building Surveyor,a copy of which
 is enclosed.
        In the second paragraph of this note there is a
  reference to ^ monitoring device to be sited adjacent
  to the batteries providing the emergency power supply for
  the public address system.                                                                informs me that this
  suggestion was certainly made at the meeting on 7 April in the
  course of discussing a number pf matters but he was not under
  the impression that the suggestion was being pressed.

                                                        Registered in England -     No. 1 1 3 4 5 3 1
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




  There is already a warning light within the public address
  cubicle together with very precise instructions to the
  operator.     The light is checked at every home match.
  The batteries would take many weeks to run down following
  any breakdown of the charging system so that provided a
  check is made a day or two before the start of the season,
  there can be no question of the emergency power supply being
  inoperable.     It would of course be possible to have another
  warning light fitted adjacent to the batteries but it must
  be kept in mind that even simple matters such as this are
  quite costly. For example, the bill received for charging
  the batteries when they were found to be flat a few months
  ago was in excess of £100.    A similar sort of bill could
  be expected if we were to fit a warning light system
  alongside the batteries.     There obviously comes a time when
  we have to resist belt and braces*requests of this kind.
         Turning now to the two items raised in connection
  with Spion Kop, it is expected that further work may be
  undertaken at the ground in the near future and the infilling
  step at the top of the original exit will be concreted at
  that time.
         The temporary barrier of scaffolding tubes and the
  bottom of the new Kop exit will be replaced by a permanent
  arrangement shortly.    We believe the responsibility lies
  with the outside catering contractor and the matter will be
  raised as soon as John Strange returns from holiday next week.


                                     Yours sincerely,




  c.c. Mr. E. England
                  SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

      Note of a Visit to the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield,
                         on 8th June, 1981

PRESENT:   Representing the' Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

           E. England (Secretary)

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

           C.   Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
           F.   Davis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           R.   Grimshaw (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           R.   Herold (South Yorkshire Police)
                      | (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           J. P. Ruddy (South Yorkshire Police)
           |            (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           D.I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1 ._____Purpose of Meeting

The visit was the second in the twice-yearly programme of visits by Officer
Working Parties to all five League Football Clubs in South Yorkshire, as
mentioned at the meeting on 10th February, 1981, and originally referred to
in the Chief Executive's letter to the Club dated 10th January, 1981. The
visit on 7th April had been a special one in view of the Stadium being the
venue on 11th April for a F.A. Cup Semi-Final match.

2 .____ Inspection of Stadium

The representatives made a joint inspection of the Stadium.

(a)     South Stand

The progress of the monitoring of the apparent deflection in the steel
trusses referred to at the meeting on 10th February was queried but, in
the absence of Dr. W. Eastwood, no specific answer could be given.

It was noted that the monitoring device to be sited adjacent to the new
metal case for the batteries supplying the emergency power supply for the
public address system (referred to at the meeting on 7th April) had yet to
be provided.

(b)     West Stand

The cracked brickwork at the rear of the stand, as well as the apparent
distress on the concrete pillars supporting the steps at the rear of the
stand and the cracks in the concrete at the top of both sets of stairs,
had been made good.

As previously agreed, as soon as a grinder was next present at the Stadium
the Club would round off the steel supports to the new emergency exit
(nearest to the South Stand).

Following experiences at the F.A. Cup Semi-Final match, the Club were
considering revised arrangements on the terracing in front of the Stand.
An assurance was given that the Officer Working Party would be consulted
when these had substance.
i   (c)    North-West Terrace

    The two small areas where water seepage had continued to take place after
    treatment had now been satisfactorily treated.

    It was also noted'that the tie bars through the upper level concrete
    area to the rear had been 'protectively wrapped.

    (d)   North Stand

    The expansion cracks in the wall of the North Stand (nearest to the Spion
    Kop) had been made good.

    (e)   Spion Kop

    The infilling of the step adjacent to the handrail on the left of the
    original exit at the top of the Kop had not been done to date but would
    be attended to shortly.

    The temporary barrier of scaffolding tubes erected between the end of the
    new Kop exit outer barriers and the concrete pillar of the lowest of the
    Kop original exit steps (adjacent to the new brick built chip shop) prior
    to the F.A. Cup Semi-Final match remained. However, the Club intended to
^   extend the existing barriers to fill the gap on a permanent basis and to
*   level off the area between the bottom of the new Kop exit staircase and the
    original Kop exit steps prior to the commencement of the forthcoming season.

    (f)   General

    It was noted:-

    (i)    that the steel girders with mesh on top adjoining the wall at the
    rear of the Butcher's Shop on Penistone Road required attention because of
    corrosion, and (ii) that the top of the brick built wall between the Spion
    Kop and the South Stand required pointing.




                                   - 2-
f <Z.o<Sr       H&mrr ,*rr
                    n r e r .tr c -              ^           »/*/*/,


    N © 4 T   j-r

                                 <AI   ^ '^ * ^ r S   ©^=-   -7 -^
                                                              77» f^ea.tL
we-to
                             G-0~r .


   M'-our^r s          -r-
                       -To       fr(
                                   0x-c«-0
locarrivers.------------------     "



                                                  9




Milton Keynes Development Corporation. May 1976
                       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CD

                             HILLSBOROUGH 'STADIUM                      U l i l *7
                                                                    / 2-1



                       EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE


The following notes of guidance are prepared and issued to assist all
official stewards and others in a position of responsibility at the
Hillsborough Stadium on the action to be taken and procedures to be followed
in the event of the possibility of evacuation of the stadium during the
playing of a game when spectators are present. The notes are not intended to
be a comprehensive list of all the action necessary, but are for personal
issue to each steward and for retention by the steward for immediate ref­
erence all the time ho/she is on duty at the stadium.

It is appreciated that the reasons evacuation may become necessary are many
and varied, but the most obvious are fires or information that explosive/
incendiary devices have been placed somewhere within the stadium/ground.
That information may be received or discovered either by members of the staff
at the stadium, or by telephone to the stadium, police, local or national
newspapers.

IT IS ST&ESSBD THAT WHENEVER SUCH INFORMATION IS RECEIVED THE RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THE DECISION TO EVACUATE ALL OR PART OF THE GROUND RESTS WITH THE SENIOR
MANAGEMENT OF THE CLUB. (The senior police officer on duty will be in a
position to advi&e as to whether the 'bomb call* is likely to be genuine or
not).

Whenever such information becomes known, a message will be relayed to the
police officer on duty in the "P. A. Commentary Box" at the ground, who, on
instructions from the senior police officer, and irrespective of whether
the match is in progress or not, will cause the record ’THREE BLIND MICE* to
be played over the loudspeaker system.

The playing of that record will indicate to everyone present at the ground,       '
othe< than spectators, that a possible emergency situation exists.

N.B.   As part of the regular pre-match brief of referees and linesmen and
       both teams, this information should be passed to them so that the
       game officials are also aware of the possibility of an interruption in
       play and the significance of the playing of the record.

On hearing that record all club stewards will make their way to their des­
ignated duty points on gangways/gates/exits, etc. Those on exit gates will
open the gates and remain at that point. During this period senior
officials will consider the nature of the emergency alleged and will decide
to evacuate all/part of the stadium. Once that decision has been taken, but
not until, the senior police officer on duty will cause a spoken message to
be relayed over the !,P. A. System" which will have the effect of:-

(1)    Stopping the game and removing players from the field of play;

(2)    Informing the spectators/officials of the precise nature of the
       emergency and its location if known, and requesting all or specified
       sections of the public to leave their seats and make their way put of
       the ground by the nearest normal exit route unless specifically directed
        to do otherwise by means of the !!P. A. System".
IT IS STRESSED THAT NO EVACUATION WtLL TAKE PLACE EXCEPT IN EXTREME
EMERGENCY AND ALTHOUGH THE PREPARATORY WARNING RECORD 'THREE BLIND MICE*
MAY BE PLAYED, THERE IS EVERY POSSIBILITY THAT INITIAL ENQUIRIES WILL
ESTABLISH THE PERPETRATION OP A HOAX, ETC., AND IN THAT CftSE, INSTEAD OF
A SPOKEN MESSAGE TO EVACUATE, THE FACT THAT THE EMERGENCY HAS PASSED
WILL BE INDICATED BY THE PLAYING OF THE RECORD - 'TEDDY BEARS PICNIC*.
0N HEARING THIS "ALL CLEAR' STEWARDS ON EXIT GATES AND GANGWAYS WILL
REMAIN ON STAND-BY AT THAT POINT FOR FIVE MINUTES BEFORE CLOSING THE GATES
AND RESUMING THEIR NORMAL DOTY POSITIONS.

In the event of any steward/club official discovering a fire or receiving
information that an emergency situation exists within the ground, he will
immediately -

  (i)    Notify the Club Secretary by telephone;

 (ii)    Inform any police officer.

{iii)    He must also, on discovering a fire, activate the fire alarm system
         by means of a ‘Break Glass' call point.

The activation of the call point will not immediately sound any form of
audible alarm but will indicate by light signal in the police staffed
control point the location of the emergency. The police controller can
then deploy manpower to investigate the cause.

In the event of discovery of fire by a steward, he should take additional
action in accordance with the following pointss-

(A)      Sound the alarm by breaking the nearest break glass call point?

(B)      Tackle the fire with the appropriate extinguisher if safe to do soj

(C)      Close doors within the immediate vicinity of the fire;

(Dj      At no time mention the words 'Fire' or 'Bomb'.   Remember, ilf you
         don't panic, neither will the crowd;

(E)      Upon completion of the evacuation of your section, report to the
         assembly area (which has been specified by the Club) and report to
         the person in overall charge, who will, in turn, report to the Fire
         Service and any other relevant emergency service which may be i n ,
         attendance.

ALL STEWARDS MUST FAMILIARISE THEMSELVES WITH TOE LOCATION OF:-

(a)     Fire Alarm 'Break Glass' call points?

(b)     location of the Fire Fighting Equipment t-

(c)     Knowledge of all escape routPS at their sector of the ground.
               t h e C o m p lim en ts ef




   vl                                        ||»                                                           ^iWE
  —        '                                 '              '            S W ^ P fk B iX ,




                                     FOR                                         I



                                     FOR



                  1Mssw
                  jm W-    ,.r ...
                          «//»»»     ... .
                                     «».«*          .. ..
                                                 «w>w»          ___
                                                                -!?»■»    r»*»       «HSS®   «sw   ««»«*   .....
                                                                                                           ®tess>   .* I .
                                                                                                                    »*»»     ^rr«
                                                                                                                             ««




         c f f i ^ r i i ot # % Q f i n m » i . r # » i » r s

C ounty Hail
B a rn sle y        ■
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                  BpWI/IAKER HOUSE
          Consulting        Engineers                                                               '43X1 JGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                     SHCF :IELD S11 9AS
W . Eastwood          B,Eng.. Ph.D .. F.Eng.. F.l.C.E..                                              T e U (0742) 583871
                      F.I.Struct.E^ F.G .S.. M .Cons.E .

A. A. Wood            B.Eng„ P h.D ., C.Eng., F.l.C.E.,
                      F.I.StrucLE^ M .I.W .E.S., M .C ons.E .

A. G. Burdett         G .M ., B.Sc.(Efifl). C .Eng., M .I.C.E.

R. C. A. Eastwood     B.Sc.. C .Eng.. M .I.C.E.. M .LStruct.E.


Geoffrey Spir         C .E n f., M .I.C.E., M.I,M«ch.E.

C. S. Greaves         B i n t , C .E ng,, M .I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E,

A. J . Clough         B .A ., C .E ng,, M .C .t.B.S., M ./.M ech.E.

J. A. Strange         C E n ( ,, M J.Struct.E.
                                                                                       Your Ref:

A. L. Percy           M .T « h .< H o n .), B.Se., C .E n*„ F.l.C.E.,
                      F.I.Struct.E„ F.I.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.1.




      The Chief Executive,                                                                         23 April, 1981
      South Yorkshire County Council,
      County Hall,
      Barnsley,                    *
      South Yorkshire.
      S 7 0 2TN


      For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan

      Dear Sir,

                          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd
                                       Public Address Standby System

                 In connection with the recent Working Party visit to
      the Hillsborough Grounds on 7 April 1981 we confirm that
      the following steps have been taken:

                 i)    the batteries                                    are installed in a fire resistant
                       metal case.

                ii)    the batteries are now kept fully charged by maintaining
                       a continuous d.c. supply.

              iii)     all amplifier changeover circuits have been checked
                       and full sound level is available on standby,

                iv)    instructions to                                   ’operate*   *test* and ‘leave* have been
                      posted alongside the equipment and copies left with
                      Mr. England.

                                                                                                                           V,




                                                   Registered in England - No. 1134531
                         PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM

 A.        TO OPERATE
 1.        Check that
              i)    Power plug in socket and switch on
             ii)    ’M a i n s ’ switch on
            iii)    All amplifier switches        (5) on
             iv)    Sound source (roving mic, box mic,
                    gram, tape) selected as required.
              v)   Volume controls at correct settings.

 2.         Note that commentary box mic can be
            directed to
              i)    'Crowd control' (South Stand entrance
                    area) via Amplifier 1.
      or     ii)    'Stadium'   via Amplifiers 2 , 3 ,     4 and
                    5.
      or iii)      Selected stands using isolating
                   switches.

 B.        TO TEST STAND-BY BATTERIES         *
 t.        Set s y stem to operate as A above.

2.         Turn    'Mains'   switch off.

3.         Check that
             i)    All    'Mains on'   neon lamps go out.
            ii)    Red 'Amplifier in use'         lamps fade and
                   relight.
           iii)    S y stem operates normally.

4.         Restore 'Mains'      switch to on and reset
           volume control.

C.         TO LEAVE AFTER USE
1.         Leave
             i)    Power plug in socket and switch on
            ii)    'Mains'   switch on
           iii)    At least one amplifier switched on
            iv)    All sound source selector switches,
                   including monitor selector off
2.         Check that
             i)    Selected amplifier(s)     'Mains On'
                   neon(s) lit.
                   A H Red    'Amplifier in use'     lamps are
                   out
3.         Note that
             i)    To maintain the batteries on charge,
                   power supply to at least one amplifier
                   must be left on
            ii)    The green 'Aux D.C. Supply' lamps may
                   be removed to prevent them discharging
                   the batteries.
Sheffield Wednesday                               Eastwood & Partners
Football C l u b Ltd.                             Consulting Engineers,
EASTWOOD Cr PARTNERS




           The above arrangement s were in force prior to the
    semi-final match on 11 April 1981.   We enclose a copy of
    the above instruction sheet for your records.




                                            Yours faithfully,




    c.c.   Mr. England - Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                                                             heArc         m

                      SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

            Note of a Visit to thfe Hillsborough Stadium,
                              on 7th April, 1981-


PRESENT:   Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football

                        (Messrs. Eastwood and Partners)
           E. England (Secretary)
           J. A. Strange (Messrs. Eastwood and Partners)

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

                    (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           F. Davis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           R. Herold (South Yorkshire Police)
           J         I (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           P. Ruddy (South Yorkshire Police)
                       (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           D.I. Vaughan ( South Yorkshire County Council)

1.     Purpose of Meeting

Bearing in mind the F.A. Cup Semi-Final which, was to take place on Saturday,
11th April, 1981, it was felt it would be desirable for the Working Party to
visit the ground, especially as'a small number of matters had arisen since the
last visit on 10th February, 1981.

2.     Inspection of Ground

(a)    South Stand

The previous comments relating to the roof structure and the exterior windows in
the Ladies’ Toilets below the stand were still applicable.
                                                       '                         c
The L.P.G. cylinders had been removed from beneath the Stand, and the batteries
supplying the emergency power supply for the police address had been enclosed in
a satisfactory fire resisting metal case. Whilst the provision of an automatic
battery charger would be a longer term solution, in the short term arrangements
had been made for the batteries to be charged before each game and for the public
address system to be checked relying only on the emergency battery supply. The
indicator for the batteries condition was presently in the Public Address Box.
It was suggested that it would be less likely to be overlooked if the indicator
was sited adjacent to the new metal case for the batteries.

(b)    West Stand

As previously agreed, the Club would round off the steel supports to the new
emergency exit (nearest to the South Stand) as soon as a grinder was next present
at the ground.

The cracked brickwork at the rear of the stand which required pointing, the
apparent distress on the concrete pillar suppprting the steps at the. rear of the
stand, the cracks in the concrete at the tep bo both. sets of stairs, as well as
the currently slight corrosion in tha base plate of the outer steel column
(nearest to the South Stand) had all been included in the maintenance programme
and woi|ld be undertaken shortly.
(e)    North West Terrace

The cracking of the concreting had been attended to by injecting material from
the top. The results had been satisfactory, except in two small areas where
water seepage had obviously taken place and which woulc* receive further
attention.

(d)    North Stand

The expansion cracks which had appeared in the wall of the North Stand (nearest
to the Spion Kop) had been included in the maintenance schedule and would be
attended to shortly.

(e)     Spion Kop

The infilling of the step adjacent to the handrail on the left of the original
exit at the top of the Kop would be given attention in the close season.

Whilst the brick built chip shop at the bottom of the new exit from the Kop had
been erected, it was not yet in use. It was noted that the siting of the
chip shop had resulted in a possible danger to spectators in that a gap into
which spectators could be pushed, or possibly stumble because of the camber, had
been created. As regards the F.A. Cup Semi-Final,

IT WAS AGREED -

that a temporary barrier of scaffolding tubes should be erected between the end
of the new Kop exit outer barriers and the concrete pillar of the lowest of the
Kop original exit steps. In the longer term, the existing barriers wouldneed
extending to fill thegap and ideally, the area between the bottom of the new Kop
exit staircase and the original Kop exit steps should be levelled off.

3.      Ground Evacuation Procedure

Whilst the Club had been supplied with a Schedule on "Fire Instruction and Drills"
on 9th April, 1980, consultations between the County Fire Service and the South
Yorkshire Police had resulted in the production of an "Emergency Evacuation
Procedure". The Glub undertook to circulate copies of theprocedure to all
Stewards who would be on duty for the F.A. Cup Semi-Final.




                                      2   .
                   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT,

      Note of a visit to^fehgTnrrTsFofoTrgh--St4 dium> S
                      on 10th February. 1981-^

PRESENT:     Representing the(*Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.^

             K. T. Addy (Director)
             E. England (Secretary)

            Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

                         (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
            R. Herold (South Yorkshire     Police)
            K. Mettam (South Yorkshire     County Fire Service)
            B. Mole (South Yorkshire Police)
            1         I (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                        'City of Sheffield Metroplitan District Council)
            D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1 .______ Purpose of Meeting

Mr. H. E. McGee, the Club's Chairman, welcomed the Working party.

As had been explained in theChief Executive's letter dated 10th January to
the Club, the County Council felt it was desirable to introduce a twice-
yearly programme of visits    by the Officer Working Partiestoall five of
the League Football Grounds in South       Yorkshire (namely, earlyin   theyear and
also in the middle of the Year) in an effort tomaintainpublicconfidence
intheir safety at football grounds. Additionally, at the other grounds,
it was hoped that this procedure would obviate the real possibility of the
Clubs carrying out works which might prove abortive or require additional
work on designation. This was the first of such a programme of visits.

2 .______ Inspection of Ground

Mr. McGee left to attend to other business, and the remainder of the
representatives made a tour of inspection of the ground. It was agreed
that the majority of matters revealed (detailed below) could be regarded
as routine maintenance.

(a)        South Stand

The detailed inspection of a mutually agreed part of the roof structure
had taken place on 13th/14th January after the erection of scaffolding and
platforms. Bearing in mind the age of the stand, relatively little
deterioration had taken place. It had been agreed that the apparent
deflection in the steel trusses should be monitored over a period of time.
Whilst there were signs of water staining on the roof timbers, it was by
no means certain if water penetration was still taking place. It was
agreed that the area around the roof hatch should be particularly investigated,
which would also give the opportunity of inspecting the roof tiles generally.

It was also agreed that should any of the exterior windows in the Ladies'
Toilets below the stand be broken, they would be replaced by wired or some
such safety glass.
(b)     Spion Kop

Except for the continuing maintenance of the concrete terracing and crush
barriers, the only matter requiring attention was the infilling of a step
adjacent to the handrail on the left of the original exit at the top of
the Kop.

The Club had received Planning Permission and Building Regulation approval
to the erection of a bricl^ built chip shop at the bottom right of the new
exit from the Kop (viewed when descending).   Thesiting of the chipshop
would not interfere with the egress from the new       Kop exit.

(c)     North Stand

Expansion cracks had appeared in the wall of the North Stand(nearest    to
the Spion Kop) which required attention.

The Club were in the process of building showers and changing accommodation
attached to the existing gymnasium at the rear of the Stand. The public
did not have access to the facilities. Additionally, the Club were
investigating the possibility of acquiring property in Vere Road so as to
provide an alternative exclusive access to the gymnasium without using
the existing access through the ground.

Revised proposals for the facilities to be provided in the new Police Post
and First Aid facilities had been agreed, and it was intended to build
permanent accommodation in virtually the same position as the existing
temporary structures.

(d)    North West Comer Terrace

The Club had received quotations for making good the cracking of the concrete
on the terracing, which the Board were to consider shortly.

(e)    West Stand

Some cracked brickwork at the rear of the stand required pointing and then
checking to see if the cracks re-opened.

Apparent distress on the concrete pillar supporting the steps at the rear
of the Stand required urgent attention, and attention ought also to be
given to cracks in the concrete at the top of both sets of stairs.

The weathering and corrosion in the base plate of the sheeting column in
the south-west corner of the stand required attention, possibly by concrete
sheeting.

Finally, the steel supports to the new emergency exit (nearest to the
South Stand) still required to be rounded off.

(f)    Police Control Facilities

The Club pointed out that the police now had exclusive use of the box
(overlooking the whole of the ground) previously used by the disc jockey.
The disco unit had been re-sited underneath the original box.
                                -3-


3 ._____ Revised Entrance Facilities

The Club outlined the consideration being given to the siting of caravans
outside the Penistone Road and Leppings Lane ends of the ground to sell
tickets. It was hoped that if this took place, increased entry flow of
spectators to the ground would result by reducing delays at the turnstiles.

4 ._____ Bar Facilities

The Club also outlined the consideration being given, at the request of
the Police, to revised bar facilities at the Leppings Lane end of the
ground.

5.      Future Developments

Whilst the proposals were in a very preliminary stage, consideration was
being given by the Club to the provision of an Executive Club' at the
Leppings Lane end of the car park under the South Stand and the adjoining
store area. There was also a possibility of the existing office accomm­
odation being extended outwards. Additionally, the reception lounge
might be extended, the kitchen area moved and a new Directors' Room built.
It was stressed that these were long term plans and no firm proposals existed
at the moment.
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY-COUNCIL
MEMORANDUM
          Chief Fire Officer             For the attention of       Your   FP19/2/4A
 To
                                                                    Ref.   AS/He

 From     Chief Executive                Please contact D - Vaughar Our
                                                                           DV/SY/583/5
                                         Tel. Ext.422               Ref.


Subject   Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
                                                                    Date    4/2/81
          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club


          Referring to your memo dated 15th January, I attach copy of a letter
          which I addressed to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, together
          with a copy of a letter dated 30th January which Messrs. Eastwood and
          Partners addressed to the Club in reply.

          Can you kindly confirm that the position is now regarded as acceptable.
 EA’S T W O O D & P A R T N E R S                                                                                      BOWMAKER HOUSE
  r*                                                                                                                   23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                     C onsulting       E ngineers
                                                                                                                       SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W . E astw o o d                  B .E n g , P h .D , F.Eng., F .I.C.E,                                                Tel.: (0742) 583871
                                  F .I.S tru ct.E , F.G.S., M .C ons.E .

A. A. W o od                      B .E n g , Ph.D ., C.Eng.. F.I.C.E,
                                  F .I.Struct. E , M .I.W .E.S., M .C ons.E .

A. G. B u rd e tt                 G .M ., B .S c.(E n g ), C.Eng., M.I.C.E.

R. C. A. E astw o o d             B.S c., C.Eng.. M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E .

Associates;
Geoffrey Spir                     C .Enj., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.

C. S. Greaves                     B.Eng., C.Eng,, M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                  O u r R ef :
                                                                                                                       WE/KH/3113
A. J. Clough                      B.A., C.En*., M.C.I.B.S., M .I:Mech.E.

J. A. Strange                     C.Eng., M.I.Struct.E.                                           Your R e f :
C o n su ltan t:
A. L. Percy                       M.Tech.(Hon.), B.Sc., C.Ent „ F.I.C.E.,
                                  F.l.Struct.E., F.I.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.I.




 The S e c r e t a r y ,                                                                                                30 J a n u a r y 1981
 S h e f f i e l d W ednesday F o o t b a l l Club L t d                                  .,
 H illsb o ro u g h ,
 S6 1SW.



 D ear Mr. E n g l a n d ,
                                                     S a f e t y o f S p o r t s Ground A c t
               Thank y o u f o r s e n d i n g me a c o p y o f Mr. V a u g h a n ' s l e t t e r
 o f 27 J a n u a r y .
              We a g r e e w i t h Mr. Vaughan t h a t i t                                 is   a p p ro p ria te to check
 t h a t t h e e x i t s i g n s and c o m m u n ic a t io n s y s t e m s i n c l u d i n g t h e
 fir e             a la r m s y s t e m a r e i n g o o d o r d e r a n n u a l l y .                            That i s      of
 c o u r s e v e r y d i f f e r e n t from i s s u i n g a f u l l IEE c e r t i f i c a t e
 f o r th e w hole o f th e e l e c t r i c a l i n s t a l l a t i o n                                  in th e ground.
A f u l l IEE c e r t i f i c a t e                             t e s t o f ev ery th in g        w o u ld b e v e r y
 e x p e n siv e as w e l l as b ein g o u t o f k eep in g                                       w i t h t h e normal
 proced u re i n d e a lin g w ith o th e r p u b l i c a r e a s such as
 h o sp ita ls,              sch o o ls e t c .                        It is    th e r e fo r e a p p ro p ria te t o assu re
Mr. Vaughan t h a t t h e c h e c k s w h ic h h e r e q u e s t s w i l l be c a r r i e d o u t .
                                                                     (eT)
              W ith r e g a r d t o t h e f i r m ' a l a r m s y s t e m ,                       t h e i n s t a l l a t i o n was
 co m p lete t o g e t h e r w ith m o d if ic a t io n s to th e p u b lic address
 sy stem by th e s t a r t o f t h e f o o t b a l l s e a s o n .                                         I t se em s we o m i t t e d
 t o f o r m a l l y i n f o r m Mr.                            Vaughan o f t h i s a t            t h e t i m e and f o r t h i s
 I a p o lo g ise .                   A query                   was r a i s e d b y Mr.I                          Io f t h e
 C o u n ty F i r e S e r v i c e i n a t e l e p h o n e c a l l on 14 J a n u a r y and Mr. _____
w rote g iv in g                  t h e a p p r o p r i a t e a s s u r a n c e on 16 J a n u a r y .                          A copy o f
 h is          lette r       is     e n c l o s e d f o r f o r w a r d i n g t o Mr. V a u g h a n .

                                                                                                        Y o u rs s i n c e r e l y ,
                                                              Registered in E ngland -   No. 1134531
S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e C o u n ty F i r e S e r v i c e ? ,                          16 J a n u a r y ,   19R1
F ir e B rig a d e H ea d q u a rters,                         •’
D iv isio n S tr e e t,
S h e f f i e l d 1.


For t h e a t t e n t i o n o f :
                    -               |                        |                               ^




D ear S i r ,

                           S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Cl u b
                             F i r e A l a m s and P u b l i c A d d r e s s

            We c a n c o n f i m        t h a t F i r e A larn i n s t a l l a t i o n    and m o d i f i c a t i o n s
to the       P u b l i c A d d r e s s s y t e m v.Te r e c c m p l e t c d d u r i n g J u l y 1 9 8 0
and s u b s e q u e n t l y c h e c k e d and f o u n d ikngood o r d e r .
           Vie a r e s o r r y i f we h a v e o m i t t e d t o i n f o r m y o u e a r l i e r ,                :
and      we t r u s t t h a t t h i s w i l l e n a b l e you t o c l e a r y c u r r e c o r d s .


                                                         Y o u rs f a i t h f u l l y ,




c . c . Mr. R. E n g l a n d ,      S h e f f i e l d W ednesday F t
     DV/MH/583/5    .       EE/CB                    27th January, 1981




Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

I am obliged to you for your letters dated 11th and 17th November, 1980.

I regret that I have been unable to reply to you earlier, but industrial
action in the Fire Service led to a backlog of other than emergency work
and a consequent delay in the provision of specialist fire prevention
advice.

With regard to the requirement of Condition 26 of the General Safety
Certificate which requires the submission of an annual certificate as to
the compliance of the electrical installations at the stadium with
Section 1 of the I.E.E. Regulations, the opinion of Messrs. Eastwood and
Partners relating to the period of time between tests (as set out in
paragraph (c) of their letter dated 12th November, 1980) is in the
circumstances considered to be reasonable and acceptable.

As regards the testing of the emergency power supplies mentioned in
paragraph (a) of the letter dated 12th November, 1980, of the letter from
Messrs. Eastwood and Partners, I would point out that Condition 12 of the
General Safety Certificate eefers not only to emergency lighting but also
to exit signs and communications systems which also require testing
annually. The fire warning system would blso need including since it is
to be linked to the public address system. In this connection, I
understand that the fire warning system has still not been finally
completed because of the continued difficulty in obtaining parts. As
this is a matter of some concern, I should be glad of your comoents.

An additional copy of the letter is attached for your use.

                                      Yours faithfully,




                                      Chief Executive

Hr. E. England,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
Hillsborough,
SHEFFIELD,
S6 1SW.
                                                                                Jm E)                                 U *•
                                                                                V       TXiiuaC              -    -
 EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                      0                                           BOWMAKER H O U S E R
                C onsulting     Engineers                                                   A aTC^x                   23 KINGFIELD ROa / S
                                                                              J jU         ) U                        SHEFFIELD S11 9AS (
 W . E a s tw o o d        B.Eng.   P h .D , F.Eng, F.I.C.E,
                            F .LSm >ct.E . F .G .S , M .C ons.E .             f \ n d H'nr ) TeL: (0742) 583871
 A.   A. W ood                        Ph-O, CEngq F.I.C.E.,
                            F.I.Struct.E» M .L W .E .S. M .C ons.E .

 A.     G . B u rd e tt    G J A , B.S<x(Eng). O E n g .. M .I.C.E.

 R . C . A . E a s t w o o d B.Sc, CEng. MXC.E, Mj.Smict.E.
 Ajsoct'ates
 G eo ffre y S p ir        c.E o*„ HJ.C.E.. M .LHedi.E.
 C. S . G reav es          B.Eng„ C-Exs., MAC.E, Mj.Scrucc.E.
 A. J . C lough            BJt_, C.EnS„ M.C.I.B.S., M.I.Mech.E.                               Our R e f:         AJC/CW/2401
 J . A. S tra n g e        c.En*, MXStn«t£,                                                   Your R e f :
 Coosoftactt;
 A. L. P ercy              M.Tedi.(Hon.), tS t, C.Enj., F.I.C.E.,
                            FJ.Scruct.E^ FJ.Mun.E-, M.R.T.P.I.




  S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e C ounty F i r e S e r v i c e ,                                                    16 J a n u a r y ,   1981
  F i r e B rigad e H ead q u arters,
  D iv isio n S tr e e t,
  S h e f f i e l d 1.


  F o r t h e a t t e n t i o n o f Mr.


  D ear S i r ,

                                    S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club
                                      F i r e alarm s' and P u b l i c A d d r e s s

                 We ca n c o n f i r m t h a t F i r e Alarm i n s t a l l a t i o n and m o d i f i c a t i o n s
  t o t h e P u b l i c A d d r e s s sy tem w e r e c o m p l e t e d d u r i n g J u l y 1 9 8 0
  and s u b s e q u e n t l y c h e c k e d and f o u n d i n g o o d o r d e r .
                 We a r e s o r r y i f we h a v e o m i t t e d t o i n f o r m yo u e a r l i e r ,
  and we t r u s t t h a t t h i s w i l l e n a b l e you t o c l e a r y o u r r e c o r d s .


                                                                         Yo ujts     fa ith fu lly ,




  c . c . Mr. R. E n g la n d ,                   S h e f f i e l d Wednesday FC


c/owfP                                                                                                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                                                                               ’ E SERVICE'
                                                                                                                                             ,




                                                      Registered in England — N o. 1 1 3 4 5 3 1
tMfi-r■|»j«so*iW                       H*/'     :Vau£}iaaa

                                                       m                     ( SF 10/2/4A
iadof'3Pia^.Qm«»v                       . 57302 I3st 26


ftfoftgr of. .EfcortB GrowsiB Acris    1979:Sfeafficlel                         15.1.1931
lfe<3»os&acr F.C .


15.-th r ^f jr-noo t o your ptioaraa&iaii o f 7th. January, 1<?31, r o q u e tin g ay
o’beji'vaticaie w ith 'jfq8hc£: t o t h 0 6 # ;to ^ o r© jassiticaiot! iirth ? . l a t t a m datofi
11th a n d . 12th STowja'tea’i 19001 (r*tetvo& fro© th® C&ti3b anrl S hears. ^Sastwooit
& Partus** re s p e c tiv e ly ) «hioh f a l l w ith in 2^ a r m o f i-3SpaaBiM liiy» I
k o uII cooftant a s follow s*—
1.   u ith rcjQard t o th a requirosieut o f C o n a tio n 26 o f tho Q eftnal
     Saf 4sr C ariifl«W te (0 * S C ,) *M<?h raq jiiro e th s e u to iB sia i c£ an.
     rt.vmn.oi c e r tif ic a te m t o th o oaapliance o f t t o e le c tr ic a l
     in s ta lla tio n s w ith S ection B o f tfca           H c'fjjlatiaiB , I aa
     of the- opinion tlia i i t wailcl to© raaecm laia t o accept tho. visw
     o f llaiyfcwood & Partaor® (Paragraph ( c ) l e t t e r 12/11/1980 r e f 0 7 0 )
     r o i a t i » s to th3- period of. tia o to-jtxmn t o e t s . :
:2» As rs'goaxls tho te s tin g o f .cBbr^mcgr powsr cnap?li'?c (Fayagrajfo (a )
    l o t t s r 12/11/1980 r o f -re) I w oull p o in t out th a t C « siitic » 12 o f
    th e &S.C* r*?forB-lTot only t o oiKsr^aear li^hifciias hut' a ls o t o ^ : i t
               3»’ ccm unicatioiaG cgrstcaae tiiic h a ls o ra e p ji^ t ^ s t i a ^ asiraxally.
    SSr- t t e ' : tjaatttoc fgpofcai wcuM uasit iuelttfingr a ls o .siae*: i t i s t o "ba
    lisiMMi- t o th3 patoUo asldrsgs sjreton, Y<m x d ll r e c a ll t t a t tshon tfca
    G«f,.C. was issu ed to th e elwli, in s ta lla tio n o f .tin f i r s x-nsmiag cyBtaa
    had not ‘boon caaplatocl. Accor£in£ to a y lata B t in fo rm a tic s ccanpl ;tio a
    i c b sia g delayed t y a j i f i c a l t ? *»-olrtad«iing. parts* B iis i s a ra a ttsr
    I vitw with.oa»'3 co»ft3«n Giac?3 i t i© now aaro tla a i a .j^ a r sinco th e
    C«S*C. was iesni ’'--
                                                                                                 TV
                                                                             *rtn»eiit of Admi- ■


SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCII                                          COUNTY h‘r
                                                                       SOUTH


 To                                        For the attention of       Your j FFL9/2/4A          1
       Chief Fire Officer                                             Ret    11W/JHB

From   Chief Executive                     Please contact             Our
                                           Tel.                       Ref.    D V /M B /583/5


Subject Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975                            Date      7.1.81
        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club


       Referring to my memo of 19th November, 1980, X should be obliged to know
       if you are yet in a position to let me have your observations ©n the matters
       for which v o ji h .i w 1 h rTjm jng-ihi i Af~\7 mentioned in the letters dated 11th and
                                      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. and Messrs.
       Eatety jfifi                      ctive ly.



           K zc p j

           C .F .O .
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
MEMORANDUM
                                       For the attention of              Your   m    m   n k )
 To       Chief Fire Officer                                                    HEW/JMB
                                                                         Ref.

          Chief Executive              Please contact d . Vaughan       Our     DV/SY/583/5
From
                                       Tel.                             Ret

          Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975                                        19/11/80
Subject                                                                 Date
          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club


          I recently forwarded to you a copy of a letter dated 7th November
          which I addressed to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

          Attached is a copy of the reply dated 11th November from the Club,
          together with a copy of both a further letter dated 17th November
          and letter dated 12th November addressed to the Club.from Messrs.
          Eastwood & Partners.

          It appears from the letter of 7th November that the Club overlooked
          the requirement of the General Safety Certificate to inform the
          County Council of any alterations or extensions at the Stadium,
          and certainly the Co—ordinator ,of the Of facer Working Party
          (Mr. D. Vaughan) of my staf$ has not received any such notification.

          Whilst it appears that the Cotinty F.ire Service haa been cansulted from
          a Building Regulation/Planning approval point of view, I should be
          glad of your observations on the matters mentioned in the CWb*s letter
          of 7th November from the point of view of your area of responsibility
          under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975.

          As regards the copy letter dated 12th November from Messrs. Eastwood
          & Partners, I should be glad of your observations on paragraphs <a) and
          (c).




                                                                        J O jb C
                                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                            COUNTY FIRE

                                                          H£ADQUARTERS
                                                          REC’D
                                                                      1 9 NOV 1980
                                                          C.F.O

                                                          0.C .F .O

                                                      i   L.A.C.
                                                          FootboftC lub“/
                                                         lim ited -   . ..
                                                         Regtstwad Office:              \
                                                         Hillsborough, SheffbfdS6 tSW
Chairman:    H. E. McGEE
                                                         Telephorp:0742-343123/4
Manager:     J . L. CHARITON, O.B.E.
                                                         Telegrams:Wednesday Sheffield8
                                                         Registered No. 62478 England
Secretary:   E. ENGLAND



             South Yorkshire County Council,              EE/CB
             County Ball,
             Barnsley, S70 2TN                            17th November 1980




             Deax Mr, MaHett,

             SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

             Further to your letter oaf the 7th November and my
             reply of the 11th November, I have pleasure in
             enclosing a copy of a letter from Eastwood &
             Partners regarding various items you have mentioned*

             Yours sincerely,




             t>ecretaxy.
                                                                                                          BOWMAKER HOUSE
E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS
                                                                                                          23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                     C o n su ltin g    E n gin eers
                                                                                                          SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W . E a s tw o o d                 B .E n g . P h .D , F.Ene „ F .I.C .E,                                 Tel.: (0742) 583871
                                   F .I.S tra c t.E . F .G .S . M .C ons.E .

A. A . W o o d                     B .E n g „ P h.D ., C .E ng„ F .I.C .E ,
                                   F.!.Struc«.E., M .I.W .E .S , M .Con*.E.

A . G. B u rd e tt                 G .M .. B .S c .(E n g ), C .Eng.. M .I.C.E.

R. C. A . E a s tw o o d           B . S c , C .Eng.. M .I.C .E . M .I.Struct.E .

Auedoto:
Geoffrey Spir                      C .En*., M.I.C.E., M .I.M .eh.E .

C. S. Greaves                      B.Ent .. C .E nj., M.I.C.E.. M.l .Struct. E.
                                                                                                          WE/KH/2419
                                                                                           Ou r R e f ;
A. J. Clough                       B .A ., C .E ng., M.C .I.&.S., M .I.M eduE.

J . A. Strange                     C .Eng., M.I.Struct.E.                                  Your R e f :
C o n s u lta n t:
A. L. Percy                        H.Tech.(Hon.), B.Sc., C.En*.t F.I.C.E..
                                   FJ.Seruct.E., F.I.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.I.




 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,                                                                  12 November 19
 Hillsborough,
 Sheffield,
 S6 1SW.


 For the attention of Mr. E. England


  Dear Mr. England.
              Safety of Spotrts Ground Act 1975
           Thank you for sending me a copy of the letter from
  South Yorkshire County Council dated 7 November 1980.
                           In the letter Mr. Vaughan raises a number of points
  and our comments are as follows


    (a)                    We did of course carry out the test of the emergency
                            power supply and this is covered by Mr. Clough's
                            certificate dated 11 August 19 80.                                     The certificate
                            is headed "Emergency Lighting Inspection and Test
                            Certificate” which might have given the impression that
                            only the lighting circuits etc. were tested but it will
                            be seen that on sheet 2 we certified that the battery
                            system is working properly.                                 It is not unreasonable
                             that the batteries should have to be tested annually
                             and subject to your approval we will do this.


      (b)                    I have not had any contact with the Building Authority
                             representatives other than the joint inspection which
                            was made on 28 August.                                  During that inspection the
                             various items of maintenance which were listed with my
& PARTNERS




   certificate dated 11 September were discussed.        The
   Local Authority representatives also mentioned
   possible rounding off of the steel cantilevering
   to form the emergency exit from the West stand,
   the possible hazard of the concrete step near the
   top exit from Spion Kop and the possibility of
   placing a rail in front of certain glass panels within
   the South stand.       It will be recalled that we
    indicated at the meeting prior to the semi-final
    in the spring that these three matters would be attended
    to in due course (even though the fire officers
    did not consider the rail in front of the glass was
    necessary) .     However we also indicated that in our
    view these were such minor matters that they did not
    need attention within the immediate future.         No
    doubt the Club can give consideration to carrying them
    out as part of the normal maintenance programme or
    alternatively, of course, we can include them
    with any future works which are carried out under
    our control for the Club.


    I am a little at a loss to know what is meant by
    this particular paragraph.      It is absolutely normal
    for IEE certificates to be issued for periods
    which may be as long as five years for completely new
    installations.      Within our firm we carry out inspection
    work in many types of building including, for example,
    schools.       Where the electrical installation is
     completely new it is standard practice for the certificate
     to be valid for five years.      We have issued such a
     certificate for the wiring of the South stand which has
     been completely renewed under our control and also for
     the emergency lighting which has been completely rewired.
     In the case of the North and West stands, we have issued
     a certificate for two years, this period being based
                                                                           SHEET
rrfjE




        EASTWOOD .CrrpARTNERS.




                     on the results of the test which we carried out
                     and the known age of the installation.

                     We would strongly, resist any suggestion that the whole
                     of the electrical installation should be inspected
                     every year and I suggest that the South Yorkshire
                     County Council be asked whether that is their
                     intention or whether they merely wish to see a
                     further copy of our two year and five year certificates
                     in 1981.'   Perhaps it is appropriate to point out
                     that because of the lengths of the various runs of
                     cable within the stadium and because of the complexity
                     of the electrical system, the checking of the North
                     and West stands plus the various outside circuits
                     which was carried out during the summer of 19 80 cost
                     approximately £1000.     It would be less costly on
                     future occasions because the routing of the various
                     circuits has now been established and recorded but
                     nevertheless if the whole stadium had detailed checks
                     every year it is likely that it would cost a four figure
                     sum.


           fd)       This paragraph is merely reminding the Club of the
                     requirement that any proposed alterations must be
                     intimated to the County Council at least 21 days
                     before they are begun.


                                               Yours sincerely,
S h e f f ie ld W e d n e s d a y ^                                            C ub
                                                               Registered Office
                                                               Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW
Chairman:     H. E. McGEE                                      Telephone:0742-343123/4
Manager:      J. L. C H A R L T O N , O.B.E .                  Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6
Secre tary:   E. E N G LA N D                                  Registered No. 62478 England


               South Yorkshire County Council,                  EE/CB
               Cotxnty Hall,
               Barnsley,                                         11th November 1980
               South Yorkshire,
               S70 2TN




              Dear Sir,

               SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

              Further to your letter of the 7th November, all your
              points axe noted, and the additional copy of your letter
              has been forwarded to Eastwood & Partners.

               Under Paragraph *d* can I point out what is happening
               at the moment at Hillsborough:-

                     We axe presently building showers and changing
                     accommodation attached to the gymnasium at the
                     back of the North Stands This in no way in­
                     fringes on any paxt of the stadium nor does
                     it impede or restrict any entrances or gang«
                     wayss Planning permission etc* has all been
                     granted by our local council.
                     Our caterers in conjunction with ourselves are
                     erecting a Chip Shop at the back of Spion Kop.
                     Here again, planning permission etc. has been
                     granted by our local council, and the work is
                     out to tender.
                      Our present disco unit is now being used as a
                      police control room, and the area below it is
                      being built in and made into a new disco unit.
                                                  ..
South Yorkshire County Council            11th November 1980


   In the embryo stage we axe considering extending our
   reception lounge, moving our kitchen area and building
   a new Directors* Room. This, of course, is all within
   our own domestic axea, and in no way will it interfere
   with admission or exit of the public; and the Leppings
   Lane end of the cax paxk tinder the South Stand which
   is an open axea, this particular axea along with the
   rooms which axe behind it axe being looked at with a
   view to constructing a social club.

If any further information is required, please do not
hesitate to contact me.

Yours faithfully,




Secretary,
7 u/*°
   (3ti4i|iiGiA^ Ordfajn            c^isajvyt&o uixu
         L»v».
 l) firv^tVtos.      26                   cfy-'-'Sjj*^ (fwn<v*Jh:
   A cU                                Ja^> $ e k
    (UcW'C&j         c«4»|v<aV- Ca           ix M m w ^     4*/
   m m       P w to b     <ff-    12    wo*mf.
       4 k                                     untAVHivJC   cU
  Aar                            ifcfdtVu^    fe   *$ 4;
  uvaxihun.

  tttd       "fea^        «»       btV u^      2- fe'
  Jb                             MM.fe4-cart.Mvj
 Hr£h-       JpwW><ra                         C*H<|s<Wi%'<
                                       lWvt«VwC»Sra^4r^
   |*TWWv^          IJV)#vSMn«**»*^  vV'   wAA
  ur*w9*>e              Ava- 4MX«^-a4oA#-- ~farvdfl
                        INSPECTION CE^riFICATE
                  v   - .........   i   '


       (as prescribed in the I .£.£. Regulations
              Electrical Equipment of Buildings)

Inspection Certificate to be given by the contractor or dther
person responsible for carrying out an inspection and test of an
installation, or part of ah installation, or by an authorised
person acting on his behalf.

I CERTIFY that the electrical installation a t :

          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
          Hillsborough,
          Sheffield.




has been inspected and tested, in accordance with the requirements
of Section E of the I.E.E. Wiring Regulations (14th Edition) and
that the results are as indicated below.

I RECOMMEND that this installation be further inspected and tested
after an interval of not more than .£^9. t-9.  ....... years, as
detailed below.                                   _________________

Items inspected or tested:


Method of earthing:                         Cable sheath.
                                            Addi tiop-a-1— overhead— line— oondthe^o r .
                                            Pr o t ective mu ltjrpjre— earthing (P. M.-B-r-)
                                            Bur-i-od c t r i p / r o d / p l a W .
                                            Eax*th leakage oireait break©**,
                                                 ■
                                                 v oltage oporat-e^i.
                                            Earth-leakago oiroui-t—bfffcakor,
                                                 ourront— op e F a ^ ^ t-.


The impedance of each earth-continuity conductor is satisfactory
(Regulation E.3).


The total earth-loop impedance is s a t isfactory/unoaticfaotor-y for
ready operation of the largest-rated excess-current protective
device relied upon for earth-leakage protection (Regulations E3-4).




Polarity throughout the installation is correct (Regulation E.2).
All single-pole control devices are in live conductors only
(Regulation E 2 ) .


The insulation resistance of the fixed wiring installation is not
less than 1 megohm (Regulations E6-B).


The insulation resistance to earth of each item of apparatus
tested separately is not less than 0.5 megohm (Regulations E.6
and E.9).                                                   ._
Each item of apparatus tested separately is in good serviceable
condition, except as stated below.


All flexible cords, switches, fuses, plugs and socket-outlets
are in good serviceable condition, except as stated below.


There is no sign of overloading of conductors or accessories
except as stated below.


Apparatus tested incl                   include portable appliances,




                                r&ato numbers— (if ■&&¥-)-:




Comments (if any) and departures from the Wiring Regulations:
 Maximum recommended period before next inspection and testing.
    South Stand and associated circuits ..........        5 years.
    Other Stands and buildings comprising
     the sports grounds .................                 2 years.
    Emerge^ULah»tirfg Circuits ...................        5 years.

Signed .. .              ................    Date

_      ,   , ,     j .      Eastwood & Partners
For and on behalf of:        ..................



              Address : ...??» X \ nM \ eM   Road ;
                            Sheffield Sll 9AS.




                                                         I
                 ELECTRICAL INSPECTION



     The installation referred to in the attached
Inspection Certificate, has been examined and tested in
accordance with Section E of the Institution of
Electrical Engineers Wiring Regulations.

     The inspection was conducted without dismantling
^any equipment or examining concealed wiring and is
intended only to provide an assessment of the electrical
safety of the installation.     It is not intended to
determine the condition or reliability of the
installation or the correct operation of equipment,
although we would comment on such defects when they are
apparent.

     The tests which involve disconnection of certain
circuits are electrical and provide a measure of
electrical safeness of the complete installation,
including concealed wiring, at the time of the test.
They would not however provide any guide to latent
mechanical faults in hidden cables due to lack of
support, tautness, sharp edges and other physical hazards

     The Inspection Certificate shows our comments (if
any) regarding apparent non-compliance with I.E.E.
Regulations and any failure to meet the Test requirements
We also indicate our recommendations when we consider
remedial action is necessary.
EMERGENCY LIGHTING - INSPECTION AND TEST CERTIFICATE
Occuper SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD.
Name and address of premises...Hillsborough, Sheffield.
Date of inspection... 11 August, 1980
-Installer's name and addressl.Bownes & Co. Ltd., Petre Street, Sheffield
                                                                 S4 7PZ.
                                                                       2.Bradwell Electrical Co. Ltd., Princess
                                                                         Street, Sheffield, S4 7UW.

We hereby certify that the emergency lighting installation or part
thereof, at the above premises has been inspected by us and complies
in all respects with the recommendations            of Part 1 of BS 5266
'Code of practice for emergency lighting            of premises' issued by the
British Stan<?lArrl<^<Hrna9-t--itution, for a category Ml installation

Signature.,
For and o n Lnerraxi ax                                      Eastwood & Partners, 23 Kingfield Road, Sheffield,
                                                                                                  Sll 9AS.
Date 11 August 19 80


Results of inspection of complete installation
Identification of exits and escape routes by signs
Ard signs correctly positioned?                                                                                                               YES
Are signs correctly illuminated?                                                                                                              YES
Are the details of the signs correct?                                                                                                         YES
Are self-luminous signs (if any) marked with the date upon
which the useful life of the sign will end?          NOT APPLICABLE

Illumination for safe movement
Are luminaires correctly positioned wherever necessary?                                                                                       YES
Does the installation everywhere meet the minimum requirements
for illuminance and uniformity?                                                                                                               YES
Are the correct lamps installed inall luminaires?                                                                                             YES

Wiring
Does the complete installation, or part thereof, comply with
the requirements of the 'Regulations for the Electrical
Equipment of Buildings'issued by the Institution of
Electrical Engineers?                                                                                                                         YES
Do the wiring and circuits comply with the requirements of
clause 9 of the code?                                                                                                                         YES
Have appropriate facilities been provided to simulate failure
of the normal supply?                                                                                                                         YES

Power source
If the main emergency lighting power source is a       NOT APPLICABLE
generator which has a run-up time in excess of 5 s
(or 15 s where applicable), has an additional battery-
operated power source been provided to cover the first hour
 ■P   —> •)*>   a   in   v   «*v   7   £   /■“* *1 *1 /—“.Y. t n v s   4   T * ■» v *   /n   ^   «   «"» .»“■>   —» 1   #•** * •«   T t r O
Have all secondary batteries satisfactory charging         •
facilities?                                                    YES

Results of switch-on and endurance tests
Time for emergency lighting to come into full operation
on simulated failure of the normal supply            less than \ second

Systems including secondary batteries
Following a period of operation at full load for the
specified duration of the category of the system under
test, or of 1 h for battery systems provided to
supplement generators, and a recharge period not
exceeding the specified maximum (24 h)will the battery
again support a further period of operation at full
load for the specified duration?                               YES
Has the battery been fully recharged following the
above test and the complete installation left in a
fully operating condition?                                     YES
SOUTH .YO RKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

        W ith the                      cf
                      f V U M                   -     s   m
  THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
  Trt H t.               /'k-vf.,. I W t s - w r ^ju^jvy n K
                 0^      ^          9v«^»-e^oc:i>s-vv)


                         FOR INFO RM ATION             dp.To.)

                                   _ JUTH YORKSHIRE
                                  COUNTY FIRE SERVICE.

                         FOR

                                  REC’D             S E P I#

                         for    c jQ j& to ii
                                   D.C.F

                                  iZ-A-O-

  u
      F ro m ,                              D ate
   D ep artm ent of Adm inistration
   County H all
   Barnsley                T el. Barnsley 86141 E x t J i ^ i .
^ ^36w>-€*-v\.                                       ^            C!MA \aM-K 8
 \4sC-d.tl ~W^nJt                                    vW-*e. |^ct \XU-tlA
                               \aS30M-t^A.            "ituL
 ( ^ v j^                C v__^t       'U a jl           CX^jfi C&JbiM'?
 w^>          "t&        TUe     =*-1p p «rVAE:>^v6^Ct                   ® 4 -—lW
 pvC-WCC                   erwfii. ,

~TX\Sv                                                                 C'Oo-e_%> v-^-C
 VCTd-vOC                "bo       W|> S-«^C                   -tfc\fe    ^ vUxc^E:
 0|6-erek                V-t lcotv.&r^i, v               b w t.           Vve^>
 CX^ HUi-£t                            tJ
                                        uji.                                vc-d(
 \ n Q * A j SJj E J p                           S   Q'w   C       '




                                                                                    9
              FAM/DV/MB/583                                3rd September, 1980.


                                 Mr. D. Vaughan               422


Dear Mr. Brownlow,

Safety of Sports Grottads Act, 1975

I have noted with concern recent media reports on incidents at football
matches, particularly at the recent one at Hillsborough between Sheffield
Wednesday and Newcastle United when a number of your officers received
injuries after the match had ended.

I fully appreciate the reasons why the police, both in South Yorkshire and
elsewhere, consider it preferable to contain possibly troublesome fans
(usually visting supporters) after a match has ended within a ground rather
than risk hooliganism, violence and damage outside the ground.^ However,
the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" issued by the Home Office does
recommend in paragraph 6.14.3 that all doors on an exit route should be
secured in the fully open position before the end of play, as it is
generally recognised that the period of greatest risk to crowd safety at
football grounds is at the time of leaving.

I am anxious that both the South Yorkshire Police and Football Clubs
should not be put at risk, either physcially or legally, by the locking
in" procedure. Indeed, the Hillsborough Stadium General Safety Certificate
requires (in paragraph 10) that all doors and gates which fora an egress
route should be opened and secured in the fully open position at a time
before the end of a match agreed between the Club and yourself. ^I would
suggest that if the practice is to be continued, consideration should be
given to the departing spectators being held back in a relatively safe
place, such as on the terrace, rather than being allowed to proceed to
the point of exit (as suggested by the Guide).

As you are .aware, the County Council set up four Area Officer Working
Parties to exercise its functions under the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act, 1975, the South Yorkshire Police being represented at both
Headquarters and Divisional level on such Working' Parties.

I would be the first to admit that, in the absence of designation of other
than the Hillsborough Stadium, progress in advising the other four football
clubs in South Yorkshire on the whole of the requirements of the Act has
not been as rapid as I would have liked. This has not generally been helped


 J. H. Brownlow, Esq.,
 Chief Constable,                                  ^ 7 the attitude.
 South Yorkshire Police,
 Police Headquarters,
 Snig Hill,
 Sheffield.
 S3 8LY
J. H. Brownlow, Esq.               -2-           3rd September, 1980.



by the attitude of the Clubs who, whilst accepting the principle, seem
reluctant to spend money on ground improvements which will be required
when designated but do not constitute an actual danger at the present
time.

On a more specific point, I understand that extensions to the barriers
at the foot of the Spion Kop at the Hillsborough Stadium designated
ground have been added at the request of the police, the wire mesh at
the top extending beyond the edge of the frame.

I have no record of the Sheffield Area Officer Working Party being
consulted prior to the Club being requested to undertake the work,
I mention this as it could be a source of embarrassment and lead to
accusations of inconsistency as the Sheffield Area Officer Working
Party at a meeting on 26th October, 1979 recommended against mesh
protrusion in the Sheffield United Pitch Security Fence. At that meeting
you were represented by Superintendents J. W. Gavins and T . Johnson.

To avoid any misunderstanding, I would stress that the foregoing is in
no way intended to be a criticism of the traditional role or method of
policing of football grounds or an attempt to intrude in your
operational responsibility. The views expressed are put forward in a
constructive spirit and in the hope that you will agree to the police
continuing to contribute to the Officer Working Parties and so achieve
consistency on all aspects throughout the County.

So far as recent media reports as to the setting up of ongoing igeetin s
                                                                    arfe
with the five South Yorkshire Football Clubs to combat hooliganism ar
concerned, bearing in mind the eventual designation of all rootoail
grounds by the Secretary o f State, I hope you will agree that it would
be useful if the County Council were to be represented at such meetings
by the Co-ordinator of the four Area Officer Working Parties, Mr. D . I.
Vaughan of my staff.

                                     Yours sincerely,




                                      Chief Executive
                                                            For the attention of
         T o                  Chief Fire Officer
                                                                                            R e t V r         HEW/JMB

       F r o m
                                                            Please contact. „      ,.,     O o r
                              Chief Executive               jei               D.Vaughan                 ;-.: D V / B B / 3 S 3 . ' - ; ' '
               -
                                                                                            Ref,    :



    S u b j e c t             Safety of Sports Grounds.Act,       1 9 7 5 .               - D a t e ^      '" 3 0 ..} . 80




                             Confirming the recent telephone conversation, which Mr8 /D;, ¥a,flgban\
                             of my office had with your'Fire-.-prevention Section* at ..the-''..request
                             •eC .the. Humberside County Councils a discussion on..various, aspects .. ..
                             off the. above named ..Act will be held on Thursday, 11th Segfcember.».1.9.§Q.

                                [ agreed, it would be very much appreciated if you could ar.r.ang>e:
                              'ti be represented to dis-cus.s practical aspects.' at-.-the-Si-ll'-shor.ough--'-
                     II   mo#iS|adiiini of the Sheffield Wednesday Club Ltd., at 2,00 p.m. on that .          ,
                              dj-te# - -. ' wUStt
                                            "     ..' '


vm imxsm mm rm m ®

                                                           Mir
                                                    shire County Council
                  F. A. Mallett, LL.B., C hief Executive                         County Hall
                                                                                 Barnsley
    k lj          J.C.H arris, M .A..LL.B.,(C antab), C ounty Secretary          South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                                                                                 Telephone: Barnsley
                  Department of Administration
                                                                                 (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                                 Telex: 547675


                   Our Ref:                        Your Ref:                     Date.:
                  DV/MH/583/5                     WE/KH/1610                   <f8th July, 1980
                   This matter isbeing dealt with by M r . D. Vaughan
                                                                                     j             Y ^ i\r\b H iR E '
                                                                                     • C O U N T Y FR E SERVICE

                                                                                         s'   A D Q'.’ A l'i 7 1£ 118
                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                  1 2 t   JUL!900
     Dear Sirs,                                                                                   f              •:
                                                                                    ; C .F .Q .
                                                                                               L _ ..
     Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 -                                           j s.c.r.o. |
     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited
                                                                                    i C .A .O .
     I thank you for your letter dated 15th July.
                                                                                    1
     After consultations with the Building Authority and in view of the fact
     that all of the barriers were tested prior to certification, the County
     Council is able to agree this year with the course of action which you
     propose* However, I would stress that this agreement is conditional
     upon it being recognised and accepted that it is without prejudice as
     to what may be required in future years under the provisions of paragraph
     25 (2) of the Safety Certificate.

     May I also mention the Certificates by:~

     (a)     a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer (as required by
              paragraph 24 of the Safety Certificate) as to all structural
              parts of the Stadium, excluding crush barriers and handrails;

     (b)     an independent Electrical Engineer (as required by paragraph
              26 of the Safety Certificate) as to the electrical installation
              within the Stadium; and

     (c)     an independent Electrical Engineer (as required by paragraph
              12(2) of the Safety Certificate) as to the condition of the
              Emergency Power Supply.

     I take it that if the Club has not already done so, they will shortly be
     requesting you to supply these.

                                                              Yours faithfully,




                                                               Chief Executive            -       ,
r    Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
     Consulting Engineers,
     Bowmaker House,
     23 Kingfield Road,
     SHEFFIELD,
                                                                          S|
u    Sll 9AS.                                                        _l
[E A S T W O O D & P A R T N E R S                                                                               BOWMAKER HOUSE
I       '         CoMVlting E n g U M fi                                                                         ■23 KINGFIELD ROAD .
                                                                                                                 SHEFFIELD S11 M S ’- .
    W . Mmtvm&d             B .E no, W tD , F .E n g . F.I.C .E.                                                 T el: (0742) 883871 >
                            F.t.Stm cS.E, F .O & . M .Cons.E.

    A. A. Wood              B .E ng, P h .D , C .Ene„ F J.C .E .
                            F A S tr o e tE . M J.W .E .S , M .Con«JE.

    A. G. Burdett           G .M , B.So.(E»>a). CJ&«0., M.I.C.E,                                                                               '-■A-
    ft. C. A. Eastwood     B -S e, C .E nfl, M J.C JE , n m t m c t E


G soH w y Spir             C i n * . . M A C .B , M.S. Much.E.

C. S. QraovM                B.En*„ C E otu M.i.CE,, M .i.Stru«.I.                                                 WE A H / 1 6 10
A. J . d o u g h           B.A., C .Ec*., M .C.I.S.5.,                                          Our   R e f:
J . A. Strangs             C.En*., M .I.S tru«.E .                                              Your Ref:
    Consultant:
A. L. Percy                M .T « d t.(H o n .}, B .S c., C E n g .. F.I.C.E.,
                           F .I.S tr u e tE ., F .U iu n .E .. M .R .T .P .I.




     Chief Executive,                                                                                             15 July 1980
     South Yorkshire County CounE^X^.
     County Hall,                                                                                        "mi i
     Barnsley,                      LV?;"A"
     South Yorkshire,                     Iv**v j l hoQ
     S70 2TN.


     For the attention of Mr . D V a u g h a n                                                        -- ---                              'AA ^•■   ■;

                                                                                                                                               'A.' A

     Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club L t d .
                  I believe that the County Council wish to have one fifth
     of the crush barriers tested each year so that they will all be
     tested during each five year cycle.                                                  The first batch were
     to be tested approximately seven months from the date of issue
     of the certificate of ground safety.
                  The Club has therefore asked us to carry out this years
     quota of tests and it is our intention to carry out the work
     commencing on Monday, 21 July.                                              There are approximately 185
     barriers in total and it would be possible to either test barriers
    .1, 6, 11 etc. or Nos. 1 - 37,approximately.                                                          It would be very
     much easier and quicker to test one block of 37 barriers rather
     than testing every fifth barrier throughout the ground because
     the testing equipment is very heavy and requires a considerable
     amount of man handling.                                            There should be a considerable saving in
     cost if all the barriers tested are in one block.
                  We have discussed the matter with M r .[                                                         ~| of the
     Sheffield^Bul'ldlng.".Surveyors, department and he sees no objection                                                                 /.             V-'-J
                                                                                                                                          /
     t o 'us taking the' easier ..and.-.therefore 'cheaper course ..                                                  Unless we
     hear from you to the contrary this is what we will do.

                                                            R egistered in England -   No. 1134331
                                                                  SHEET   2.
/
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




           Two copies of our report will be sent to you shortly
    after the testing is complete so that you can then forward
    one to the Building Surveyors department.


                                    Yours sincerely,




    c.c.   Mr. E . England
             YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

I        W ith th e C o m p lim en ts of

'   T H E C H IE F         E X E C U T IV E

                      ffifevCER * . VIEttAH .
    Ca-tfclfrvs ,      ‘‘fofV&Wg (jbmaSBh \-ytq. ^sV s-tct H » 6 l .
                       V   wisu U^   ^tcUfc,                    .
                           FOR INFORMATION


                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                           FIRE SERVICE
                           FOR
                                 H EADQUARTERS
                                 KEC’D         U A P R 198<h
                           FOR
                                 8   P«M
                                          t
                                 CAO.

     From _,                                    Dmtm 11
     D e p a rtm e n t of A d m in istration
     Courfty Hall
     B arnsley             Tel. Barnsley86141 E «,          ^ 2
                                                                                                  cp

                                  &      o



                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

              Note of a meeting between the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)
              and the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

                                Hillsborough Stadium :f*10th April7T980^)

PRESENT:

Representing the Club

E . England (Secretary)
Dr. W. Eastwood, (M essrs. Eastwood & Partners)

Representing the Working Party

3                                 (South Yorkshire      County F ire Service)
K. Mettam                         (South Yorkshire      County Fire Service)
                                  (City of Sheffield    Metropolitan D istrict Council)
B . Mole                          (South Y ork sh ire   Police)
                                  (City of Sheffield    Metropolitan D istrict Council)
D. I. Vaughan                     (South Yorkshire      County Council - Administration D ept.)

1.         Purpose of Meeting

In view of the F . A . Cup Sem i-Final at Hillsborough on 12th April and following recent
v isits by the disciplines represented on the Working Party, the Chief Executive of the
South Yorkshire County Council had raised with the Club by letter dated 31st March various
m atters which apparently were s till outstanding.

A letter of reply dated 3rd April had been received from the Club, as well as letters dated
4th and 8th April from the Club's Consultants, M essrs. Eastwood and P artners, giving
details of the present position.            J

2.         Inspection of Ground

The Working Party inspected the ground in company with the Club's representatives.

(i)        Training of Safety Stewards

           The Club had felt there was little point in pursuing the training of the Safety
           Stewards until the fire warning system had been com pletely installed, but with
           agreem ent the County Fire Service had instructed some stewards yesterday.
           A schedule specifying the duties and respon sib ilities was handed to the Club's
           representatives.

@i)        Exit Signs

           The Club's representatives felt that the exit signs generally had been sited where
           required and were of adequate siz e and/or illuminated.

           tt was agreed that there were a number which could be more advantageously sited
           and/or illuminated, and some which might be more effective with larger lettering

                                                   1.
and/or direction arrow s. The County Fire Service undertook to lia ise with
M essrs. Eastwood and Partners.

Emergency Lighting in the South Stand

As was evident, complete re-w irin g of the South Stand with separate circuits had
already com m enced, and the County Fire Service undertook to let M essrs. Eastwood
and Partners know their detailed requirem ents.

Fire Warning System

The Fire Warning System had been installed, except for the trickle charger and
battery equipment. These item s had been subject to delivery problem s, but the
system should be complete by the end of the month.

It was agreed that as regards the F . A . Cup Sem i-Final, the Police Communications
base which would be at the ground would a lso be used for Fire Service purposes if
necessary.

Sealing of Fire R esisting Fram es

The sealing of the fire resistin g door fram es against the supporting walls had generally
been carried out, but there were a sm all number which were now showing signs of
sm all gaps.

Fire Retardent Paint

The Club pointed out that "Nullifire" fire retardent paint had been specified on the
partitions within the South Stand but, as the Contractors were on holiday until
14th A pril, it was not possible to say with certainty at this time whether it had actually
been used.

Wired Glass                                                                   ■'    • '■

The Club pointed out that to the best of their knowledge wired g la ss had been used
wherever required by the County Fire Service.

The County Fire Service and the Police were generally satisfied that the sm all panes
of g la ss in the upper half of the wooden partitions within the South Stand would not in
normal circum stances be regarded as a fire and/or safety hazard. The Club agreed in
the longer term to consider the fitting of wired g la ss and, in the short term , to
consider fitting wooden battons as an interim m easure.

Sharp Edges to Steelwork on South-West Stand

Whilst there were a number of sharp corners on the supports, these were at a height
of at least seven feet. However, the Club undertook to round them off.

 P erim eter Fencing on the Spion Kop

The Club pointed out that this had been tested where feasible and the results forwarded
to the Chief Executive in January. A copy had been passed to the Building Authority on
30th January.
P ossible Step Obstruction on Upper Exit Area on Spion Kop

Whilst it was agreed that the erection of the barriers at the Upper Exit Area had left
a sm all adjacent area of approximately one foot wide by four foot long at a lower level
than the rem ainder of the e x it, it was felt that its position coupled with the crowd
flow at that point meant that it did not unduly create an hazard. However, the Club
undertook to give attention to it in the longer term .

Mesh Fencing under North Stand

In view of the normal crowd flow rates on the public side of the m esh fencing and the
fact that there was no public a c ce ss to its rea r , it was felt that the timber framed
m esh fencing under the North Stand providing security to storage areas was acceptable.
                                                           Football Club
                                                           Limited
                                                           Registered Office
                                                           Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW
Chairman:     H. E. McGEE                                  Telephone:0742-343123/4
Manager:      J. L. CHARLTON, O.B.E.                       Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6
Secretary:    E. ENGLAND                                   Registered No. 62478 England



             South Yorkshire County Council,
             County Hall,
             Barnsley,                                 (   ''3rd:''April. 1980
             South Yorks., S70 2TN




             Dear Mr. Mallett,

             SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

             Further to your letter of the 31st March, my Chairman
             is away for another three or four weeks; so you will
             appreciate that X cannot give you Board decisions or
             opinions. My personal reaction is surprise, as under
             the above act work has been going on continuously since
             it was started last summer and at no time do I feel
             that the Club have lagged behind in its actions to do
             everything that has been promised to be done.

             To take Item 4 of your letter «* this is very much in
             the progress, and we are in the hands of the contractors.

             As regards the training of safety stewards, this was being
             left until the warning system was installed® However, on
             receipt of your letter I did contact Mr. Vaughan and
             suggested that if he would like to contact the County
             Fire Service, all our stewards would be at the ground
             for our match on Easter Monday, and that might be an
             opportunity to deal with this particular item. The
             officers of the Fire Service had intimated to me
             previously that any time would be suitable to them.

             All your other items under Paragraphs 2 & 3 will be
             dealt with, and in fact a copy of your letter X have
             sent to Dr. Eastwood for his professional advice.

             Yours sincerely,




             Secretary
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                              BOWMAKER HOUSE
               Consulting    Engineers                                                                           23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                                 SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W . Eastwood            B .E ng„ P h .D „ F.Eng.. F .I.C .E ,
                                                                                                                 Tel.: (0742) 583871
                        F.I.Struct.E ., F .G .S , M .C ons.E .

A. A. Wood               B.Eng., P h.D .. C.Eng.. F .I.C .E ,
                         F.I.Struct.E ., M .I.W .E.S., M .C ons.E .                                          fp
A. G. Burdett           G .M ., B .S c .(E n g ), C .E ng., M .I.C.E.                                              'ik / .
R. C. A. Eastwood       B .S c., C .Eng., M .I.C.E.. M .I.Struct.E .

Associates t
Geoffrey Spir           C .E n j.. M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.

C. S. Greaves           B .E n j„ C .E n j.. M .I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.
A. J . Clough           B.A., C.Ent „ M.C.I.B.S.,M .I.M «ch.E.                                  Our R ef:        WE/KH/1610
J . A. Strange          C.Eng., M .I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                Your R ef:
C onsultant:
A. L. Percy             M .Tech.(Hon.), B.Sc., C .E n j., F.I.C.E ,
                        F .I.Struct.E „ F.I.Mun.E„ M .R.T.P.I.                SOUTH   YCRXSKi


                                                                                        - 9 APR 1980
                                                                                   COUNTY Hall
                                                                                  SOUTH                S/0 2IM
    The Chief Executive,                                                                                         4 April 1980
    South Yorkshire County Council,
    County Hall,
    Barnsley.


    For the attention of M r . D . Vaughan


    Dear Mr. Vaughan,                           *
                 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                               Safety of Sports Grounds Act
               Mr. England has sent me a copy of your letter of 31
    March and of his reply dated 3 April.
         I am in a little difficulty in replying to some of the
     points raised as                                                    is      on holiday until Tuesday,8
     April, and Mr. Strange is away until Monday, 14 April.
     Because we are carrying out re-wiring in the South Stand
     and                      .        is better equipped to deal with the commentson
     the Exit signs I will delay replying until he returns.
               With regard to the comments from the Building Control
     department I may need to reply in greater detail when John
     Strange returns from holiday.                                              However, my first comments
     are as follows
      (i) The cracks between the door frames and supporting wall
               will be re-inspected.                                     I can only assume that this is
               something which was not noticed in the inspection which
               we made and the inspections which were made by the
               Building Control department at the end of the work.                                                         It
               may be that due to shrinkage of the timber a slight
               gap has opened since that time.                                              We will, of course, have
                                                     Registered in England - No. 1134531
                                                                   SHEET



EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




        the cracks mortared or covered if this is needed, but
        might I suggest that minor matters of this kind do not
        need a letter or need to be dealt with between the
        periodic inspections which you and we will be carrying
        out.   . After all the next inspection is less than three
        months away.


   (ii) I have not been able to discuss the paint used on the
        south stand partitions with the Contractor, who is
        closed down until 14 April.        However, one of my assistants
        believes that Mr.           jias recently told Mr. Strange
        that Mr.         saw a painter with a tin of Dulux instead
        of the Nullifire which we specified.       It would have been
        appreciated if a telephone call had been made at the time
        so that we could have checked with certainty and if
        necessary taken corrective action.       I will write to you
        again on this point.


    (ill) Mr. Strange mentioned that Mr.             had queries in a
        recent telephone conversation whether wired glass has been
        used where appropriate.    Mr. Strange said that so far
        as we know wired glass had been used everywhere that the
        fire officer had requested it, and that the fire officer           •
        had of course, made his own inspection.        The conversation
        had ended with Mr.            saying that he would check with
        the fire officer.


    (iv) We presume that the reference to 'clearance* refers to
        the vertical headroom.    It will be recalled that some
        ingenuity was needed to devise this particular exit, as
        we were constrained by the levels in the existing stand
        and the level of the top of the terracing and the exit
        route.     Our drawings and calculations were submitted to         ,
                                                                      SHEET   3.


EASTWOOD & PARTNERS

                                                          ^     ^ 1   a /^




           the Building Control department for comment.        They
           inspected during construction and after the work was
           completed.    I am not amused by the fact that the
           headroom is now being queried.     In any case this is
           a matter for the fire officer, not the Building Control
           department.   With regard to the sharp edges I suggest
           we leave the matter until the inspection in June/July
           as the season is now almost over, and there is no
           time to agree further work and have it carried out before
           the season ends.


     (v)   The perimeter fencing at the north-east c o m e r of the
           Spion Kop has been appraised for condition and strength.
           Bearing in mind the likely pressures at that location,
           the tests which we carried out where possible, and that
           we are dealing with an existing ground, the fence is
           satisfactory in my opinion.


     (vi) We will look at the step obstruction, but again unless
           this is something which is obviously dangerous (in
           which case I would have expected the matter to be raised
           last December) suggest that discussion be left until the
           June/July inspection.


     (vii) The mesh fencing under the North stand was discussed
           with Mr. Jones of the fire service and he, like me, was
           satisfied that there is no hazard which justifies the
           making of changes.


           I will write to you again after Mr. Clough returns from
    holiday.
                                            Yours sincerely,

    c.c.    Mr. E. England
EA STW OOD & PARTNERS                                                                                 BOWMAKER HOUSE
                                                                                              i
                                                                                              t       23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                Consulting    Engineers
                                                                                                      SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W . Eastwood             B .E ng„ P h.D .. F.Eng.. F.I.C.E..                                          T e l: (0742) 583871
                         F .l.S truct.E „ F.G .S .. M .C ons.E .

A. A. Wood                B.Eng., P h.D .. C.Eng.. F.I.C.E..
                          F.I.Struct.E ., M .I.W .E.S., M .C ons.E .

A. G. Burdett            G .M ., B .S c .(E n g ), C .E ng., M .I.C.E.

R. C. A. Eastwood        B .S c., C.Eng., M .I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E .

Associates:
Geoffrey Spir            C .£ n j„ M.I.C.E.. M.I.Mech.E. '

C. S. Greaves            B .Enj., C .E n j., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.

A. J . Clough            B.A., C .E n j., M.C.I.B.S., M.I.Mech.E.
                                                                                        Our R ef:      WE/KH/1610
J . A. Strange           C.Eng., M .I,Struct.E.                                         Your Ref:
C onsu/tant:
A. L. Percy              M .Tech.(Hon.), B.Sc.. C .E n j.. F.I.C.E.,
                         F.I.Struct.E .. F.I.Mun.E., M .R.T.P.I.




                                                                           F
The Chief Executive,                                                                                   8 April 1980
South Yorkshire County Council,
County Hall,
Barnsley.                                                                       cc: :r uu,
                                                                               soua x o m m s S70
For- the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan



 Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                                     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                                    Safety of Sports Grounds Act - 1975
               I have now been able to talk with Mr.                                                regarding
the exit signs and have pleasure in replying to your points
 ii, iii and iv.


Para ii
               I find the exit signs were erected under the supervision
of John Strange who is still                                             on holiday.         I have quickly
 looked through the certificate of ground safety and have not
been able to find any reference to lettering size.                                                    Because
you do not say which exit signs have not been sited in
accordance with the plans it is a little difficult for me to
comment and I suggest this matter be left in abeyance until
John Strange returnsr                                     With regard to the illumination of the
exit signs, it may be that you are unaware that we are rewiring
the South Stand and it may be that the signs you have in mind
will be appropriately illuminated by both systems when this
work is complete.



                                                       Registered in England - No. 1134531
                                                                      SHEET



EASTWOOD £r PARTNERS




   Para iii
          We have not been able to understand what it is
   which you say does not comply with the requirements
   of paragraph 12 of the certificate.     The agreement
   with the Fire Service (Mr. K. Jones) was set out in our
   letter of 12 December.     So far as we can see the only
   possible variation from that agreement is that because
   of the rewiring which is now taking place tfe did not
   implement the agreed measures in the case of the two exits
   referred to in the fourth paragraph of our letter of 12
   December.


   Para iv
          The fire warning system is complete except for the
   supply of the trickle charger and battery equipment.       These
   items were ordered some months ago and if the original
   delivery dates had been adhered to would have been installed
   by now.     Unfortunately the suppliers have failed to
   deliver on time.    We have been applying appropriate pressure
   and the latest information is as set out in the attached
   copy letter from our electrical contractors which was dated
   24 March.     As you will see from this, two of the four
   outstanding items have very likely been delivered by now
   but the signal indicator panel was not expected for four
   weeks from 24 March and the industrial batteries complete
   with steel stand and ancillary equipment was due to be
   delivered by Friday, 25 April.


          I understand that there is to be a meeting at the ground
   on Thursday, 10 April, when these can no doubt be discussed.


                                    Yours sincerely,



   c.c.   Mr. E. England
% ,*V*




    Brad w e ll E lec trical C om pany L im ited
    Re gi st er ed in London No. 745352

                                                                                 E L E CT RI CAL E N G I N E E R S
                                                                                                            Re gis ter ed Of fice :
                                        Electrical Installations & Plant Maintenance                       VOLT WORKS/PRINCESS STREET. SHEFFIELD S4 7UW
                                        Motor Re-w inds & Repairs H.F. & L.F. Furnaces                     TELEPHONES 29906 & 29907
                                                                                                            TELEGRAMS VOLT SHEFFIELD 4
                                                                                                            Telex Nos. CHAMCO G 54208
                                                                                                                       CHAMCO G 547676

     Your Ref; WE/TB/SB/l6l0
     Our Refs GKP/DH                                                                                               24th March 1980.


     Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
     Bowmaker House,
     23 Kingfield Road,
     SHEFFIELD.
     Sll 9AS    Eastwood         Paitnc*^                                                   For the attention of Mr. Bower
                                   2 5 MAR 1980                                              i
     Dear -SiJs, R cc'd ......................                                   '."L I..


                                          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited
                                          Installation of Fire Alarm & Mods to Public
                                          _________ Address Systems.______________

          Res The above works we have rechecked delivery dates of the Gents equipment
     with our suppliers and we are advised from works on Friday 21st March 1980 as
     followss

              Chloride Gents Model 3202    Battery Charger                                                                    7 days
                    "      • Model 3213/D Signal Indicator Panel                                                              k weeks
                    "        Model 9122 -01 6 end ofline resistors                                                            7-10 days.

              Gents Industrial Batteries

                        2b - YAP9, steel stand and ancillary equipment - Friday 25th April 1980.


          The above delivery dates of the equipment will prevent our works completion
     for the end of March 1980.

          Taking the above into account we will endeavour to complete the works as soon
     as possible.

                                                     Yours faithfully,
                                            p.p. ERADWELL ELECTRICAL COMPANY LIMITED.




      (DIRE CT OR S E. B R A D W E L L ( C H A I R M A N ) O.J. B R A D W E L L R.A. B R A D W E L L J. S P I T T L E H O U S E A.G. S L A T E R
               D V /M H /5 8 3 /5           E E /C B




D e ar Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
                                     !



The County Council is disturbed to find that, following recent bis Its by the disciplines
re p re se n te d on the Officer Working Party, there a r e s till outstanding at the Hillsborough
Stadium vario us m a tte rs which it w as required or a g re ed would receiv e attention.

For     instance, the Chief F lro O fficer Informs me that:-

(I)       W hilst the County F ir e S ervice offered a s s is ta n c e in the training-of safety
          stewards a s to th e ir actions in an emergency (as re q u ire d by P a ra g ra p h D
          of Schedule 2 of the G en eral Safety Certificate), to the t e s t of my knowledge
          no step s have been taken in th is direction}

(II)      C o ntrary to Paragraph 11 of Schedule 2, som e exit signs having inadequate
          le tte rin g size have been provided and s ite d otherwise than in accordance with
          the certificate plans, w hilst the exit signs a t the r e a r of the South Stand
          are not illuminated by both the normal and emergency lighting,

(ill)      The em ergency lighting provisions In the South Stand and the gangways
           leading from I t do not comply with the requirements of Paragraph 1:2 of the
           Certificate, as amended by my le tte r of 21st December, 1979;

(iv)       No fir e warning system has yet been provided to satisfy the requirements of
           Paragraph 13 of Schedule 2,

The Building Authority had advised the Club’s Consultants, M e ssrs. Eastwood and
P a r tn e r s , th a t th e following m a tte rs re q u ire attention

(i)       The fire resistin g door fram es to be sealed against the supporting w alls;




Mr. E . England,
Secretary,                                                           /0-)
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
Hillsborough,
SHEFFIELD,
S6 1SW.
M r. E . England                            -   2   -                   31st K a rch , 1930




(ti)    Confirm ation that fire retardent paint has been used on the partitions within
        the South Stand;

(ill)   w h e th er w ired glass has been used where appropriate on th e partitions
        within the South Stand for fire and/or safety purposes;

(iv)    W hether the new sta ir construction a t the South-West Stand hag adequate
        c le a ra n c e , with the sharp edges to the steelw ork being r e m o v e d and
        c onsideratio n being given to providing a tim ber fascia;

(•/)    The p e rim e te r fencing at the N orth-East c o rn e r of the Splon   Eop   to be
        a p p raised fo r condition and streng th ;

(vi)    The upper exit a re a on. the Spion Kop to be checked for gter> o b strm tlc ru

(vii)   The mesh fencing under the North Stand to be a s se ss e d for strength and
        potential h aza rd to crow d s u rg e s .

The County Council is naturally concerned in the legal sen se that som e o f the conditions
attached to the Safety C ertificate a r e apparently not being satisfied, bat equally in a
practical sen se It has in m ind th a t the majority of spectators who will be attending
the F . A . Cup Sem i-Final on 12th A pril will not be fam iliar with e ith e r the lay-out
o r fa c ilitie s a t the Stadium .

It may well be that the Club has given attention to the points raentior.ed U> the la st
few days, but perh ap s yon will le t m e have y o u r com m ents as a r a tte r of 'irgv-yyy.

                                                        Y ours faithfully,




                                                        Chief Executive
Chief Executive                  nr* 0. Vaughan

Chief Fire Officer


Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club


Following an inspection of the stadium by officers of the Fire
Service I am concerned to note that the undermentioned work is
still outstanding.

1.   Although the Club was informed that ths Fire Service
     would be willing to aeaist in the training of eafety
     stewards aa to their actiona in an emergency ae
     required by Schedule 2, Section 9, of the eafety
     certificate ieeued by the County Council, no progreee
     haa been made in this matter.

2.   It was required that exit eigns of euitable eize
     should be provided and their poeitioning agreed on
     Bite. The eafety certificate etipulatee that the
     signs shall be provided and maintained to the
     eatiefaction of the Chief Fire Officer.

     The recent inepection haa diacovered that without
     further discussion, eoms eigne having inadequate
     lettering size have been provided and the aiting has
     not complied with the detail of the certificate plan.

     The eigns at the rear of the South Stand are not
     illuminated by both the normal and emergency lighting.

     These items do not appear to eatiefy the requiremente
     of the eafety certificate.

3.   The emergency lighting provisione in the South Stand
     and the gangwaye leading from it do not comply with
     the requiremente of the eafety certificate.

4.   No fire warning eyetem hae yet been provided to eatiefy
     the requirement of Schedule 2, Section 13(i) of the
     eafety certificate.

     nr. England, Secretary to the Club, hae etated that
     they have put out for tender for the installation of
     a fire warning system but did not expect the work to
     be completed before the Football Association's Cup
     SamioFinal.

As the conditions attached to the safety certificate are not being
eatiefied you may wish to have the Club clarify the situation in
writing/! _________



Chl.t-p^rTTme.r ^
     IJ
    SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

                                                For the attention of          Your''
     T«>        A.C.O. Wright
      — .r......... ..-.. .... ...— ..- Please contact
                                                                              Our
    From f Station Officer
         i              .   -— — ---- . Tel.                                  Ref. *


    Subject     Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975«
                Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
                                                                              Date       .. .
                                                                                       20 3 80


                Following an inspection of the above premises on the 12th of March, 1980
                "by Station Officer Binnington and myself, the undermentioned conditions
                tinder the        were still outstanding.
                         c.oJ»k|u«£^
                1. The training of safety stewards had still not "been completed.
                     Mr. England (Club Secretary) stated that the safety stewards were
&                    familiar with most of the requirements but had not yet received
                     instractions on raising the alarm or the correct method of extinguishing
                     a small fire.

                     These requirements are indicated on Schedule II section 9 of the above


                2.    Some of the exit signs do not come up to the required standard as
                      indicated in Schedule II section ll(l) of the above      for the following
                     Reasons:                                              -/«***

                     (a) Some of the signs have inadequate lettering sizes and are not in the
                     positions indicated on the requirement plan.

                     (b) The exit#Aat the rear of the south stand were not illuminated by        .
                     both the nonakl lighting Nandthe emergency lighting^"

                3. Parts of the south stand and gangways leading from it are still not
                   illuminated by both main and emergency lighting as indicated in
                   Schedule II section ll(2) of the above 4taA.        <.

                4. Ho fire alarm systems have been provided as required by Schedule II
                   section 13(l) of the above ^8st£“^r. England stated that they have put
              !    out for tenders for the installation of the fire alarm system, but did
                   not expect the work to be completed before the P.A. Cup Semi-Final.
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTYvCOUNCIL
MEMORANDUM
       I                              I For the attention of        Your   FP19/2/4       ;
 To    jChief Fire Officer            !
                                                                    Ref.   HEW/JMB        !

       Chief Executive                  Piease contact]). Vaughan   Our                   •
From                                                                       DV/MB/583/5    |
                                        TeL Ext, 4 22               Ref.
                                                     -
                                                                                          f

Subject Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975                          Date   14.3.30        |
        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club


        Confirming the conversation which Mr, D. Vaughan of my staff had yesterday
        with your Assistant Chief Fire Officer (Fire Prevention), Mr. H. E, Wright,
        you will be aware that it has been announced that the F.A. Cup Semi-Final
        between Arsenal and Liverpool will be played at the Hillsborough Stadium on
        12th April,

        Despite the fact that the Certificate in respect of th.e Stadium was issued
        as comparatively recently as 21st December, 1979, I feel that the Sheffield
        District Officer Working Party will have to review the situation at the.
        Stadium.
                                                /
        I have asked the Police and the Building Authority to let me. have their
        comments on any outstanding matters for which they have primary responsihiii tr
        as soon as possible and certainly by the end of the month.

        Could you kindly let ice have your comments on any outstanding matters for
        which you have primary responsibility in the same time scale.




                             OV/'vw

          \)
