  NOTE RE PRELIMINARY MEETING TO DISCUSS POLICING ARRANGEMENTS AT SHEFFIELD
                  WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB FOR SEASON 1989/90
        2.00 PM TUESDAY 18 JULY 1989 - DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE'S OFFICE


PERSONS PRESENT

P Hayes Esq QPM MA'LLB, Deputy Chief Constable
Chief Superintendent Nesbit F Division Commander designate
Chief Inspector Bettison

It is understood that the Local Authority are pressing all members of the Safety
at Sports Ground Working Committee to contribute to the completion of a revised
safety certificate for Hillsborough. Mr Bownes who represents the Local
Authority is proceeding on the basis of the final address to the Hillsborough
Inquiry by Treasury Counsel, Mr Collins Q C .

Mr Hayes suggests that our response should be to echo the concern about the
previous lack of urgency in completing the revision of the Certificate and
support Mr Bownes1 newfound enthusiasm to complete the task. However, Mr
Collins' final address is not accepted as the authoritative guide to future
policing arrangements at Hillsborough. Lord Justice Taylor is still preparing
his interim findings and recommendations and it is suggested that we await the
publication of that report. Expediency is a proper objective but it should not
have primacy over accuracy and safety in making sure that the revised document
is correct. Therefore, Mr Hayes proposes our energies should be conserved until
such time as the Inquiry has published its preliminary findings.



Notwithstanding these proposals, it is necessary to discuss the forthcoming
season with Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Mr Nesbit points out that the
first game, on 19 August 1989, is at home to Norwich City. He envisages no
problems in respect of policing that football match. Norwich City are expected
to attract only a few hundred 'away' supporters causing few difficulties for the
police commander.

The second home match of the season, Sheffield Wednesday v Everton, is during
the evening of 30 August 1989. This match is expected to create certain
difficulties:

The Local Authority have intimated that they are to disallow the use of Leppings
Lane terraces by way of a„prohibition order on that part of the ground. South
Yorkshire Police support the Local Authority decision. Furthermore, if fans are
allowed partial use of the terracing, particularly enclosures 1 and 2, then
other problems would arise (viz: there is a dangerous wall at the rear of these
enclosures which connects Gate C to the South side of the stadium; also the fans
could easily move from pens 1 and 2 into pens 3 and 4 which have dangerous
structures and where there is a considerable amount of debris).

 The Force position should be this - because of the physical difficulties at the
 ground as described above and to allow all interested parties (ie: the SYP,
 the Club, the Local Authority) to consider the Tribunal findings and to
 formulate plans for future arrangements at Hillsborough we should ask for the
 Everton game to be postponed. The difficulties, listed above, justify such a
 request.
                                       -   2   -




If the match is not postponed for any reason then the following arrangements
      app^y. The 'away' supporters, at least, should be subject to ticketing
arrangements- it.Is anticipated that 4,500 could be accommodated in the
West Stand without any difficulties. Chief Superintendent Nesbit recommends a
contingency plan for the.Everton game and any similar fixtures as fo ow

The North West terrace, enclosures 6 and 7, have a capacity of least 2,700    If
the Force are obliged to police such a game, then any n°n ticket ho    g
supporters can be accommodated by payment through turnstiles 8 to 16 at tne
Leppings Lane end which give access onto the North West terrace. This would
thwart the problems that might arise with hundreds of ticketless fans outside
the ground.
If the game is to go ahead then we should point out to the Club all the problems
we envisage and ask them how they intend to address those problems.


Discussion then turned to consideration of a list of responsiblities produced by
Chief Superintendent Nesbit.  (Appended hereto). Mr Hayes makes the point that
the list must be qualified with the view that Lord Justice Taylor has not yet
published his interim report or findings and that the list represents an
interregnum document only. The list was then reviewed and other matters arose
in discussion that do not appear on the list, for example:

i      What are the Club doing about the provision of cutting equipment etc

ii     What do the Club intend to do about manning perimiter track gates and
        radial fence gates

 iii    Should not the referee be consulting with police commanders before going
        ahead with the kick off?

 It is to be stressed, however, that any joint recommendations and J ^ e e m e n t s are
 pending further discussion'in the light of Lord Justice Taylors Report. Mr
 Haves impressed on Chief Superintendent Nesbit that we are attending a m            g
 on 19 July 1989 with representatives,.of Sheffield Wednesday            £lub merely
 to ask questions. Our list might provide discussion points but not
 authoritative list of 'wills and won ts .
                        **
  A general discussion then took place on the question of communications. Mr
  Hayes suggests that, in the light of the difficulties at the Semi Final, we
  should demand that a Steward be 'on tap', ie: immediately available and
  connected into the ground radio system. A point was also raised about our own
  communications set up. In case of breakdown of the communications equipment
  we need to have some contingency plan. That may be the provision of a back up
  set at every football match. Mr Hayes spoke to Chief Inspector Creaser,
  Communications Department, about this matter, Chief Inspector Creaser to
  report back. An alternative option may be to switch to sub divisional
  channel. If this option is preferred then instructions must be written into
  future operational orders to enable the switch-over to be made.

    Mr Nesbit will meet with representatives of Sheffield Wednesday Football
    Club at Hillsborough Stadium on the morning of Wednesday 19 July 1989. Mr
    Hayes requests a report following that meeting, but the aim must be to define
    and clearly understand our separate responsibilities until further reviewed
    once the Inquiry findings are available.
                     UES^o ^ rS

          WILL                                WON'T



PUBLIC ORDER                        DISTRIBUTION AND DIRECTING
                                    SPECTATORS


TRAFFIC CONTROL                     COUNTING SPECTATORS



SEGREGATION IN THE GROUND/          PROVISION OF FIRST AID EQUIJ
JOINTLY WITH THE CLUB


SEGREGATION OUTSIDE/OURS SOLELY     NUMBERS OF FIRST AID PERSON.!



CROWD SIZE ESTIMATION IN ADVANCE/   NUMBER OF AMBULANCES
JOINTLY WITH CLUB                   (AND TYPE) REQUIRED



SUPPLY OPERATIONAL ORDER            PERFORMANCE OF STEWARDS



                                    DIRECTION OF STEWARDS
                                    REGARDING DUTIES


                                    RESPONSIBILITY FOR TRAINING



                                    KEEPING GANGWAYS/EXITS CLEAJ



                                    MANNING ALL EMERGENCY EXITS
                                    INCLUDING TRACK GATES


                                    FIRE EQUIPMENT/TRAINING



                                    OPENING GATES CONTINGENCY
                                    FOR CRUSHING
                             TO DISCUSS

                            {IMPROVEMENTS)


NO HOME FANS LEPPINGS LANE

TURNSTILES - LEPPINGS LANE

THE WALL SOUTH STAND LANE
SIGNING FOR ENTRANCES/TURNSTILES

RADIO COMMUNICATIONS
TAPE RECORDING FACILITY AVAILABLE

CERTIFICATE
P A SYSTEM TEST IN OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS (UPGRADING)

CCTV - AND MAINTENANCE CONTRACT
PROVISION OF AMBULANCE LIAISON     OFFICERS AND SEATING   FOR THt

PROVISION OF A SUITABLE POLICE     CONTROLROOM (-S==*rKrcOxNG -&i

VISUAL DISPLAYS FOR CROWD DISTRIBUTION
REGISTER OF STEWARDS - TRAINING - DUTIES (W H E R E / WHEN/HOW) E

TELEPHONE IN GYMNASIUM
REPORT OF MEETING TO DISCUSS INTERIM POLICING ARRANGEMENTS AT HILLSBOROUGH AT
THE START OF SEASON 1989/90

Meeting held in the Secretary's office, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club at
10.30 am on Wednesday 19 July 1989

PERSONS PRESENT

Chief Superintendent Nesbit, F Division Commander Designate
Superintendent Marshall, Deputy Commander, F Division
Superintendent Sleath, FI Sub Divisional Commander
Chief Inspector Bettison
Inspector Sewell, FI Sub Division Football Liaison Officer
Mr G Mackrell, Secretary SWFC
Mr K Addy, Director SWFC (with responsibility for ground structures)

The meeting began with a tour of the ground, paying particular emphasis to the
West End of the ground, Leppings Lane stand and terraces. The Local Authority
have still to determine what parts of that section of the stadium can and cannot
be used. However, Mr Mackrell suggested discussions on the basis that all parts
of the ground will be released for use prior to the start of the 1989/90
football season.

It was agreed that use   of the West Stand (seating area) presents no problem as
far as accommodation, access, stewarding and policing arrangements are
concerned. Use of theterracing depends to a great extent upon the findings and
recommendations of the   TaylorInquiry.

Mr Mackrell put forward a proposal on behalf of SWFC. He suggested the use
of pens 1 and 2 for standing accommodation being serviced by turnstiles A - G.
Mr Nesbit recorded his concern about the use of pens 1 and 2: the perimeter wall
that runs alongside the entrance to pens 1 and 2 is in a dangerous condition and
presently shored up. Furthermore, use of pens 1 and 2 present the opportunity
for supporters to climb into pens 3 and 4 which are patently unsuitable for
accommodation of spectators. The survey of pens 3 and 4 revealed that barriers
are missing, that perimeter fencing is bent away from the stanchions and there is
some debris on the terraces themselves. Mr Mackrell points out that it is not
envisaged that Sheffield Wednesday Football Club will use pens 3 and 4 for the
forseeable future, but,for psychological reasons as much as anything, it is in
hand to have the perimeter fences repaired to the standard that existed on 15
April 1989. Chief Superintendent Nesbit repeated his reluctance to use pens 1
and 2 as spectator accommodation and pointed to pens 6 and 7 as being the
preferred option for standing accommodation. Mr Mackrell suggested that a
problem exists with the present safety certificate that demands segregation of
numbers going into the North West terrace - pen 7. Chief Inspector Bettison
pointed out that the terrace in question has a capacity of 2,700 and provided
that the facility existed for counting in those 2,700 spectators then they could
be safely accommodated in that section of the ground.

Mr Mackrell suggests the philosophy upon which his considerations are being
made. He envisages 3 phases of      planning

i     What to do now
ii    What to do when Lord Justice Taylor'sfindings  are known
iii   What to do when the safety certificate ispublished.

Chief Superintendent Nesbit concurred with that philosophy and pointed out that
any discussion and resolutions made today must be qualified on the basis that
Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations may supercede the discussions and
resolutions.

Chief Superintendent Nesbit raised the question of the Everton game scheduled to
take place at Hillsborough on 30 August 1989. Mr Mackrell interrupted saying he
envisaged no problems, he had already checked and discovered 3,000 spectators
attended from Everton for the corresponding fixture last season which was held
on a Saturday afternoon. This year the Wednesday evening fixture should attract
fewer spectators than that. Chief Superintendent Nesbit raised the question of
a pilgrimage from Liverpool to the fateful Leppings Lane terraces. Mr Mackrell
disagreed. Chief Superintendent Nesbit repeated that any operational decisions
regarding the Everton game must be reviewed in the light of the Taylor Inquiry
recommendations. Mr Mackrell proposed that the recommendations in Treasury
Counsel's final submission might prove to be a working guide. Mr Nesbit felt
that this could not be taken as an authoritative document. Mr Mackrell returned
to the subject of using pens 1 and 2. Chief Superintendent Nesbit repeated his
concerns regarding the wall and the accessibility of pens 3 and 4. Mr Mackrell
recorded his reticence and pointed out that if the terraces are not used in the
first few games then this might set an unwelcome precedent. Superintendent
Marshall pointed out that if we continue the arrangements as they existed before
then we will encounter at some stage the problems of 15 April 1989. Mr Mackrell
disagreed pointing out that Sheffield Wednesday football club is unlikely to
attract an FA Cup Semi Final game for the forseeable future and that other games
will not attract the same numbers. Chief Superintendent Nesbit brought the
conversation back to the Everton game. He proposed that if the game was to go
ahead particularly retaining the fixture on 30 August 1989, then the
arrangements should be as follows

Everton supporters should be restricted to tickets beforehand and should be
accommodated solely in the West Stand which has a maximum capacity of 4,400. The
police would suggest in addition a contingency plan to cater for any ticketless
fans who might attend the game. Mr Mackrell raised the question of pricing. If
fans are unwilling to pay for stand tickets they can always turn up and pay a
lower price to stand on the Kop. Chief Superintendent Nesbit assured Mr
Mackrell that that possibility could be removed by policing arrangements that
would segregate the Everton supporters to Leppings Lane. Mr Addy agreed with
Chief Superintendent Nesbit's view and reiterated some of the problems that
might arise if fans were allowed to stand on the Leppings Lane terraces. Mr
Mackrell agreed and suggested a review of the fixture list to see which games
would be amenable to such arrangements and which would warrant, in his view,
different arrangements.

Despite this suggestion the conversation centred upon the first two home games
of the season, Norwich on 19 August 1989 and Everton on 30 August 1989. Mr
Mackrell pointed out that as far as Norwich is concerned he is expecting limited
numbers and that as far as Everton is concerned he is happy with the police
suggestions. He proposed an agreed policy for Norwich and Everton to be
reviewed thereafter in the light of further information which might be to hand.
Mr Addy raised the question of policing arrangements in the West Stand for these
games. Chief Superintendent Nesbit pointed out that the fans may seek to drop
wreaths down or get into pens 3 and 4 from the stand area. No firm policy was
established. Chief Superintendent Nesbit asked about re-arranging the Everton
fixture through the Football League to a later time in the season. Mr Mackrell
was loathe to do that stating that it was late in the day, that he had already
rearranged one match, and that, in any event, he had written to the police
asking for their comments on the fixture list and in the police response the
Everton fixture had not been raised.

(This last point appeared to be a telling point).

Mr Mackrell proposed that any overflow from the West tand could be accommodated
in the North Stand. Chief Superintendent Nesbit pointed out that the police
were against that arrangement because it would be expensive in resource terms to
segregate the opposing fans in the same stand. Discussion then took place about
who would use the North Stand and through which turnstiles they would enter the
stands. Mr Mackrell pointed out that he was against serving the North Stand
solely from Penistone Road. Chief Superintendent Nesbit said that for the
Everton match in particular he did not want 4,500 at Leppings Lane trying to
enter through some turnstiles and for other turnstiles in the same location to
be used by Sheffield Wednesday supporters seeking entrance to a different part of
the ground. Mr Mackrell suggested that he had been criticised at the Inquiry
for acquiescing to police demands for turnstile arrangements. Chief Inspector
Bettison,who had heard that part of the evidence at the Inquiry,was able to
correct Mr Mackrell by pointing out that he was criticised for the turnstile
arrangements that Sheffield Wednesday Football Club had formulated in the light
of the police segregation policy, not for acquiescing to police suggestions
about turnstile arrangements.    The police had never made such suggestions.
Chief Superintendent Nesbit, on a concilliatory note, pointed out that he had no
intention of changing arrangements that have stood for a number of years
without good cause, but it was necessary to underscore what had gone before and
to assess planned arrangements for the future. Mr Mackrell pointed out that
changes to the arrangements might have to be made in the light of
recommendations resulting from the Inquiry, for example, he stated that SWFC
were already assessing the possibility of making Leppings Lane end wholly seated
accommodation. Chief Superintendent Nesbit brought the conversation back to the
Everton game. Mr Mackrell pointed out that he had already spoken to the
 Secretary of Everton football club and they are expecting it to be a ticket only
 fixture for Everton supporters. Mr Mackrell suggests sending them 4,000 tickets
 for the West Stand (400 below maximum). Chief Superintendent Nesbit then
declared the police contingency to utilise pen 7 for any ticketless fans that turn
up over and above the 4,000. This was met with general agreement, the Club for
 their part would maintain the confidentiality of such a contingency plan.

A general discussion took place about access in the North Stand. It was clear
that the Club as represented by Mr Mackrell and Mr Addy, were firmly against a
policy of serving the stand from the Penistone Road north entrances only.
During this conversation Mr Mackrell raised the spurious objection that there
were insufficient turnstiles at Penistone Road. Superintendent Marshall made
the calculation that the 12 turnstiles that were available could accommodate
9,000 people within an hour whereas the 23 turnstiles that were available at
Leppings Lane end could not accommodate the West End plus a portion of the North
Stand within an hour. The argument about the sufficiency of turnstiles at
Penistone Road was thought to be a 'stalking-horse' on the part its author Mr
Mackrell. Common agreement was reached on the following matters. A policy
would exist for the first two games of the season after which the policy would
be reviewed. The policy had to have the proviso that any recommendations of
Lord Justice Taylor would supercede any agreement. Notwithstanding this
qualification, the West Stand only would be used for ’away* supporters, which
had a capacity for 4,000 spectators. Sheffield Wednesday football supporters
will be accommodated in the three remaining sections of the ground. For the
Everton game pen 7 would be utilised as an 'over—flow' for any ticketless fans
that needed to be accommodated within the ground. For this purpose, Mr Mackrell
k



                                         - 4 -

    agreed to have at least 2 turnstiles manned In case the contingency arose.

    As far as the North Stand was concerned it was agreed that this would be for the
    exclusive use of Sheffield Wednesday supporters, the police, for their part,
    wish this to be accessed from Penistone Road only. Both Mr Mackrell and Mr Addy
    wish to record their objections to such a policy and this matter remains
    unresolved.

    Discussion then took place about the turnstile arrangements from the West Stand.
    It was agreed that turnstiles A - G would be used that; the separating wall in
    the concourse would be used to prohibit movement throughout the concourse; that
    personnel barriers would be erected at the South West corner to
    prevent spectators going to pens 1 and 2; that the tunnel gates would be
    padlocked closed and that all spectators going into the West Stand would enter
    through the entrance in the South West concourse area. Included in this
    discussion was consideration of stewarding arrangements in this area. The
    conclusion was that Mr Mackrell will draft proposals for deployment and duties
    of stewards throughout the ground and forward same to F Division for police
    approval.   This was agreed.

    Chief Inspector Bettison made the general point that policing throughout the
    ground should be a more reactive role (responding to stewards requests etc) than
    it has been of late. This was accepted by the Club. Mr Mackrell promised to
    send the draft proposals re stewards in the near future so that the final
    document would be prepared in readiness for the stewards evening before the
    season starts when the precise role of stewards could be 'thrashed out'.

    Other aspects were then considered as follows

    The game v Manchester City. All parties agreed to a 12 noon kick off on New
    Years Day. Mr Mackrell would progress these arrangements.

    PC Guest, who had been previously used in a liaison capacity in the Club Control
    Room, would be withdrawn. The Club accepted this and accepted their duty to
    monitor turnstile counts themselves and inform the police where necessary. Mr
    Mackrell was asked about the provision of a similar monitor in the Police
    Control Room. He agreed to look into the matter.

    Communication with Club officials was then considered. It was established that
    Mr Mackrell was the Safety Officer for the Club and that he was the point of
    contact for any matters which needed Club attention. Chief Superintendent
    Nesbit asked about contact before, during and after football matches held at
    Hillsborough suggesting the provision of a 'go-between' steward. Mr Mackrell
    rejected such a decision, pointing out that he had a radio set and would provide
    the police control with a similar set, there is a land line to his office, and
    he would provide, in writing, details of precisely where he would be during the
    game.

    Perimeter track gates. Chief Superintendent Nesbit suggested that these should
    really be a steward's responsibility. This was agreed by all parties. Chief
    Superintendent Nesbit suggested that the police serial would continue to be
    deployed to the perimeter track and that they would have a responsibility for
    the South and North sides of the ground but that the perimeter track in front of the
    West Stand and Spion Kop would be stewarded with stewards having responsibilites
    for the individual gates onto the track.
Delaying Kick Off - Mr Mackrell agreed that he would need to be consulted before
such action and that he would be available for such consultation. It was agreed
between Mr Mackrell and Superintendent Sleath that they would talk before each
game and such considerations would form part of their liaison.

Superintendent Marshall pointed out that paragraph 46 of the Green Guide
requires the Club to have a contingency plan for accommodating supporters who
arrive and overwhelm the turnstiling arrangements. Mr Mackrell suggested that
such a contingency would exist certainly for the first 2 games and that this
could be reviewed at the appropriate time. This was agreed.

On the question of first aid requirements, Mr Mackrell pointed out that the
Football League had issued all Clubs with a list of requirements which Sheffield
Wednesday would comply with. A telephone had been connected in the first aid
room and that Sheffield Wednesday Football Club would take full responsibility
for all first aid equipment.

Mr Mackrell asked that they were party to any Emergency Services contingency
plans. This was agreed.

Superintendent Marshall asked about liaison with the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club Supporters Club. Both Mr Mackrell and Mr Addy agreed that this
would be a waste of time as the Club that exists does not represent any more
than the membership of the Club, which is very small.

Cutting Equipment - Mr Mackrell stated that this was on his agenda, but will not
be considered in advance of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations. This was
accepted by the police officers.

Inspector Sewell asked about briefing of stewards. It was agreed that senior
stewards would be available for a full briefing before the match by police
officers who would reiterate their responsbilities and ensure that they were
fulfilled. The question of a debriefing session was raised - it was agreed that
this would be useful and the Club supported such a move. To be progressed by
Superintendent Sleath.

The meeting ended at 12.50 pm with a view to re-arranging a further meeting in
the early part of week commencing 31 July 1989 when Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendations would be known and Mr Bownes of the Local Authority would be
available to meet with the Club and the police.
                                           SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUND
                                           ADVISORY GROUP MEETING
                                      HELD AT THE TOWN HALL, SHEFFIELD
                                       10.00 A.M. TUESDAY 25 JULY 1989




Me e tin g C h a i r e d by Mr.       Bownes   - S h e f f ield C i t y Coun cil

Persons    in A t t e n d a n c e :

Chief Su peri nte nden t Nesbit                        South Y o r k s h i r e Police
Su per i n t e n d e n t Marsh                         S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e Police
C hi ef Insp ecto r Bett iso n                         South Y o r k s h i r e Police
Mr. Butler                                             Bu ild ing S urv eyors Department
M r . Seaman                                           South Y o r k s h i r e Fire Service
A.N. O t h e r                                         H e a l t h & C o m m u n i t y Services Department
                                                       Sh e f fie ld City C o u n c i l




Mr.    Bownes         o pe ned the      m e e t i n g w i t h the v i e w that the m e e t i n g represented
pr e lim ina ry d isc u s s i o n s     on certain m a t t e r s and any decisions mu st await the
re com m e n d a t i o n s of Lord      J u sti ce Tay lo r ' s Report.     This p o s itio n was echoed by
all of the part ies           to the meeting.

Item 1 - Use of T e r r a c i n g at She ffie ld            W e d n e s d a y Footb all Club,   particularly   the
West Terrace

It was the c ons ensus amongst all p a r tie s that Pens 3 and 4 wer e uns uit a b l e for
use.        It was m e n t i o n e d that S h e f fi eld W e d n e s d a y Footba ll C l u b w ished to use
other win g sections of the terrace.                    C h i e f S u p e r inte nde nt N e sbi t informed the
me e t i n g of the d isc us s i o n s that had taken place b e t w e e n the P oli ce and the Club
re gar ding the use of Pens              1 and 2.             Mr. Butler agreed w i t h Mr. Nesbit's
s entiments and c o n f irm ed that it w o u l d be unsafe to use those enc los u r e s whilst
the p e r i m e t e r wal l was in a d a n g e rou s condition.

Mr. Butler also told the m e e t i n g that Pen 6 was                  u n s u i t a b l e for us e as a harrie r
had been r e mo ved from Pen 6 for the              purp ose s of c o mpa rati ve testing with the
barrier that had failed in Pen 3-                C h i e f Sup eri nte nden t Nesbit e xpl ained the
Police p r o p osal s put t o ’ the C l u b at a r ec ent m e e t i n g to u t ili se the West Stand
only wit h Pen 7, the N o r t h West r ai sed terrace b eing ava ilab le for use as an
em e r g e n c y measure.      Mr. Seaman on be half of the Fire Service stated that the
Fire Service were agai nst the use of the te rracing at the West End of the Gr ound
as a principle.         T h e y could ce rtai nly not condone the use of Pens w h i c h allowed
access to or e m e r g e n c y egress through Pens 3 and 4. Mr. S ea man went on to
discuss the Fire Serv ice' s c o nc ern about the wall w h i c h separates the concourse
area b e t w e e n the turnstil es a n d the West Stand.

A general dis cus s i o n then took plac e about the plans to use the stand w i t h Pen 7
re t ain ed for e m e r g e n c y use.    Mr. Butler agreed with such plans and confirmed
that Pen 7 was approved, the b a r rier s had b e e n tested a nd as far as he could see
there could be no ob jection to its use.              Mr. S e a m a n con fir med that he has no
objections to such a plan.             Mr. Bownes then a g reed such a p l a n on behal f of all
representatives          to the meeting.
A discussion took place about the capacity to be allowed in Pen 7. Nothing was
resolved on this issue.    Mr. Seaman asked about the respective duties of Police
and Stewards of the West Terrace of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Chief
Superintendent Nesbit confirmed that the Club had agreed to provide the Police
with a plan of deployment in the near future.    Mr. Seaman seemed satisfied with
this progress.This item was discharged by Mr. Bownes,          agreeing to draft
correspondence    to the Club    outlining the proposals put forward by Chief
Superintendent    Nesbit, i.e.  the utilisation of the West Stand for 'away'
supporters and the use of Pen 7 on the West Terrace for the emergency use of the
Police in accommodating spectators.

Item 2 - Use of the West Stand at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

The discussion    centred upon  the fact that an inspection of the stand was
required as it had not been inspected during the routine annual tour of
inspection.   The meeting was bogged down with considerations of how and when
that inspection might take place. Chief Superintendent Nesbit suggested members
find a convenient time and date this week to peform that inspection. The item
was discharged with the resolution that all members of the Safety and Sports
Ground Advisory Group would meet at 10.00 a.m. on Friday 28 July 1989 at
Hillsborough Stadium to conduct a tour of inspection of the West End,
particularly the West Stand. It was agreed that Mr. Mackrell the Safety Officer
of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club would be invited to attendalso.

Item 3 - The Future of Perimeter Fences and Gates

Again this item was compromised by the fact that Lord Justice Taylor's Report is
still awaited.    Chief Superintendent Nesbit made the point that at Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club it is intended to ask Stewards to accept their
responsibility for any Perimeter Fence Gates.    Questions arose from parties to
the meeting about how they would perform such duties in practice.     Mr. Bownes
cut short such deliberations by pointing out that it is for the Club to produce
a Safety Management Plan (which will include Perimeter Fences and Gates) which
needs to satisfy the Local Authority that the safety arrangements at the Club
are adequate.    Mr. Bownes had already invited both Sheffield Wednesday and
Sheffield United to provide such safety management plans and it was agreed to
await the return of those plans before'discussing the matter further.

Mr. Bownes did make a pertinent point that if South Yorkshire Police are taking
a particular stance with' regard to Sheffield Wedensday Football Club, then they
ought to take the •same position with Sheffield United Football Club.      Chief
Inspector Bettison suggested that there may be local arrangements at the two
Clubs which do not correspond, yet the Local Authority could still make
themselves satisfied with the safety management plans of each Club. Mr. Bownes
agreed with this view.

Item 4 - Adequacy of Turnstiles especially at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

Mr. Bownes raised the point that the turnstile arrangements represented a 'grey
area' where responsibilities were blurred. He announced that these were to be a
matter for anyone and everyone with a duty for safety at Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club.

Again however, it was pointed out that the Taylor Report may make certain
recommendations which cannot be anticipated at this stage. The matter was
deferred accordingly.
                                                           -3-

Ch ief S u p e ri nte nden t Nesbit r ai sed a tangential point in respect of turnstile
ar rang e m e n t s at S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y Football Cl ub - he p o i nt ed out that for the
Everton game              at H i l l s b o r o u g h on 30 A u g ust   1989,   the Police had suggested
entrance to the N o r t h S tan d from Pennis ton e Road N o r t h only, thereb y preventing
diff icu ltie s and dis ord er at the Leppings Lane Turnstiles.                         He told the meeting
that such a r ra nge men ts were not a gr eed by S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y Football C l u b who
wi shed to use the turnst ile s at bot h Penistone Road and Leppings Lane to feed
the N o r t h Stand.             Mr. S eam an on b ehal f of the Fire Service pointe d out that if
segregation, for example was agreed upon as a p r i ori ty by the Safety of Sports
Gr o u n d A d v i s o r y Grou p then c a p a c i t y for the v a rio us sections of the groun d would
have      to    be      r e v ie wed   (and p o s s i b l y   limited)   to cope with       the ingress of
supporters to a p a r t i c u l a r section.                   In other words if Sh eff i e l d Wednesday
Football         Club        ar gued     that       the   turnstiles   of   P eni stone   Road  North  were
insuf fic ient in n u mbe r to cope w i t h the number of spectators w i shi ng to access
the N o r t h Stand, then the proper respo nse w o u l d be to limit the capa cit y of the
No r t h S t a n d so that those turnsti les cou ld cope.

 Item 5 - D ire cti on        Signs    within     Sports     Grounds    especially       S h e f fi eld   Wednesday
 Football Cl ub

It was quickly agreed that, as w i t h turnstiles, this m a t t e r wo uld have to await
Lo rd J u s ti ce T a y l o r ' s r e co mmen dat ions . Mr. S e ama n on b e hal f of the Fire Service
claimed that the sig ning arrang eme nts at S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y Football Ground
were abysmal, but n e e d e d l o oki ng at on site.               No firm r ecom m e n d a t i o n s could be
achieved in the Council Chamber.                   The item was deferred.

Item 6 - C a p a c i t y R e d u c t i o n on Terr ace s

This item was not d i s c u s s e d at length as, again, it was agreed that Lord Justice
T a y l o r ' s r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s s h oul d be a w ait ed before taking pr ecip i t o u s action.

Items 7 and 8 - For I n f o r m a t i o n Onl y

Item 7 rela tes to pape rs d i s t r i b u t e d at the meet ing ,           not for discussion.
Items discharged.

Item 9 - O ther Business

Mr. Bownes on a point of i n f o r m a t i o n ,sugg est ed that Council m e m b e r s m a y w i s h to
be i nvolved with S afet y of Sports G round A d v i s o r y Groups in S h e f fie ld in the
future.


Mr. Seaman point ed out to the m e e t i n g that he had subm itt ed a comprehensive
report to Mr.               Bownes about the d e fic ien cie s               in the wooden Sou th Stand of
Hi llsborough.             He was not h appy with it as a fire risk.                     The rep rese nta tive of
the H e a l t h and C o m m u n i t y Services Depart men t a g r e e d with Mr. Seam an' s v iews               and
suggested that simila r p rob l e m s (if not worse) exist at the J o h n Street Stand at
Sh e f f i e l d U n i t e d Football Club.        T h e s e m a t t e r s were not d i s c u s s e d at length, the
purpose was m e r e l y to raise the topics for information.                            Mr. Seaman p o i n t e d out
that it was important that the correct people ought to -at tend m e e ting s of the
Sa fety of Sports G r o und A d v i s o r y Group - it was too important a task to be
fu lfi lled by late noti ce 'stand-ins'.                      Therefore, Mr. S eam an declared, the Fire
Service wont nec es s a r i l y be able or willing to attend m e e ti ngs called at short
notice in future.                   Mr. Bownes agre ed wi th these sentiments and tentatively
pr oposed ins erting an advance                   notice time limit into the Sa fety Cer tificate
w h i c h is c u r r e n t l y b e i n g drafted.

The meeting closed at 12.00 noon
                                          c c         t
                                          occ
                                         ACC (OPS)                   H O M E O FFIC E
                                                              Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                         ACC (S.S.)
                                                                      Direct line: 01-273
                                                                    Switchboard: 01-273 3000
                                         ACC (M.S)

Our reference:    FEP/89 3 5 / 4 8 / 8
Your reference:
                                                          1

       The Chief Executive
       County Councils
       Metropolitan District Councils
       London Borough Councils
       Common Council of the City of London
       Fir:e and Civil Defence Authorities                             I   & AUG 1989
       Chief Officers of Police                                             W- AU,yi;.   .



       Chief Fire Officers
       Chief Ambulance Officers

                                                                           4 August 1989




       Dear Sir/Madam

       HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 68/1989
       INTERIM REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
       Introduction
       The Interim Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary
       into the tragic events at Hillsborough football ground Sheffield
       on 15 April has now been published. A copy of the R e p o r t is
       attached. Further copies are available from HMSO bookshops*
       2.   The purpose of this circular is to inform recipients of the
       contents of the Report and to urge them to take required action
       without delay in order to implement, as necessary, the Inquiryfs
       recommendations to improve safety arrangements at sports grounds,,

       Government response

       3.  ’The Home Secretary has welcomed the thoroughness of the
       Report and its recommendations which he believes should be dealt
       with without delay pending the longer term findings of the
       Inquiry which will be published in its Final Report.
Scope of the reccr’Tr^gvndations

4.   Although the scope of recommendations is wide they are aimed
primarily at football league grounds and the international
stadiums used for soccer and rugby where there are liable to be
large, densely packed crowds on terraces. Recipients should
nonetheless consider their application to other designated sports
grounds and sports grounds at which large crowds are in
attendance.

5.   The 43 recommendations are in paragraph 316. They are in
two categories: the 28 asterisked are those requiring
implementation before the start of the new football season or
immediately thereafter; the remaining 15 are those which,        g
although requiring immediate action are likely to take longer to I
put into effect. The Home Secretary nevertheless urges
recipients to take urgent action cn both categories so as to put
into effect as many of the recommendations as possible before the
start of the season.

The guide to safety at sports grounds

6.   It is anticipated that the Guide will be amended to reflect
the Inquiry's findings in due course after consultation with
appropriate bodies. Any changes will take account of the Final
Report's recommendations. If. there is any doubt as to the
nature of crush barrier testing described in Annex C of the Guide
advice can be obtained from the Home Office 01-217 5352.
The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

7.   Consideration is also being given to any necessary
enforcement of the Report's recommendations by means of a        g
Statutory Instrument under section 15A of the Safety of Sports   ^
Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) requiring safety certificates to
include mandatory terms and conditions. Consultation as required
under section 18 of the 1975 Act will first be carried out before
any such Order is made.
Football clubs

8.   A copy of this circular together with the Report has been
sent to all 92 football league clubs and the international
stadiums in the expectation that they will co-operate fully.
Should co-operation not be forthcoming local authorities are
reminded of their powers under s. 10 of the 1975 Act for use if
there is judged to be a serious risk to spectators in any part of
the ground.

Resource implications

9.   Whilst acknowledging that local authorities will need to
examine current priorities in order to action the Inquiry's
recommendations, it is net envisaged that there should be
significant long-term resource implications for them. The cost
of any additional policing and/or provision of ambulance
services at football grounds is expected to be met by the clubs
or ground operators themselves.

Other
10. Any enquiries about this circular except barrier testing
(see paragraph 6 above) should be addressed to Mr A Brown
(01-273 2765).

11.     Copies also go to those bodies on the attached list.

                            Yours faithfully




                            A H TURNEY
                            Fire and Emergency Planning Department
E.R.



       Association of County Councils

       Association of Metropolitan Authorities
       London Boroughs Association
       Association of London Authorities

       Association of District Councils
       Welsh Counties Association

       Association of Chief Police Officers
       Clerks to Police Authorities

       Regional Managers, Health Authorities

       Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association

       National Association of Fire Officers
       Fire Brigades Union

       Police Federation

       Police Superintendents' Association

       Association of Chief Ambulance Officers
       Football Association

       Football Association of Wales
       Football League

       Football Trust

       Football Grounds Improvement Trust
       Rugby Football Union

       Welsh Rugby Football Union
       Rugby Football League

       Speedway Control Board
       Cricket Council
       Jockey Club

       National Greyhound Racing Club
    E.R



|         i-iO-rTn xci.xlxo.   nSSGCldwlGn
i
          All England Tennis and Croquet Club
          Royal and Ancient Golf Club

          RAC Motor Sports Association
          British Board of Amateur Athletics
          Hockey Association

          British Show Jumping Association

          National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs
          Football Supporters Association

          St Johns Ambulance

          Sports Councils for England and Wales

          Central Council for Physical Recreation




i
                      TALOR RECOMMENDATION IMPLEMENTATION TEAM

FUNCTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF MEMBERS

Chair                                    DCC
Deputy Chair                             Chief Superintendent Broomhead
Secretary                                Chief Inspector Bettison
Assistant Secretary                      Chief Inspector Donnelly




1.         POPPLEWELL REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS AND REVISED GREEN GUIDE 1986 - CHIEF
           INSPECTOR BEAL

     a)   Review all recommendations and identify thosewhich connect with the
          43 recommendations provided by Lord Justice Taylor. Identify other
          which require implementation in South Yorkshire.

     b)   Prepare position paper on the responsibilities of football clubs vis a
          viz the police arising out of these documents and the Taylor Inquiry
          report.

2.        'MODEL' ORDER - SUPERINTENDENT SIMPSON

           Start to draft and complete, as far as possible, a model operational
           order to assist in producing a consistent and comprehensive order at
           all matches in South Yorkshire.

           The order is to take account of all recommendations and reflect the
           deliberations of this working group.

           Superintendent Simpson to be provided with all orders (including those
           for football matches on the 19. 8. 89) so that best practice might be
           established and circulated.

3.        THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY AND SUBSEQUENT REPORT - CHIEF INSPECTOR
          BETTISON

          To be familiar with all aspects of the enquiry and the reports
          especially as they affect the deliberations of the working group.


4.        CONTRACTUAL ISSUES - SggERIBXENDEffig -OIinHTON   CM.    ^

          To consider and understand the present contractual arrangements with
          all South Yorkshire football clubs.
To take account of civil case Harris v SUFC and to understand the
issues, deliberations and findings in that case.

To advise on the implications of the proposals in this working group
on contractual arrangements.

To prepare draft contracts and to consider liaison with members of
Management Services and Finance Department to complete this task.

COMMUNICATIONS - SUPERINTENDENT MARSH

Radio, telephone, semaphore and related matters.

To be provided with existing report from Communications Department and
to establish close liaison with that department.

CCTV - COMPUTERISED/MECHANISED COUNTING SYSTEM - SUPERINTENDENT SLEATH

To review existing equipment and establish what is available on the
market and advise clubs accordingly.

LIAISE WITH EMERGENCY SERVICES - CHIEF~~IHSg£€IQR-BQIffiffiLLY       O ^ H T T J uJ

Make contact, collate contingency plans from the 5 clubs.        Advise on
consistency, best practice etc. across the Force.

Particular regard to DCC's Note for File (circulated).

TRAINING IN CROWD DISTRESS' - SUPERINTENDENT GBEBTOffOD "T6-fc-fc-

Training to recognise over crowding, distress etc.      How best achieved.

Form liaison with Health and Safety Executive officers at Sheffield.

REVIEW OF MAJOR INCIDENT PLAN - CHIEF INSPECTOR BETTISON

Implementation Team to consider recommendations of previous review.
                      POSSIBLE IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMME


PHASE 1   Asterisked recommendations in Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report


     Filling and monitoring terraces         recommendations 3, 4, 5      ^
     Perimeter fence gates                   recommendations 8, 9, 10
     Ticketing                               recommendation 24              ^
     Planning and Operational Orders         recommendations 26, 27, 28,29 ^
     Co-ordination of emergency services     recommendations 35, 36, 37, 38. ^


     Timescale - before 19 August 1989



PHASE 2   Other recommendations (non-asterisked) in Lord Justice Taylor's
          Interim Report that have a police responsibility


     Training in crowd densities               recommendation 6
     CCTV and turnstile monitoring equipment recommendation 30             ^
     Communications                          recommendations 31, 32, 33, 34 '


          Further recommendations for which the police are not directly
          responsible but which might warrant a watching brief

     Safety Certification                    recommendation 17
     Duties of football club                 recommendations 18, 19, 20, 21, 22
     Medical practitioner at club            recommendation 41


     Timescale -



PHASE 3   Review recommendations in (a) Popplewell Report (b) Green Guide


     Timescale -



PHASE 4   Preparation of 'model* Order


     Timescale -



PHASE 5   Revision of Force Standing Instruction on Policing Football Grounds


    Timescale -
PHASE 6    Report of progress and further comment or recommendations to


     (a)   Lord Justice Taylor - whilst considering his final report ?
     (b)   ACPO Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events
     (c)   The press - publicise our positive action ?


    Timescale - November 1989
REPORT OF MEETING TO DISCUSS INTERIM POLICING ARRANGEMENTS AT HILLSBOROUGH AT
THE START OF SEASON 1989/90

Meeting held In the Secretary's office, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club at
10.30 am on Wednesday 19 July 1989

PERSONS PRESENT

Chief Superintendent Nesbit, F Division Commander Designate
Superintendent Marshall, Deputy Commander, F Division
Superintendent Sleath, FI Sub Divisional Commander
Chief Inspector Bettison
Inspector Sewell, FI Sub Division Football Liaison Officer
Mr G Mackrell, Secretary SWFC
Mr K Addy, Director SWFC (with responsibility for ground structures)

The meeting began with a tour of the ground, paying particular emphasis to the
West End of the ground, Leppings Lane stand and terraces. The Local Authority
have still to determine what parts of that section of the stadium can and cannot
be u s e d H o w e v e r , Mr Mackrell suggested discussions on the basis that all parts
of the ground will be released for use prior to the start of the 1989/90
football season.

It was agreed that use of the West Stand (seating area) presents no problem as
far as accommodation, access, stewarding and policing arrangements are
concerned. Use of the terracing depends to a great extent upon the findings and
recommendations of the Taylor Inquiry.

Mr Mackrell put forward a proposal on behalf of SWFC. He suggested the use
of pens 1 and 2 for standing accommodation being serviced by turnstiles A - G.
Mr Nesbit recorded his concern about the use of pens 1 and 2: the perimeter wall
that runs alongside the entrance to pens 1 and 2 is in a dangerous condition and
presently shored up. Furthermore, use of pens 1 and 2 present the opportunity
for supporters to climb into pens 3 and 4 which are patently unsuitable for
accommodation of spectators. The survey of pens 3 and 4 revealed that barriers
are missing, that perimeter fencing is bent away from the stanchions and there is
some debris on the terraces themselves. Mr Mackrell points out that it is not
envisaged that Sheffield Wednesday Football Club will use pens 3 and 4 for the
forseeable future, but,for psychological reasons as much as anything, it is in
hand to have the perimeter fences repaired to the standard that existed on 15
April 1989. Chief Superintendent Nesbit repeated his reluctance to use pens 1
and 2 as spectator accommodation and pointed to pens 6 and 7 as being the
preferred option for standing accommodation. Mr Mackrell suggested that a
problem exists with the present safety certificate that demands segregation of
numbers going into the North West terrace - pen 7. Chief Inspector Bettison
pointed out that the terrace in question has a capacity of 2,700 and provided
that the facility existed for counting in those 2,700 spectators then they could
be safely accommodated in that section of the ground.

Mr Mackrell suggests the philosophy upon which his considerations are being
made. He envisages 3 phases of      planning

i      What to     do     now
ii     What to     do     when   Lord Justice Taylor'sfindingsareknown
iii    What to     do     when   the safety certificateispublished.

Chief Superintendent Nesbit concurred with that philosophy and pointed out that
any discussion and resolutions made today must be qualified on the basis that
Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations may supercede the discussions and
resolutions.

Chief Superintendent Nesbit raised the question of the Everton game scheduled to
take place at Hillsborough on 30 August 1989. Mr Mackrell interrupted saying he
envisaged no problems, he had already checked and discovered 3,000 spectators
attended from Everton for the corresponding fixture last season which was held
on a Saturday afternoon. This year the Wednesday evening fixture should attract
fewer spectators than that. Chief Superintendent Nesbit raised the question of
a pilgrimage from Liverpool to the fateful Leppings Lane terraces. Mr Mackrell
disagreed. Chief Superintendent Nesbit repeated that any operational decisions
regarding the Everton game must be reviewed in the light of the Taylor Inquiry
recommendations. Mr Mackrell proposed that the recommendations in Treasury
Counsel's final submission might prove to be a working guide. Mr Nesbit felt
that this could not be taken as an authoritative document.  Mr Mackrell returned
to the subject of using pens 1 and 2. Chief Superintendent Nesbit repeated his
concerns regarding the wall and the accessibility of pens 3 and 4. Mr Mackrell
recorded his reticence and pointed out that if the terraces are not used in the
first few games then this might set an unwelcome precedent. Superintendent
Marshall pointed out that if we continue the arrangements as they existed before
then we will encounter at some stage the problems of 15 April 1989. Mr Mackrell
disagreed pointing out that Sheffield Wednesday football club is unlikely to
attract an FA Cup Semi Final game for the forseeable future and that other games
will not attract the same numbers. Chief Superintendent Nesbit brought the
conversation back to the Everton game. He proposed that if the game was to go
ahead particularly retaining the fixture on 30 August 1989, then the
arrangements should be as follows

Everton supporters should be restricted to tickets beforehand and should be
accommodated solely in the West Stand which has a maximum capacity of 4,400. The
police would suggest in addition a contingency plan to cater for any ticketless
fans who might attend the game. Mr Mackrell raised the question of pricing. If
fans are unwilling to pay for stand tickets they can always turn up and pay a
lower price to stand on the Kop. Chief Superintendent Nesbit assured Mr
Mackrell that that possibility could be removed by policing arrangements that
would segregate the Everton supporters to Leppings Lane. Mr Addy agreed with
Chief Superintendent Nesbit's view and reiterated some of the problems that
might arise if fans were allowed to stand on the Leppings Lane terraces. Mr
Mackrell agreed and suggested a review of the fixture list to see which games
would be amenable to such arrangements and which would warrant, in his view,
different arrangements.   '

Despite this suggestion the conversation centred upon the first two home games
of the season, Norwich on 19 August 1989 and Everton on 30 August 1989. Mr
Mackrell pointed out that as far as Norwich is concerned he is expecting limited
numbers and that as far as Everton is concerned he is happy with the police
suggestions. He proposed an agreed policy for Norwich and Everton to be
reviewed thereafter in the light of further information which might be to hand.
Mr Addy raised the question of policing arrangements in the West Stand for these
games. Chief Superintendent Nesbit pointed out that the fans may seek to drop
wreaths down or get into pens 3 and 4 from the stand area. No firm policy was
established. Chief Superintendent Nesbit asked about re-arranging the Everton
fixture through the Football League to a later time in the season. Mr Mackrell
was loathe to do that stating that it was late in the day, that he had already
rearranged one match, and that, in any event, he had written to the police
asking for their comments on the fixture list and in the police response the
Everton fixture had not been raised.

(This last point appeared to be a telling point).

Mr Mackrell proposed that any overflow from the West tand could be accommodated
in the North Stand. Chief Superintendent Nesbit pointed out that the police
were against that arrangement because it would be expensive in resource terms to
segregate the opposing fans in the same stand. Discussion then took place about
who would use the North Stand and through which turnstiles they would enter the
stands. Mr Mackrell pointed out that he was against serving the North Stand
solely from Penistone Road. Chief Superintendent Nesbit said that for the
Everton match in particular he did not want 4,500 at Leppings Lane trying to
enter through some turnstiles and for other turnstiles in the same location to
be used by Sheffield Wednesday supporters seeking entrance to a different part of
the ground. Mr Mackrell suggested that he had been criticised at the Inquiry
for acquiescing to police demands for turnstile arrangements. Chief Inspector
Bettison,who had heard that part of the evidence at the Inquiry,was able to
correct Mr Mackrell by pointing out that he was criticised for the turnstile
arrangements that Sheffield Wednesday Football Club had formulated in the light
of the police segregation policy, not for acquiescing to police suggestions
about turnstile arrangements.    The police had never made such suggestions.
Chief Superintendent Nesbit, on a concilliatory note, pointed out that he had no
intention of changing arrangements that have stood for a number of years
without good cause, but it was necessary to underscore what had gone before and
to assess planned arrangements for the future. Mr Mackrell pointed out that
changes to the arrangements might have to be made in the light of
recommendations resulting from the Inquiry, for example, he stated that SWFC
were already assessing the possibility of making Leppings Lane end wholly seated
accommodation. Chief Superintendent Nesbit brought the conversation back to the
Everton game. Mr Mackrell pointed out that he had already spoken to the
 Secretary of Everton football club and they are expecting it to be a ticket only
 fixture for Everton supporters. Mr Mackrell suggests sending them 4,000 tickets
 for the West Stand (400 below maximum). Chief Superintendent Nesbit then
declared the police contingency to utilise pen 7 for any ticketless fans that turn
 up over and above the 4,000. This was met with general agreement, the Club for
 their part would maintain the confidentiality of such a contingency plan.

A general discussion took place about access in the North Stand. It was clear
that the Club as represented by Mr Mackrell and Mr Addy, were firmly against a
policy of serving the stand from the Penistone Road north entrances only.
During this conversation Mr Mackrell raised the spurious objection that there
were insufficient turnstiles at Penistone Road. Superintendent Marshall made
the calculation that the 12 turnstiles that were available could accommodate
9,000 people within an hour whereas the 23 turnstiles that were available at
Leppings Lane end could not accommodate the West End plus a portion of the North
Stand within an hour. The argument about the sufficiency of turnstiles at
Penistone Road was thought to be a 'stalking-horse' on the part its author Mr
Mackrell. Common agreement was reached on the following matters. A policy
would exist for the first two games of the season after which the policy would
be reviewed. The policy had to have the proviso that any recommendations of
Lord Justice Taylor would supercede any agreement. Notwithstanding this
qualification, the West Stand only would be used for 'away' supporters, which
had a capacity for 4,000 spectators. Sheffield Wednesday football supporters
will be accommodated in the three remaining sections of the ground. For the
Everton game pen 7 would be utilised as an 'over-flow' for any ticketless fans
that needed to be accommodated within the ground. For this purpose, Mr Mackrell
agreed to have at least 2 turnstiles manned in case the contingency arose.

As far as the North Stand was concerned it was agreed that this would be for the
exclusive use of Sheffield Wednesday supporters, the police, for their part,
wish this to be accessed from Penistone Road only. Both Mr Mackrell and Mr Addy
wish to record their objections to such a policy and this matter remains
unresolved.

Discussion then took place about the turnstile arrangements from the West Stand.
It was agreed that turnstiles A - G would be used that; the separating wall in
the concourse would be used to prohibit movement throughout the concourse; that
personnel barriers would be erected at the South West corner to
prevent spectators going to pens 1 and 2; that the tunnel gates would be
padlocked closed and that all spectators going into the West Stand would enter
through the entrance in the South West concourse area. Included in this
discussion was consideration of stewarding arrangements in this area. The
conclusion was that Mr Mackrell will draft proposals for deployment and duties
of stewards throughout the ground and forward same to F Division for police
approval.   This was agreed.

Chief Inspector Bettison made the general point that policing throughout the
ground should be a more reactive role (responding to stewards requests etc) than
it has been of late. This was accepted by the Club. Mr Mackrell promised to
send the draft proposals re stewards in the near future so that the final
document would be prepared in readiness for the stewards evening before the
season starts when the precise role of stewards could be 'thrashed out'.

Other aspects were then considered as follows

The game v Manchester City. All parties agreed to a 12 noon kick off on New
Years Day. Mr Mackrell would progress these arrangements.

PC Guest, who had been previously used in a liaison capacity in the Club Control
Room, would be withdrawn. The Club accepted this and accepted their duty to
monitor turnstile counts themselves and inform the police where necessary. Mr
Mackrell was asked about the provision of a similar monitor in the Police
Control Room. He agreed to look into the matter.

Communication with Club officials was then considered. It was established that
Mr Mackrell was the Safety Officer for the Club and that he was the point of
contact for any matters which needed Club attention. Chief Superintendent
Nesbit asked about contact before, during and after football matches held at
Hillsborough suggesting the provision of a 'go-between' steward. Mr Mackrell
rejected such a decision, pointing out that he had a radio set and would provide
the police control with a similar set, there is a land line to his office, and
he would provide, in writing, details of precisely where he would be during the
game.

Perimeter track gates. Chief Superintendent Nesbit suggested that these should
really be a steward's responsibility. This was agreed by all parties. Chief
Superintendent Nesbit suggested that the police serial would continue to be
deployed to the perimeter track and that they would have a responsibility for
the South and North sides of the ground but that the perimeter track in front of the
West Stand-and Spion Kop would be stewarded with stewards having responsibilites
for the individual gates onto the track.
Delaying Kick Off - Mr Mackrell agreed that he would need to be consulted before
such action and that he would be available for such consultation. It was agreed
between Mr Mackrell and Superintendent Sleath that they would talk before each
game and such considerations would form part of their liaison.

Superintendent Marshall pointed out that paragraph 46 of the Green Guide
requires the Club to have a contingency plan for accommodating supporters who
arrive and overwhelm the turnstiling arrangements. Mr Mackrell suggested that
such a contingency would exist certainly for the first 2 games and that this
could be reviewed at the appropriate time. This was agreed.

On the question of first aid requirements, Mr Mackrell pointed out that the
Football League had issued all Clubs with a list of requirements which Sheffield
Wednesday would comply with. A telephone had been connected in the first aid
room and that Sheffield Wednesday Football Club would take full responsibility
for all first aid equipment.

Mr Mackrell asked that they were party to any Emergency Services contingency
plans. This was agreed.

Superintendent Marshall asked about liaison with the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club Supporters Club. Both Mr Mackrell and Mr Addy agreed that this
would be a waste of time as the Club that exists does not represent any more
than the membership of the Club, which is very small.

Cutting Equipment - Mr Mackrell stated that this was on his agenda, but will not
be considered in advance of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations. This was
accepted by the police officers.

Inspector Sewell asked about briefing of stewards. It was agreed that senior
stewards would be available for a full briefing before the match by police
officers who would reiterate their responsbilities and ensure that they were
fulfilled. The question of a debriefing session was raised - it was agreed that
this would be useful and the Club supported such a move. To be progressed by
Superintendent Sleath.

The meeting ended at 12.50 pm with a view to re-arranging a further meeting in
the early part of week commencing 31 July 1989 when Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendations would be known and Mr Bownes of the Local Authority would be
available to meet with the Club and the police.
                               COMPOSITE MINUTES

                           MEETINGS HELD TO DISCUSS
                RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TAYLOR REPORT

                  (1) IN THE DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE'S OFFICE
                      AT 2.30 PM ON MONDAY 7 AUGUST 1989

               (2) IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM, POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                     AT 2.30 PM ON TUESDAY. 8 AUGUST 1989

Present:

(1) P Hayes Esq QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable - Chairman
    Chief Superintendents Nesbit, Thompson and Wain
    Superintendents Bates, Marsh and Swann
    Chief Inspector Bettison

(2) P Hayes Esq QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable - Chairman
    Superintendents Greenwood, Marsh, Oughton, Simpson and Sleath
    Chief Inspectors Beal, Bettison.and Donnelly



The Deputy Chief Constable introduced the Taylor Report to each meeting and
distributed copies. He pointed out that there were 43 recommendationsin the
Report some of which applied to the South Yorkshire Police. Those
recommendations which are asterisked must be implemented before the start of
the 1989/90 football season - 19 August 1989.

The Deputy Chief Constable drew attention to paragraph 26 of the
recommendations and pointed out that he was the appointed chief officer. In
the short term it was intended to address the recommendations and in the long
term to review Force policy in terms of policing football by reference to the
previous Popplewell Report recommendations and to the Green Guide. This would
eventually lead to revision of the Force standing instructions in respect of
policing football events.

A working party is to be convened chaired by the Deputy Chief Constable with
Chief Superintendent Broomhead as deputy chairman, Chief Inspector Bettison as
secretary, five sub-divisional officers representing each of the football
grounds within South Yorkshire and, Superintendent Marsh representing
Operations Division.

Chief Superintendent Wain asked why divisional officers could not just be left
to get on with it. Mr Hayes replied that he wished for there to be a
consistent response across the Force as far as this can be achieved, both in
relation to liaison with clubs, other emergency services and the local
authorities.

It was agreed the following recommendations would be considered first • -

Recommendation three - counting spectators into self-contained sections of the
ground

The Deputy Chief Constable said the local authority will determine capacities
in the various sections of the ground and will convey those to the police
amongst others. The responsibility for 'counting' - however achieved - lies
with the club and he asked members to discover in time for the meeting
scheduled for 11 August, how they intend to achieve this.
                                         -   2   -




     The responsibility fcr closing off access when capacity-'is reached is also to
     be that of the clubs. However, if assistance is required on any occasion we
     will react positively.

     Superintendent Oughton referred to the Harris -v- Sheffield United Football
     Club and said the police have additional responsibilities in respect of
     'comfort and safety of spectators'. He asked if we have monitors in control
     rooms should we not also have responsibility?

     The Deputy Chief Constable said the clubs, in this situation, also have their
     own monitors.

    Superintendent Sleath made the point that the purpose of the monitors is to
    assess the rate of filling and the numbers still to arrive, not to determine
    whether an area is full. This was agreed.

    Chief Inspector Beal stated that Annex 2 to the Green Guide places
    responsibility for monitoring, and such determination, on the club.


    Recommendation four - which calls for a written agreement between the police
    and the club

    The Deputy Chief Constable stated that the proposals agreed at these meetings
    on the recommendations will be conveyed to the club via the respective sub-
    divisional officers. It should be pointed out to the clubs that the aim is to
    take a consistent view across the Force and that certain principles are
    proposed by the police in respect of the demarcation of responsibilities.

    Sub-divisional officers are to address respective club officials - present our
    'preferred options' and ask for their proposals. They should inform club
    ofiLCLa.Ls that it is our wish to be in a position by Monday 14 August after
    considering their proposals (to be discussed at 11 August meeting) to
    present a composite agreement with the five clubs for their written approval.


    Recommendation five - the monitoring of crowd levels in each self contained

•   pen or terraced area

    The Deputy Chief Constable posed the question 'Is this to be the clubs
    responsibility?'. Chief "Superintendent Nesbit made the point that this has
    already been agreed with Sheffield Wednesday and Mr Bates added that there is
    a similar agreement with Sheffield United. Mr Marsh queried whether there
    would be a difference at Barnsley where, he believed, there is a reluctance to
    accept certain responsibilities. Mr Swann rejected this view and said that
    post Hillsborough he expected better co-operation.

    Mr Thompson made the point that stewards who will have this responsibility at
    Doncaster Rovers will be wearing different coloured tabards. Mr Bates added
    that this is done at Sheffield United as well. The Deputy Chief Constable
    commended this idea to both meetings and raised for consideration the question
    of identifiable clothing for police officers on perimeter track detail.

    The Deputy Chief Constable said our combined stance will be that
    recommendation number five is to be carried out by the club.

    We need to know, by Friday 11 August 1989, how they divide up the ground
    (plans required) and how they intend to monitor each area.
                                        - 3 -

/
    A discussion followed regarding recommendation six (which is not on this early
    agenda) concerning the training of stewards/police officers to recognise crowd
    densities.

    It was agreed that responsibility for training stewards will be the clubs but
    as we will be training our officers the club are welcome to be involved with
    our programme.  (They retain responsibility for ensuring all relevant stewards
    have been trained).

    Further to this the Deputy Chief Constable recommends that all police officers
    and stewards deployed to those duties should be consistently deployed so that
    rapport and experience is built up and the training need minimised.


    Recommendation nine - the policing of the open perimeter fence gates

  Mr Hayes pointed out that a police officer is to be responsible. Mr Bates
^^confirmed this is the existing policy at Sheffield United. A discussion
^P:ook place about how many officers are required for the number of gates in any
   perimeter fence. It was agreed that one police officer is to be deployed to
   each gate in a perimeter fence for the purposes of deciding whether or not to
   allow spectators through that gate to relieve overcrowding at any time. It
  was further agreed that this officer will be in radio contact with match
   control and will liaise with the steward referred to at recommendation five.

    A discussion took place about whether the officer so authorised ought to be
    identified in some way. It was unresolved.

    It was pointed out to the meeting that the 'authorised' officer deployed to
    any perimeter fence gate must not under any circumstances be diverted to other
    duties. It is a condition that an officer should remain at the gate at all
    times, though additional officers/stewards with no such specific task might
    supplement these officers.

   Superintendent Greenwood raised the question of terraced areas which had no
   perimeter fences and would not normally have a police officer deployed in that
^^area.- The point being that there is no Liaison officer for the monitoring
^^steward.

    After discussion the Deputy,Chief Constable proposed that if there is a
    terraced area with a gate, but no perimeter fence, we will man the gate. Any
    terraced area without fence or gates should have at least one officer in that
    area.

    Superintendent Simpson asked about sanctions for stubborn clubs and the Deputy
    Chief Constable stated that if we do not achieve a written agreement we may
    have to consider seeking a match postponement.


    Recommendation 10 - cutting equipment

    The club will make the provision. The police do not want the responsibility
    of using this equipment therefore its use will be the task of the Fire Brigade
    or    trained club employees. The Deputy Chief Constable pointed out to the
    meeting that a 'nominated' senior police officer has the decision whether and
    when such cutting equipment should be used. It was agreed that the nominated
    officer would be the officer in overall control at the matcn. This oizicsr
                                             - 4 -


    /   would therefore need to familiarise himself with the location and type of
/       equipment available. We need also to write details of the arrangements into
         operational orders.


        Paragraph 24 - information on tickets

/ '     The Deputy Chief Constable informed the meeting why this recommendation had
         arisen in the light, of the ticket information at the Semi-Final game at
         Hillsborough. There will be a need for both the club and ourselves to
         consider the number of spectators expected, the segregation policy to oe
         applied, the number of turnstiles for each group of spectators and the
         potential throughput of 750 an hour so that in respect of each match the
         arrival information can be particularised accordingly. The requirement is for
         the club to liaise with the police on every occasion and we must be able to
         advise sensibly.

        The Deputy Chief Constable pointed out to Chief Superintendent Nesbit that the
        Sheffield Wednesday -v- Everton game which is to be all ticket for away
        supporters is important in this regard.

        The Superintendents were asked to find out from the clubs how they propose to
        meet the arrangement.


         Paragraph 27 - operational orders

         The Deputy Chief Constable pointed out to the meeting that he is considering
         the worth of a 'model' operational order but was aware of the dangers
         involved. The 'model' order could be used too readily and important changes
         missed.

         The Deputy Chief Constable suggested that recommendation 27 calls for (a) a
         greater awareness, to be written into the operational order, of the primacy of
         public safety over the concerns for public disorder, and (b) a further
         requirement to think through difficulties that may arise in respect of
         overcrowding and to have contingency plans to cope with these.

         The Deputy Chief Constable asked the superintendents to have some thoughts for
         revising operational orders by Friday 11 August.

        Mr Thompson digressed at this point and suggested that any working party ought
        to review the formula for police charges to football clubs.  It was obvious to
        him that more police officers were going to be required inside the ground than
        previously.

         The Deputy Chief Constable thanked him for this comment and asked ail members
         at the meeting to address the question of total manpower need inside their
         respective grounds and to inform the working group of any changes envisaged.


         Recommendation 28 - contingency plans, for dealing with arrival/departure
         patterns

         The Deputy Chief Constable listed what some of these patterns may be, for
         example, non-tickets holders at ticket games, late arrivals, emergency
         departures, etc. Mr Hayes pointed out other patterns are foreseeable. He
 «



                                    -   5   -




asked that all members of the meeting come up with a list of patterns which
are foreseeable at their ground and, for the meeting on 11 August 1S83,
representatives should have contingency plans in mind for coping with these.

The second part of this recommendation deals with 'sufficient reserves'. The
question was posed what is sufficient? Superintendent Bates made the point
that rapid deployment is the key feature of this recommendation, sufficiency
would be a matter for ground commanders to determine for each match at each
ground. The superintendents meeting thought that one serial was a minimum
reserve.

The Deputy Chief Constable asked members to tell the clubs that we are
required as an imperative to provide these reserves and that they are to be
deployed inside the ground. They ought to be aware that costing arrangements
will reflect this matter.


Paragraph 29 - delaying kick-off

The Deputy Chief Constable proposed a view that, as an absolute fail safe, the.
referee ought to ask permission from the ground commander before taking the
players out onto the pitch. Mr Wain agreed with this view. A discussion took
place and Mr Thompson pointed out that any such proposal ought to have
national ratification. The Deputy Chief Constable repeated his proposal and
requested that all clubs be asked, pending national agreement, to adopt this
strategy.

Superintendent Sleath envisaged few problems as the South Yorkshire Police •
already have a policy of liaison with match officials. Requesting this
additional courtesy from referees would, in his view, be acceptable.


Recommendation 35 - liaison with emergency services

The Deputy Chief Constable pointed out that 'regular liaison' was ambiguous
and that representatives should address this matter before the meeting on
11 August and be able to explain what happens at the moment and make proposals
about what should happen in the futurer

Superintendent Simpson pointed out that a Mr Morley of SYMAS is offering his
services to clubs and to iootball liaison officers. It was felt by the
meeting that a SYMAS- representative should be invited on to the Safety at
Sports Ground Working Group.

This matter to be further considered.


Recommendations 36 and 37 were taken together - the contingency plans for
emergency vehicle access and provision of information about the event to the
emergency services

The Deputy Chief Constable suggested that these two recommendations can be met
by amending operational orders to show the contingency plans that exist at the
various grounds, and to identify the officers deputed to liaise with emergency
services, to show the rendezvous points etc. Such amended operational orders
will be sent to Ambulance and Fire Brigade controls. They each should be
asked to nominate a liaison officer for any 'on the day' updates.
                                    -   6   -




Recommendation 38 - notifying officers at the ground of contingency olans for
the arrival of emergency services
                                                                     in the
The Deputy Chief Constable suggested that this again be caught up
oDerational order revision.


Communications

The Deputy Chief Constable said this would be fully con^ d^ e° a t & reserve
time. For the time being he enjoined the superintendents
set at every football match until new equipment was available.


The Deputy Chief Constable closed the meetings with the following
instructions:-

     i)   make contact with the clubs and, in the light of the corporate
          policy determined through these meetings, be in a position to
          discuss on Friday 11 August a draft agreement for the
          policing/stewarding of football matches in South Yorkshire m
          the future;

    ii)   think about contingency plans arising out of these recommendations

   iii)   estimate the manpower/cost implications of meeting these
           recommendations;

    iv)   to meet again on Friday 11 August at 2.00 pm - Conference Room
           - when we must progress, if possible to conclusion, the various
           issues referred to.
                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S RECOMMENDATIONS


SPECIFIC POLICE ACTION REQUIRED :

Recommendation No. (Asterisk signifies a recommendation which must be resolved
                    before the new season 19.08.89).

*     3    Counting spectators into self-contained pens. Who is going to do it?
            Police or Stewards? How is it to be achieved? Tickets, Enumerator etc.


*     4    Written agreement between club and police setting out their respective
            responsibilities for crowd safety and control and, in particular, for the
            filling of self contained pens or terraced area and the monitoring of
           spectators therein.

           Xhoughts:     i) Perhaps ask clubs for early drafts - take best policies
                             of each and negotiate amendments to drafts. (Clubs should
                             be encouraged to adopt greater responsibilities).

                        ii) Does it need legal authority?


* 5        A steward or police officer to be charged at every match with monitoring
           crowdlevelsin self contained   pen or terraced area.

           Thoughts:     i) Steward role surely.   However;

                        ii) Is it politically expedient for South Yorkshire
                            Police to be seen taking an active interest in
                            crowd safety for first few games?

                       iii) If the police took on the task there isa danger
                            of an officer being fixed with other demands - e.g.
                            a necessary arrest or preventing pitch invasion etc.



      6.   Police officers and stewards to be briefed and trained in recognising crowd
           densities.

           Training to include demonstrations and photographs designed to enable that
           recognition.

           Thoughts:    i)    Photographs probably available from HSE.

                        ii) Are police to be responsible for training stewards.

                       iii) Photos are probably best medium as it might be
                            difficult to train every police officer by way of
                            physical demonstration.

*     8    All perimtere fence gates to be left open whilst spectators on terrace.
           A police officer (not steward) to be responsible for each gate (group of
           gates if close together) and to decide whether to allow spectators through
           to prevent overcrowding.

           To be identified before game and his/her duty known to all other police
           officers and stewards.

           He should be in radio contact with match control.

           Thoughts:    i)   This could be the same officer referred
                              to in 5 above.

                        ii) He must be protected from other distractions.


  *   10   Suitable cutting equipment to be provided by the club. Decision to use it
           lies with senior police officer. Agreement to be reached as to who is to
           use it, e.g. police, fire brigade or stewards.

           Thoughts:    i)   Recommends not police - additional training, and
                             responsibilities for maintaining and checking equipment.


  *   24   Any information on tickets issued by club to be reviewed in conjunction with
           police.

           Thoughts:    i)   Only relevant to large matches.

                        ii) Particularly relevant to SWFC in respect of forthcoming
                            Everton game.


  *   26   Chief Constable to appoint a chief officer to liaise with the management of
           each football club and L.A., re safety and control of crowds.

           A.C.C. (Operations) ?


• *   27   Operational orders, and pre-match briefing to alert all officers to
           importance of overcrowding and appropriate steps for dealing with it.

           Thoughts:    i)   Earliest notification to ground control appears to be
           paramount.


  *   28   Operational orders to incorporate contingency plans for dealing with any
           foreseeable pattern of spectator arrival/departure. Sufficient reserves to
           be on hand to enable rapid deployment to any point inside or outside the
           ground.


  *   29   Option to postpone kick-off remains with officer in command at ground.
           Crowd safety should be paramount consideration in deciding whether to
           exercise it.
     Thoughts:    i) Suggest Ground Commanders meeting debate the option.      It
     does not lend itself to written instruction.


30. Police control room to have all CCTV monitoring available to it and record
    of any electronic or mechanical turnstile counts.

     Thoughts:    SWFC have already offered to provide such
                  facility.


31   Sufficient operators in police control room to enable all transmission to be
     dealt with.

     Communication system should give priority to control.

     Additional channels should be available, where necessary, to prevent
     overcrowind of airwaves.

     Consider sound-proofing control room.

     Thoughts:    i)   New 'sub-divisional type' of system should facilitate
                       priority of control.

                  ii) Discussions already in hand about the inability of a
                      'command' channel to prevent overcrowding.


32   Separate system of landlines around ground.

     Thoughts:    i)   Long term project?


33   P.A.S. within control room to communicate with individual areas.   Important
     announcements to be preceded with loud tone.


34. Use to be made of electronic scoreboard to address crowd.

     Police to consider semaphore signals in case of emergencies.

     Thoughts:    i)   Electronic scorebard at SWFC only I believe.   'F' Commander
                       to progress.

                  ii) Semaphore ought to have some rational basis.    ACPO?
Emergency services to maintain, through senior nominated
officers, regular liaison concerning crowd safety.

Thoughts i) Who is to be nominated?   Seniority?


Before each match, police to provide details - routes
taken, venue, crowd expected etc - to emergency services


Contingency plans for emergency vehicle access etc. to be
reviewed.

To include routes of access, rendezvous and accessibility
within ground.

Thought i) Officer at 35 above to pursue.


Officers at entrance to ground to be briefed as to
contingency plans for arrival of emergency services and
should be informed whenever emergency services are called
                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

 TELEX/TELEPRINTER MESSAGE




    For Camim U a Only



    FROM          DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE


    TQ_______ CHIEF SUPTS 'A', rB', 'C', 'D1, 'F', OPERATIONS DIVISIONS


    PTO_______________                          SERIAL



    (TITLE/MESSAGE INSTRUCTIOHS)_____    HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - REPORT


    REFERENCE YOUR/MY




 Text - Use Capital Letters

THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT RELEASED BY LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR ON FRIDAY
4 AUGUST 1989, CONTAINS 43 RECOMMENDATIONS CONCERNING PUBLIC SAFETY AT FOOTBALL
EVENTS AND PLACES A RESPONSIBILITY ON THE POLICE, THE CLUBS AND THE LOCAL______
AUTHORITIES TO IMPLEMENT THE RECOMMENDATIONS WITHOUT DELAY.


SOME OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS ARE REQUIRED TO BE EFFECTED BEFORE THE START OF THE
1989/90 FOOTBALL SEASON WHICH COMMENCES ON 19 AUGUST.


TO ENSURE THAT THIS IS ACHIEVED AN IMPLEMENTATION TEAM UNDER THE CHAIRMANSHIP OF
THE DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE HAS BEEN FORMED AND IS ALREADY WORKING ON THESE ISSUES.


THE TEAM HAS REPRESENTATION FROM THE OPERATIONS DIVISION AND ALL THE TERRITORIAL
DIVISIONS EXCEPT 'E'.             THE SECRETARY IS CHIEF INSPECTOR NORMAN BETTISON WHO IS
AVAILABLE AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS ON EXTENSION 3472._________________________


THE WORK OF THE TEAM IS OF PARAMOUNT IMPORTANCE AND WILL TAKE PRECEDENCE OVER
ANYTHING ELSE.


   OIC
                              \
    AUTH (Imp/Stf)
                                     /
                  ...                                      W ji,hi,,     ............ ...
   OripintMl by                                              Rank



   Dapt/Div                                         Tai:                 Extn:




 GEN/56
                   INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT - RECOMMENDATIONS

                     MEETING OF THE IMPLEMEN'1'4.TI0N TEAM
                TO BE HELD AT 2.00 PM, FRIDAY 11 AUGUST 1989
                IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM, POLICE HEADQUARTERS


                                        A G E N D A



Apologies for absence


Minutes of previous meetings (7.8.89/8.8.89)


Leave/other commitments

                     «)
Time scales                   ^    ^      ^    O cU & S


Functional responsibilities of the working group


Documentation


Matters arising from the previous minutes:-

a.   Items for the 'written agreement1

b.   Items    for the O p e r a t i o n a l O rder

c.   Liaison with the emergency services


Future meetings - dates


Any other business
           MEETING OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION TEAM
                     HELD AT 2.15 PM, FRIDAY 11 AUGUST 1989
                  IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM, POLICE HEADQUARTERS


Present:

P Hayes Esq QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable - Chairman
Chief Superintendent Broomhead
Superintendents Greenwood, Marsh, Oughton, Simpson and Sleath
Chief Inspectors Beal, Bettison and Donnelly



 1/89      MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETINGS

The minutes of the meetings held on 7 and 8 August 1989, were accepted as a
true and accurate record of those meetings.


 2/89      LEAVE/COMMITMENTS

The Deputy Chief Constable commenced the meeting by stressing the importance
of team members attending future meetings. He said that in all cases where
they would be absent, the meeting must be attended by their deputy or in the
case of a chief inspector member his superintendent. He added that he had no
objection to both parties attending future meetings if they so wished.

It was agreed that in the absence of Chief Inspector Bettison, Chief Inspector
Donnelly will act as secretary.


 3/89      TIMESCALES

Mr Hayes said that by 19 August 1989, the asterisked recommendations must be
implemented and prior to that date the written agreement described in
recommendation four must be established with each of the clubs. He said that
it was intended to finalise those agreements by Tuesday 15 August 1989 and the
content will be discussed as a separate agenda item later in the meeting.

After achieving that deadline it is intended to complete the implementation of
all the recommendations by 31 October 1989 or before if possible, when the
results will be communicated to Lord Justice Taylor whilst he is considering
his final Report.

The Chairman said it follows that in order to achieve these timescales and
objectives meetings will be held on a regular basis as necessary.


 4/89      FUNCTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES

The Chairman said that it will be necessary for each member of the group to
undertake a specific function which will enable the team to achieve the
implementation of the recommendations within the timescales previously
outlined.

Mr Hayes then allocated the functional responsibilities as follows:-
a.   Superintendent G* i_e.uwuud1 '•’n

Training in Crowd Distress - training to recognise overcrowding,
density, etc. How best achieved. Consider liaison with Health & Safety
Executive officers at Sheffield. Inclusion of stewards.


b.   Superintendent Simpson

'Model Order* - start to draft and complete, as far as possible, a
'model' Operational Order to assist in producing a consistent and
comprehensive Order at all matches in South Yorkshire.

The Order is to take account of all recommendations and reflect the
deliberations of the working group.

Superintendent Simpson to be provided with all South Yorkshire Orders
(including those for football matches on 19 August 1989) as soon as these
are available so that best practice can be considered.


c.   Superintendent Oughton

Liaise with Emergency Services - make contact and collate contingency
plans from the five clubs. Advise on consistency, best practice, etc.,
across the Force.

Standing Instructions for the Policing of Football Grounds - to be
amended as necessary in due course.


d.   Superintendent Marsh

Communications - radio, telephone, semaphore and related matters.

To be provided with existing report from Communications Department, to
establish close liaison with that department and advise on ways of
progressing this issue.


e.   Superintendent Sleath

CCTV - computerised/mechanised counting system - to review existing
systems and establish what is available on the market and advise
accordingly on how the recommendations in these regards can best be
achieved.


f.   Chief Inspector Beal

Popplewell Report recommendations and revised Green Guide 1986 -

(a) review all recommendations and identify those which connect with the
43 recommendations provided by Lord Justice Taylor. Identify others
which require implementation in South Yorkshire.

(b) Prepare position paper on the responsibilities of football clubs
vis-a-vis the police arising out of these documents and the Taylor
Inquiry Report.
             Chief Inspector Bettison

    The Hillsborough Inquiry and Subsequent Report - to be familiar with all
    aspects of the Inquiry and the reports especially as they affect the
    deliberations of the working group.

    Review of Major Incident Plan - the Implementation Team to consider
    recommendations of previous review.


             Chief Inspector Donnelly

    Contractual Issues - to consider and understand the present contractual
    arrangements with all South Yorkshire football clubs.

    To take account of civil case Harris -v- Sheffield United Football Club
    and to understand the issues, deliberations and findings in that case.

     To advise on the implications of the proposals in this working group on
     contractual arrangements especially with regard to financial issues.

     To prepare draft contracts and to consider liaison with members of
     Management Services and Finance Department to complete this task.

The Deputy Chief Constable said that the first requirement on team members
will be to gain a detailed grasp of their specific functions in order to lead
or act as an information resource on these subjects at future meetings and, as
the team progresses it is expected that whenever aspects arise relating to a
particular function, the necessary research will be carried out by the team
member allocated that responsibility. Others with expert knowledge in a
particular field will be seconded to the group whenever necessary.


 5/89        DOCUMENTATION

The Chairman said the following documentation has been identified as relevant
to the implementation of the recommendations and group members should ensure
they have access to them:-

        i)   Home Office Circular 68/1989 - Interim Report of the
             Hillsborough Inquiry;

    ii)      Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry - Interim Report;

   iii)      Popplewell Inquiry - Summary of Recommendations;

    iv)      The Green Guide to Safety at Sports Ground;

        v)   The ACPO Guide to Policing Football;

    vi)      The ACPO Working Party Report into Police Use   of CCTV
              and Still Photography;

   vii)      South Yorkshire Police - Standing Instructions for the
             Policing of Football Grounds;

  viii)      'Note for File' dated 9 August 1989, re. liaison with
             emergency services (see also subsequent 'Note for File'
             dated 14 August 1989 on this same subject);
   ix)        Paper prepared by Superintendent Parker concerning
              communications.

The Secretary, Chief Inspector Bettison confirmed that each member was in
possession of these documents.


 6/89         MATTERS ARISING FROM THE PREVIOUS MINUTES

        6•1   Written Agreement (Recommendation A)

The Chairman reiterated his intention that the written agreement between South
Yorkshire Police and the Football League Clubs should be completed during the
week commencing 14 August 1989 and therefore it was imperativethat the
content of that document should be finalised at this meeting.

Mr Hayes referred to Recommendation 3, ie:-

        'Arrangements should be made:-

        (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or
        area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in accordance with
        Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
        ticketing arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and

        (b) to close off further access to such pen or area whenits maximum
        capacity is about to be reached'

and asked what arrangements, if any, had been made by the clubs in respect of
this recommendation.

Superintendent Greenwood said that the monitoring of spectators entering the
single pen at Doncaster will be by way of numbered tickets. He explained that
four turnstiles service the one pen and a ticket will be given to each person
at the time of entry to the ground and when the maximum capacity minus 15% is
reached the stewards will close the turnstiles.

Superintendent Simpson reported a lack of co-operation by the Barnsley
Football Club. He said that he had approached the Club Secretary, Mr Spinks
on two occasions to discuss the recommendations but this had been met by a
refusal on their part to enter into any discussions.

Mr Simpson continued stating that he attended a meeting on Wednesday 9 August
at Barnsley Football Club which was also attended by the Director of Planning,
the Fire Brigade and Ambulance Service when the recommendations were discussed
and a course of action was agreed but the Club did not attend that meeting.

On Thursday 10 August a further meeting was held at the ground when the
Chairman, Vice Chairman and Club Secretary for Barnsley Football Club also
attended. He said the club officials initially showed resistence to any
suggestions which were being made but quickly realised it was inevitable that
changes had to be made. The meeting was concluded with the club stating that
they will not supply the police with any agreement in writing until they have
had chance to consider the common agreement agreed by other clubs, which they
will then agree to and sign.
Mr Simpson said it had been pointed out to them that in these circumstances
they would have no input into the agreement but that did not affect their
stance.

Regarding recommendation three, Mr Simpson said the turnstiles at Oakwell are
very old and operate a mechanical counting system and the club are planning to
set up a system of runners for each section of the ground who will then report
at intervals of 15 minutes to the police control the numbers that have entered
particular sections of the ground.

The Chairman accepted that the police control should be aware of the numbers
in the various sections of the ground, to be aware of late arrivals amongst
other things, but stressed that the club must understand   fully that itis
their responsibility to monitor the numbers and when the   capacities have been
reached close that section of the ground.

Mr Simpson said they are experiencing problems but it is hoped that these will
be resolved in the near future. In reply to a question from Chief Inspector
Bettison, Mr Simpson said that Oakwell did not have any pens but the geography
of the ground is such that certain turnstiles service certain areas of the
terraces and Spion Kop therefore it is possible to isolate specific areas.

Superintendent Oughton said that the system at Millmoor for monitoring the
numbers entering the ground is computerised and is relayed to the Club
Secretary's office and shows the capacities at each section of the ground at
any given time. He said the computer has been programmed to sound an alarm
when the capacity has been reached, then the turnstiles servicing that section
will be closed down by the club.

Chief Inspector Donnelly said that Bramall Lane also has a computerised
counting system and with the exception of the Spion Kop specific turnstiles
service particular sections of the ground. With regards to the Kop that is
presently split into two sections by a fence and the turnstiles give access to
both these sections. He said the club are considering two options, ie (i)
remove the fence, or (ii) employ stewards to monitor the number of spectators
in each of the two sections.

Mr Donnelly said that it has been initially agreed that when the computer
showed that the capacity has been reached, the club would contact the police
control room and they in turn would inform officers on the turnstiles via
radio to instruct the turnstile operators to close, and the control room would
also instruct the chief steward by radio in order that he can reinforce this
instruction.

After discussion the Chairman said the above is a sensible fallback position
but it is the clubs responsibility to ensure the turnstiles are closed down,
therefore, alternative arrangements will have to be made by them to initiate
these controls in the first instance without police intervention.

Superintendent Sleath said it was a computerised system at Hillsborough
connected to their control room. When the numbers reach 15% below capacity an
alarm sounds and the turnstiles' supervisor is contacted by radio and
instructed to close these turnstiles serving that section of the ground.

The Chairman said that the agreements will be drawn up on the basis of the
arrangements already made with the clubs and in accordance with
recommendation four it will include the condition that any variation of the
agreement in respect of an individual match will be agreed in writing in
advance.

Mr Hayes said the agreement will state that the club will provide on the
perimeter track a steward for each pen or terraced area for the duration that
spectators are in that pen or terraced area, whose sole duty will be to
monitor the crowd conditions for any signs of overcrowding or distress
(recommendation five). The police will provide a police officer for each gate
(or group of gates if they are close together) who will be authorised to
decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve
overcrowding (recommendation nine). Those officers will be in possession of a
radio and will identify themselves to the steward(s) appointed by the club to
monitor the pen or terraced area.

Chief Inspector Bettison said that clubs will be asked to provide a plan of
their ground showing where stewards, with the responsibility to monitor the
crowd, are located and this will be appended to the agreement.

Chief Superintendent Broomhead pointed out that recommendation nine states
that a police officer will man the open gate to the pitch (recommendation
eight) but in practical terms it will need at least two officers per gate as a
contingency for any public order situation. He said that this should be borne
in mind when considering the contractual agreements in respect of costs.

After discussion the Chairman asked members to be in a position to outline the
additional costs in manpower caused by the implementation of recommendations
eight and nine at the next meeting. Also details of any other foreseeable
additional costs caused by the implementation of the Taylor recommendations.

Superintendent Simpson suggested that there is now a very good argument for
using manpower dedicated to policing inside the ground instead of the three
phase policing presently carried out at each game. The cost of the dedicated
manpower should then be charged in total to the club. The Chairman said that
this should be considered at a later meeting.

Returning to the content of the written agreement, the Chairman said it will
include that each club will provide suitable and sufficient cutting equipment
to permit the immediate removal of enough fencings to release numbers of
spectators if necessary. That equipment will be operated by employees of the
club who should be trained in its use (recommendation 10).

The Chairman said the agreement will also include a formal arrangement whereby
in advance of each football match the police liaison officer and the club
liaison officer will meet and consider the planning arrangements which will
apply in respect of the match in question.

As a part of this they will need on each occasion to take into account the
number of spectators anticipated, any intelligence or behavioural
difficulties, the pattern of arrival, the segregation policy to be adopted,
the number of turnstiles to be used in respect of each major spectator group,
the state of those turnstiles and, the possible input speed in respect of each
main spectator group. When tickets are to be sold they will consider the
information provided on those tickets by way of plans, arrival times, colour
coding or anything else which is seen as relevant from the point-of-view of
public safety (recommendation 24).

After discussion it was agreed that the police liaison officer will be the
sub-divisional commander or his deputy in charge of policing'that ground.
The Chairman said that he has been nominated by the Chief Constable as the
Chief Officer with the responsibility for liaison with the management of each
football club and local authority concerned in respect of the safety and
control of crowds. This will be included in the written agreement
(recommendation 26).

Mr Hayes referred to recommendation 28 concerning police reserves available
for rapid deployment to any point inside or outside the ground and asked if
there is a need to include in the agreement reference to these reserves, their
locations and the financial consequences to the club. After discussion it was
agreed that this should be dealt with in the contracts to the clubs and
omitted from the written agreement.

The Chairman said that the option to postpone kick-off is at the discretion of
the officer in command at the ground and it is therefore essential that the
club provides a telephone link between the referee's room and the police
control room (recommendation 29). He said that this requirement will be
included in the written agreement.

Mr Hayes said that in relation to recommendation 37, brief reference will need
to be made in the written agreement saying that the emergency services as
required by the Report are working together to agree contingency plans in
respect of access, rendezvous points, accessibility within the ground for
vehicles from all three emergency services, and as appropriate the intention
is to enjoin club officials in the preparation of these plans.


     6.2   The Operational Order - Recommendations 1, 3, 5, 8, 9, 10
           27, 28, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37 and 38

The Chairman said that with regard to recommendations 1, 5, 8 and 9
Operational Orders will include a plan of the ground showing the maximum
number of people to be allowed in each section or part of the ground; also
identifying the pens or other designated areas to be monitored by stewards
regarding overcrowding or distress; showing precisely the location of these
stewards and the police officers manning the gates and making it clear that
each officer will have a radio with direct access to ground control.

It will be made clear that whilst the primary responsibility of designated
stewards is to monitor the crowd as above, police officers also have this same
responsibility as part of their general duties. It is an absolute requirement
that the officers at the gates, which will always be left open, make
themselves known to the designated stewards referred to so as to enable
immediate contact from the steward via those officers to ground control in the
event of difficulties.

At the grounds without gates officers will be located on the perimeter to
provide this same communication facility and will identify themselves to the
stewards monitoring the crowd. The proposal was agreed.

The Chairman suggested that mention should be made of recommendations 3(a) and
3(b) by way of information as to the responsibilities of the club and
additionally regarding 3(b) in the form of a contingency plan dealing with the
event of a public order situation following the closure of a particular pen or
section of the terracing. The proposal was agreed.
The Chairman suggested that reference should be made to the availability of
cutting equipment, who will use it if necessary other than ourselves and that
the decision to use it is with the police officer in command at the ground
(recommendation 10). The proposal was agreed.

The Chairman said that both the Operational Order and the pre-match briefing
must alert all officers on duty to the dangers of overcrowding and also
contingency plans to deal with this wherever it occurs in the ground
(recommendation 27). Also reference should be made of those officers on
reserve available for rapid re-deployment in terms of their identity, location
availability, transportation and the communication arrangements regarding this
(recommendation 28). The proposal was agreed.

The Chairman said that recommendation 28 states that the Operational Order for
each match should enable the police to cope with any 'foreseeable' pattern in
the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. He said that
this refers to late arrivals, people attending all-ticket matches without
tickets, the opening of emergency gates, etc., and asked members if they could
identify foreseeable reasons for late arrivals and problems with departures.

Superintendent Oughton said that there has been other occasions when a match
has been cancelled at short notice in Sheffield causing a massive influx of
supporters attending the game at Millmoor.

Superintendent Greenwood stated that on occasions where there has been a
morning kick-off in the area, some of these supporters make their way to a
game taking place in the afternoon.

Chief Superintendent Broomhead said that a standard pattern is now emerging
where some spectators are travelling in private vehicles, not showing any club
colours, parking three/four miles from the ground and their presence is not
known in that city/town centre.

Superintendent Greenwood suggested that the report prepared by Detective
Inspector A King in respect of Liverpool supporters details evidence on the
pattern of some supporters. The Chairman asked Chief Inspector Bettison to
make copies available to the group members.

Regarding departures, Superintendent Simpson said there is always a potential
for fans leaving early and congregating outside the ground in order to create
a public order situation.

It was agreed that segregation of supporters is essential.

The Chairman decreed that our Orders will reflect contingency arrangements as
appropriate apropos the above.

Turning to recommendations 31/34 concerning communications, the Chairman said
that once these matters contained in these recommendations have been addressed
then the details will need to be included in the Order. The proposal was
agreed.

The Chairman suggested that in order to comply with recommendation 36, ie, the
requirement to provide the emergency services with information about evening
football matches, a copy of the Operational Order should be supplied to them
with the relevant information contained therein at least^££vfe days before the
match. Changes will be notified ^             officers. The proposal was
agreed.
The Chairman said that Operational Orders should also include the contingency
plans for the arrival at each football ground of emergency service vehicles,
which should include routes of access, rendezvous points and accessibility
with the ground itself. Also the police officer posted at the entrances of
the ground should be identified and included in the Order (recommendations 37
and 38). The proposal was agreed.


        6.3   Liaison with Emergency Services

The Chairman referred to the 'Note for File' dated 9 August 1989, which was
circulated at the meeting. He said that he had met with the Ambulance Service
regarding recommendations 35 to 38 and it has been agreed that Mr Morley,
Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer, will be the nominated officer required at
recommendation 35 to liaise regularly concerning crowd safety at each of the
grounds. He said that it was seen that meeting twice a year outside the
Safety Certificate meetings may well be sufficient.

The Chairman asked for suggestions as to who should benominated as the senior
liaison officer for the police.    After discussion it was agreed that it should
be the sub-divisional commander   or his deputy for the division in which the
ground is situated.

The Chairman said that it was also agreed at that meeting that after receipt
of an Operational Order the Ambulance Service will notify the Divisional
Commander concerned of a specific liaison officer who, should there be any
changes we feel they need to beaware of, will be available to be contacted
both in the days preceeding and   on the day of the match.

The Chairman said he would endeavour to achieve a similarunderstanding with
the Fire Service before 19 August 1989.


 7/89         ANY OTHER BUSINESS

        7.1   Implementation Programme

The Chairman circulated to members the proposed programme for the
implementation of the recommendations consisting of six phases (see Appendix
 A ). He said that it is anticipated that phase one will have been completed
by the next meeting on Thursday 17 August 1989 and the agenda will take the
form of phase two in addition to the matters arising from the present meeting.
Not included is the Review of the Major Incident Plan. This will be the final
task.


     7.2      Manpower

Superintendent Marsh requested through the Chair if members would consider the
implementation of a proposal whereby the supply of manpower to other divisions
for football matches is undertaken after some careful consideration on their
selection to ensure maximum output from those officers. He suggested the use
of the Divisional PSUs.

The Chairman asked members to address their minds to this proposal for
discussion at a later meeting.
There being no further business the meeting closed at 4.25 pm. The next
meeting will be held at 10.30 am on Thursday 17 August 1989 in the Lecture
Theatre at Police Headquarters.
                                                             APPENDIX 'A'


                        POSSIBLE IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAMME


PHASE 1   Asterisked recommendations in Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report

          Filling and monitoring terraces         recommendations   3, 4, 5
          Perimeter fence gates                   recommendations   8, 9, 10
          Ticketing                               recommendation    24
          Planning and Operational Orders         recommendations   26, 27, 28, 29
          Co-ordination of emergency services     recommendations   35, 36, 37, 38


          Timescale - before 19 August 1989


PHASE 2   Other recommendations (non-asterisked) in Lord Justice Taylor's
          Interim Report that have a police responsibility

          Training in crowd densities             recommendation 6
          CCTV and turnstile monitoring
            equipment                             recommendation 30
          Communications                          recommendations 31, 32, 33, 34


          Further recommendations for which the police are not directly
          responsible but which might warrant a watching brief
           A«far‘S.*YVl   _
          S§£e€y Certification                  recommendation 17
          Duties of football club               recommendations 18, 19, 20, 21
                                                  and 22
          Medical practitioner at club          recommendation 41


          Timescale


PHASE 3   Review recommendations in (a) Popplewell Report (b) Green Guide


          Timescale -


PHASE 4   Preparation of 'model* Order


          Timescale -


PHASE 5   Revision of Force Standing Instruction on Policing Football Grounds
          Revision of Force Major Incident Plan


          Timescale -
?




                                      -   2   -




PHASE 6   Report of progress and further comment or recommendations to:-

          (a)   Lord Justice Taylor - whilst considering his final report ?
          (b)   ACPO Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events
          (c)   The press - publicise our positive action ?


          Timescale - November 1989
                   INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT - RECOMMENDATIONS

                      MEETING OF THE IMPLEMENTATION TEAM
                 TO BE HELD AT 2.00 PM, FRIDAY 11 AUGUST 1989
                 IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM, POLICE HEADQUARTERS


INTRODUCTION

We agreed at the last meeting on 8 August, that the immediate need is to agree
an implementation plan in respect of all those recommendations affecting
ourselves and others which have to be in place by 19 August and in front of
which we have to have a written agreement with the clubs.

At this meeting, therefore, we will work through these issues. Thereafter,
but not in any detail, we will consider how to further progress our work.


THE WRITTEN AGREEMENT - REQUIREMENTS ARISING

Today we will determine those matters to be included in the 'written
agreement'.

As we consider further the Popplewell Report, the Green Guide, the recent Home
Office Circular, other relevant matters and have further liaison with the
clubs, it may be that the matters contained in the first written agreement
will be expanded or altered.

Part of our response to recommendation 24 will be a formal arrangement whereby
in advance of each football match the police liaison officer and the club
liaison officer (possibly the secretary or safety officer) will meet and
consider the planning arrangements which will apply in respect of the match in
question.

As a part of this they will need on each occasion to take into account the
number of spectators anticipated, any intelligence on behavioural
difficulties, the pattern of arrival, the segregation policy to be adopted,
the number of turnstiles to be used in respect of each major spectator group,
the state of those turnstiles, the possible input speed in respect of each
main spectator group (note Inquiry report calculation that a throughput of 750
an hour per turnstile should be achievable). When tickets are to be sold they
will consider the information provided on those tickets by way of plans,
arrival times, colour coding or anything else which is seen as relevant from
the point-of-view of public safety.

With regard to recommendation 28 - the police reserves available for rapid
deployment - these are only required because a football match is taking place.
The most likely area of difficulty to which these reserves would be committed
is either inside or in the immediate vicinity of the ground and therefore they
will be available at the ground.

The significance of this is that their costs will fall on the club.

A problem arises because the size of the reserve will vary from place to place
and from match to match.

There is a need to include reference to these reserves, their location and the
financial consequences in the written agreement.
Regarding the contract for repayment of police services with the clubs, the
future position is likely to be as follows

Once the implications of predictable increases in police strength at football
events has been determined, the contract can be adjusted accordingly. In
terms of reserve costs, the size of this requirement will not be the same at
each ground and will besubject to change depending on the game to be policed.
Therefore in terms of the contract it may be that     we    simply add onan item
asterisked 'plus police reserves'.

In relation to recommendation 37, brief reference will need to be made, saying
that the emergency services as required by the Report are working together to
agree contingency plans in respect of access, rendezvous points, accessibility
within the ground for vehicles from all three emergency services, and as
appropriate the intention is to enjoin club officials in these discussions.


THE OPERATIONAL ORDER - REQUIREMENTS ARISING

A:   Recommendation 1 - A plan of the ground will    be    included showing the
     maximum number of people to be allowed in each section or part of the
     ground; also identifying the pens or other designated areas to be
     monitored by stewards regarding overcrowding or distress; showing
     precisely the location of the police officers manning the gates and
     making it clear that each will have a radio with direct access to Force
     Control.

     It will be made clear that whilst the primary responsibility of
     designated stewards is to monitor the crowd as above, police officers
     getf&rad/iy also have this same responsibility as part of their general
     duties. It is an absolute requirement that the officers at the gates
     (which will always be left open) must be known to the designated stewards
     referred to so as to enable immediate contact from the steward via those
     officers to Force Control in the event of difficulties.

     At the grounds without gates officers will be located on the perimeter to
     provide this same communication facility and will identify themselves to
     the stewards performing this duty."


B:   Recommendation 3(a)(b) - Regarding 3(a) this will be included by way
     of information as to club responsibilities. Regarding 3(b) this will be
     included in the form of a contingency plan dealing with the event of the
     club requesting assistance to prevent access and overcrowding or other
     difficulties.


C:   Recommendation 10 - Reference must be made to the availability of cutting
     equipment, where this is applicable, and as to who will use it if
     necessary. Also that the decision to use it is the police officer in
     command at the ground.


D:   Recommendation 27 - The Order and the pre-match briefing MUST alert all
     officers on duty to the dangers of overcrowding and also contingency
     plans to deal with this wherever it occurs in the ground.
Recommendation 28 - Reference will also be made to those officers on
reserve available for rapid re-deployment in terms of their identity,
location, availability, transportation and the communication arrangement
regarding this.


Recommendations 31/34 - Once the communication matters contained in thes
recommendations have been addressed, then details will need to be
included in the Order.


Recommendation 36 - The requirement to provide the emergency services
with information about every football event as set out will in the main
be achieved by supplying them before each match with a copy of our Order
and therefore this information will need to be included therein.


Recommendation 37 - The requirement regarding the contingency plans must
be referred to in some detail.


Recommendation 38 - The specific briefing regarding police reaction to
the arrival at the ground of emergency services will need to be included
n
a




     C ~-e>— 8-% ^U/ '     J_   ^




    L^J>~s y - ^          xSf       S   -   U   .   ' C




                                                                     i£j2K~-^_— ,




                                                          CO c/ ^ ^ l Ij
                   I 'ftJ 0S




                                                                   /^Xw-ic-eA




                                                                     I
- C r fr




           1
                    A
                    UGU
                      ST                                                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                                                                                              E P
                                                                                                                                                                                                T EMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ER

                    12      13     14      15      16     17       18        19       20        21         22        23        24        25        26        27        28      29   30   31   1   2   3   4   5       6    7   8       9   10   11   12   13

D.C.C.


C/SUPT B
       ROO
         MHE
           AD       ------------


SUPTSG
     REE
       NWO
         OD          -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


          SIMPSON


        O
        UGH
          TON                                               ------
                                                                 --------------------------------------------------------------------------------


          S
          L E
            A T
              H                                             ................................................................................................................


          M
          ARS
            H


C/INSP BETTISON     --------——----------—-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


C/INSP D
       ONN
         ELL
           Y                                                                                                                                                            _

c   )        Lm s

                    S
                    E P
                      T E
                        M B
                          ER                                                                                                                                                                  O
                                                                                                                                                                                              CTOB
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ER

                    14     15      16     17      18      19      20        21        22        23        24        25        26        27        28        29        30                      1   2   3   4   5   6       ‘7   8   9       10   11   12   13   14   15   16

-D.C.C.


C/SUPT B
       ROO
         MHE
           AD


SUPTSG
     REE
       NWO
         OD


          SIMPSON


        O
        UGH
          TON


          S
          L E
            A T
              H


          M
          ARS
            H


C/INSP BETTISON


C/INSP D
       ONN
         ELL
           Y



c/>,~Y
                       MEETING OF THE IMPLEMENTATION TEAM
                TO BE HELD AT 10.30 AM, THURSDAY 17 AUGUST 1989
                  IN THE LECTURE THEATRE, POLICE HEADQUARTERS


                                 A G E N D A


1.   Apologies for Absence


2.   Minutes of the Previous Meeting (11 August 1989)


3.   Matters Arising:

     a.   Written Agreements                                 -    Mr Hayes

     b.   Operational Orders                                      Supt Simpson

     c.   Liaison with Emergency Services                    -    Mr Hayes/
                                                                  Supt Oughton

     d.   Additional Manpower Costs                               Supt Hale


4.   Training in Crowd Densities (recommendation six)             Supt Torr


5.   CCTV/Turnstile Monitoring Equipment                          Chief Insp Beal
     (recommendation 30)                                          for Supt Sleath


6.   Communications (recommendations 31, 32, 33, 34)              Supt Marsh


7.   Any Other Business


8.   Date of Next Meeting
               MEETING OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION TEAM
                      HELD AT 10.30 AM ON THURSDAY 17 AUGUST 1989      _
                      IN THE LECTURE THEATRE, POLICE HEADQUARTERS      J


Present:

P Hayes Esq QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable - Chairman
Chief Superintendent Broomhead
Superintendents Hale, Marsh, Oughton, Simpson and Torr
Chief Inspectors Beal, Bettison, Chambers, Donnelly, Hellewell, Purdy
  and Warne
Inspector Townend


Apologies for absence were received from Superintendents Greenwood and Sleath.


 8/89          MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETING

The minutes of the meeting held on 11 August 1989, were accepted as a true and
accurate record of that meeting with the following exceptions

        a.    Page four - item 5/89 - paragraph two

        The sentence "The Secretary, Chief Inspector Bettison, confirmed that
        each member was in possession of these documents" should be amended to
        read "The Secretary, Chief Inspector Bettison, confirmed that each member
        was in possession of the documents relevant to their functional
        responsibility".

        b.    Page five - item 6.1 - paragraph five

        The sentence "He said the computer has been programmed to sound an alarm
        when the capacity has been reached" should be amended to read "He said
        the computer has been programmed to sound an alarm when the crowd reached
        10% off capacity".

        c. The Chairman referred to item (v) of minute 5/89 - 'The ACPO Guide to
        Policing Football' and asked Chief Inspector Beal to add this document to
        his existing functional responsibilities.

        d. The Chairman referred to item (vii) of minute 5/89 - 'South Yorkshire
        Police - Standing Instructions for the Policing of Football Grounds' and
        asked Superintendent Oughton to add this document to his existing
        functional responsibilities.


 9/89         MATTERS ARISING FROM THE PREVIOUS   MINUTES (11   AUGUST 1989)

        9.1   Written Agreements (item 6.1)

The Chairman said that he is endeavouring to attain a common position across
the Force in respect of police/club responsibilities at each of the grounds,
in order to achieve a situation whereby any officer of this Force assigned to
a football match in South Yorkshire will   be fully   aware oftheir
responsibilities and that of the clubs.    He added  that theagreements are a
major step in that direction.
Mr Hayes informed the group that a meeting with representatives from each of
the clubs will take place at Police Headquarters on Thursday 24 August 1989 to
discuss the recommendations by Lord Justice Taylor.

The Chairman said that although the agreements firmly put the responsibility
of implementing recommendations three and five with the clubs, paragraph 165
of the Taylor Report states

     'There remains, however, the question whether there are some grounds or
     parts of grounds where the club may need to rely upon the police (whom
     they pay to attend) to control filling of pens and monitoring them for
     overcrowding. In other words, whilst the duty in law to ensure safety
     rests upon the club, they may need, and by agreement be entitled, to
     employ the police to act as their agents in certain circumstances. This
     very difficult and grey area as to club and police responsibility will
     need to be reviewed in greater depth at stage two of this Inquiry.'

He said there is also the ACPO submission at paragraph 1^ of their report
which indicates that crowd control is always going to be inextricably linked
to criminal hooliganism and the police will never accept direction from
stewards. It is suggested in these circumstances the police must accept a
leading role and despite the requirements and civil liabilities of football
clubs themselves take on supervision of the overall conduct of events wherever
crowd safety is an issue.

The Chairman said that all officers will be briefed that they are primarily
concerned with crowd safety and this should be included in the Operational
Order.

Mr Hayes ascertained that each club had now reviewed the maximum capacities in
each section of their ground as per recommendation two of the Taylor Report.
At the request of Superintendent Torr, the Chairman asked members to be in a
position to relate the reviewed permissible density for each section of the
terracing.

Chief Superintendent Broomhead asked that with the exception of 'A' Division
members should forward copies of the amended Safety Certificates directly to
him for his information.

Superintendent Simpson said that the police have an input into each of the
Ground Safety Certificated and suggested that the Force strive for a common
policy in this respect. Superintendent Marsh said that the Fire and
Ambulance Services had also suggested that the four Districts should meet to
agree common policy. The Chairman said that this was a valid suggestion and
the proposal will be put to them.

Chief Superintendent Broomhead reported to the meeting that the written
agreement required by recommendation four had been agreed and signed by
Doncaster Rovers, Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United.

Superintendent Oughton said it is likely the agreement with Rotherham United
will be completed by noon on Friday 18 August 1989.

Superintendent Simpson said regarding Barnsley Football Club he had handed the
agreement to the Club Secretary, Mr Spinks, and they are now considering it.
     9.2   Operational Orders (item 6.2)

Superintendent Simpson stated that he had commenced the collation of the South
Yorkshire Orders together with Operational Orders from other Forces. He said
after research has been completed he will commence the production of a draft
'model' Order for consideration by the Implementation Team.


     9.3   Liaison with Emergency Services (item 6.3)

Regarding the service of Operational Orders to the Ambulance and Fire
Services, the Chairman said that it has been initially agreed the Order will
be served five days in advance of the match but after discussion it was agreed
tii^.s should be reduced to three days •

The Chairman referred to 'Note for File' dated 14 August 1989,   which was
circulated at the meeting. He said he had spoken to the Chief    Fire Officer
regarding recommendations 35 to 38 and it has been agreed that   Mr Alan Seaman,
Assistant Chief Fire Officer, will be the nominated officer as   required by
recommendation 35 in respect of arrangements in the County.

Superintendent Oughton said that each sub-divisional commander has now met
with the local nominated officers from the Ambulance and Fire Services and the
arrangements have been agreed for the service of the Operational Orders direct
to the local liaison officer.

The liaison officers are as follows:-

     Doncaster       Ambulance Service        Mr Wade
                     Fire Service             Mr Pritchard

     Rotherham       Ambulance Service        Mr Eason
                     Fire Service             Mr Copley

     Barnsley        Ambulance Service        Mr Horner
                     Fire Service             Mr Robbins

     Sheffield       Ambulance Service        Mr Morley
     United          Fire Service             Mr Liversidge

     Sheffield       Ambulance Service        Mr Higgins
     Wednesday       Fire Service             Mr Ryder

The Chairman asked what method was to be employed in order to communicate
alterations which might occur after the service of the Operational Order.
Superintendent Hale suggested the use of a telex. This was agreed.

Superintendent Oughton informed the meeting that the contingency plans for the
arrival of emergency services at each of the grounds have now been agreed in
accordance with recommendation 37.


     9.4   Additional Manpower Costs (item 6.1)

Superintendent Hale said that at present the criteria for charging the clubs
is laid down in the form of a commercial contract between the Police Authority
and each club. This contract includes the scale of charges based on the
estimated crowd.
The contract itself is relatively new and was not introduced until the 1987/88
season ana resulted from the problems encountered in 19S7 as a result of the
serious financial difficulties of Rotherham United.

Prior to the introduction tc the contract the arrangements were that prior to
each season a meeting was held with the clubs to discuss the proposed scale of
charges.

Hr Hale said that following representation from the clubs that South Yorkshire
charges were comparatively higher than elsewhere in the country' the charges
were reduced for the 1982/83 season to the criteria currently operating.

The Harris judgment clearly stated that the police duties inside the ground
cire 3 s'oecis.l service snd tlist th.e police were sslced by t. h.e club- tc ensure
safety and generally supervise the crowd and most importantly the club should
pay for these services.

He said the financial implications for the police are considerable in manpower
terms alone, the cost of reserves for each match will add substantially to the
football budget. Additional areas of cost will be new communications
equipment and training.

Mr Hale said the Harris judgment states that, the police inside the ground were
carrying out the duties owed by the club to those whom it had invited onto its
premises, ie the spectators, and that this is in addition to that which an
ordinary citizen would not expect and were not entitled. It was therefore a
special police service under Section 51(1) of the Police Act 1964 for which
the Police Authority could charge. Those duties on behalf of the club in
addition to public order were crowd management and safety/rescue and the
enforcement of ground regulations.

He said that it is quite clear that policing inside the ground and related to
the duties described above should be paid by each club. It is also clear that
criteria for levelling charges certainly does not now reflect the levels of
policing required by the Taylor report. Officers exclusively on duty inside
the ground include all officers designated to perimeter exits.and exits out of
the ground in the event of an emergency. Added to this must be officers there
without specific essential duties, but -responsible for general crowd
management.

He said the scale of manpower related to the crowd size was set prior to both
the Popplewell and Taylor Inquiries and because of this he argued that these
specific duties should form the minimum level of policing regardless of crowd
size and that thereafter additional police officers are added according to the
levels set out in the current criteria for levying charges.

Mr Hale suggested that the minimum levels for each ground would be       as at
Appendix ’A ’.

He then outlined Appendix ’B ’ which gives the average manpower charged to the
club in the season 1988/89 and the effect of using the suggested new criteria
set out above. In addition there are other personnel whose duties are
essential to the football matches, but could be said to have functions
relating to both inside and outside the ground (Appendix ’C *).

He said one other major area of cost are police reserves whichshould be built
into every match. However, the recommendation does not give any indication of
                                         - 5 -


the numbers or who should pay, as it states they must be available for
deployment inside or outside the ground.

Mr Hale said if the above is used as a basis of charging the clubs, as a
general approximation the costs to the club     would double.He added  thathis
suggestions are intended as points to discuss and are not intended as the only
way forward. He said that his suggestion does in fact produce an anomaly
whereby Sheffield United would in fact pay more than Sheffield Wednesday
despite lower average crowds simply because    there are moregates to cover.

 Chief Inspector Bettison stated that during the Inquiry he had held a
 discussion with Mr Metcalf (solicitor for South Yorkshire Police) regarding
rwhich officers on duty at Hillsborough were responsible to Sheffield Wednesday
 Football Club by way of .special services to the club under Section 51(1) cf
 the Police Act 1964, He said that Mr Metcalf was of the opinion that any
 cfficar employed on the clubs property, either inside or outside the ground,
 were employed as special services.

The Chairman said he intended to raise this issue with the Police Authority at
the meeting on 18 August 1989, particularly the cost of the police reserves,
and this item will be taken forward to the next meeting.


        9.5   Contingency Arrangements (item 6.2)

The Chairman referred to the discussion at the previous meeting regarding the
inclusion of contingency plans in the Operational Orders. He said there was
an urgent need to identify specific problems that could occur and the action
necessary to deal with them adequately.

During the ensuing discussion it was agreed that a core of contingency plans
will be common to each match, whilst others will be dependant on additional
factors. The Chairman asked Superintendent Simpson to prepare a paper
outlining the core of contingency plans to be implemented at each of the
grounds to be discussed at the next meeting.

Chief Superintendent Broomhead indicated that he intended to hold a sub-group
meeting with members of the Implementation Team on Friday 18 August and
Tuesday 22 August 1989 when the whole aspect of contingency plans will be
addressed. Core plans will be available in ground control rooms from the
start of the football season.


10/89         TRAINING IN CROWD DENSITIES (RECOMMENDATION SIX)

Superintendent Torr said that recommendation six outlined three main areas
with which all officers and stewards with duties in relation to the terraced
areas, particularly the designated officers and stewards on the perimeter
track, should be fully briefed and trained. These areas being -

        (a)   recognition of crowd densities;
        (b)   recognition of signs of distress; and,
        (c)   crowd dynamics.

He said that it is the intention to produce a training video of 15 minutes'
duration which will encompass the whole of those areas recommended and this
can be used to train officers and club stewards. However, production of the
video will not be completed for four/six weeks.
                                                                            - 6 -


Mr Torr then presented a short video outlining the intended format.                                                                                                The
format was agreed.

Superintendent Torr informed the meeting that he had organised a series of
photographs showing the various densities per 10 square metres and these will
be distributed to the sub-divisional counsanders prior to the councencement of
the football season. The Chairman said these should also be brought to the
attention of the club stewards.

Mr Torr suggested that the designated officers should also be aware of the
agreed density for each area of the terracing.

^ 11 ■*'") O        C l ' w r v j ^ r    O ' 1’   ^       C ■i- — ^   V . -n V   A    7 *                                                      —V              _
— “-*■                          w w i-   J - O    O   *   w w w>-*                   v      ~ G ~   - ii'C   - 4. u   £ * j- >J   u N-.   G.    v — vu ■». w       5 . . U W - . i g

how each of the five grounds in South Yorkshire should be policed and the
aspect of crowd densities could be included in that film.

Superintendent Torr circulated to the meeting an aide aemoire outlining                                                                                                    the
symptoms, signs and treatment of compression of the chest ar.d suggested                                                                                                   its
issue to all officers deployed in football duties. The Chairman agreed                                                                                                     to the
proposal and stated issue should take place immediately. He added that                                                                                                     the
club stewards should also be issued with copies.


11/89          CCTV/TURNSTILE MONITORING EQUIPMENT

Chief Inspector Beal said that CCTV was funded by the Football Trust in 1981
for the installation of the first purpose built closed circuit television
system at Aston Villa Football Club, Birmingham. Since that time the
development of CCTV has been away from its use as a Command and Control
facility towards its use as an intelligence and evidence gathering system.

He said both the ACPO Public Order Guide and ACPO Working Party Report on CCTV
highlight this move and it is interesting to note that nowhere in either of
these weighty volumes is the monitoring of crowd safety by CCTV even
considered.

Mr Beal said the limited timescale given to achieving this review of both CCTV
and turnstile counting equipment throughout South Yorkshire had necessitated
those involved in undertaking brief surveys at the grounds in question and
making 'estimates' in respect of installation costs of such equipment.
Therefore, the information can only be used as a guidance for further
discussions with clubs.

On behalf of Superintendent Sleath he wished to record his thanks to the staff
of the AVA department and in particular Sergeant Foster and Mr Hall, for their
assistance in completing the surveys in the short time allowed.

Mr Beal then outlined the details of the survey in respect of each club
(Appendix 'D').

The Chairman said that it is important that the systems installed enable the
monitoring of crowd densities outside the ground, within concourse areas and
in pens and other standing areas in line with recommendation 21 of the Taylor
Report.

The Chairman referred to recommendation 30 which states that there should be
available in the police control room the results of all closed circuit
9
                                                         -   7   -




    television monitoring both inside and outside the ground and asked what was
    the implications of this recommendation for the clubs in this Force area.

    Chief Inspector Beal said that Sheffield Wednesday presently have a CCTV
    monitoring system linked to their own control room and arrangements are iii
    hand to link this system into the existing system in the police control room
    and this will increase the present number of monitors from seven to nine.

    After further discussion the Chairman thanked Chief Inspector Beal and said
    the survey should form the basis of further discussions with the clubs.

    Superintendent Simpson said the Football Trust carried out surveys of the CCTV
    c—
    5JrC w  CLi_ ui.C O U C11 V-v-r-V-— a. ^             **-■*- -3 .
                                               WClC Cuiii^iCi.CU   *L!&--CD
                                                                          *-
                                                                           ^ j___      --AA
                                                                              ’CCi . U SC-Q
            *'.ir f*nc*cw For cllieu** xrcni Cue   ncnic j f t i c s   bcisntiiic   H c s s s r c n c*. DcVc^Cuiuciit
    Branch was carrying out those surveys and suggested that it may be beneficial
    to consult with him. This was agreed and Chief Inspector Beal will do so.

    Chief Inspector Beal sa.id- the report (Acoendix 'D') also contains a survev of
    the turnstiles in operation at each of the grounds and outlines the required
    work and estimated cost to comply with the second part of recommendation 30,
    ie, there should be available in the police control room the results of any
    electronic or mechanical counting of numbers at turnstiles or of numbers
    sdni.1 t ed to any area of the g r o u n d .


    12/89         COMMUNICATIONS - RECOMMENDATIONS 31/34

    Superintendent Marsh circulated at the meeting a discussion paper on the
    aspects of communications as recommended by the Taylor Report.

    The Chairman thanked Mr Marsh and stated that the paper will be discussed at
    the next meeting.

    The Chairman informed the meeting that the communications system at
    Hillsborough had already been changed and the portable equipment replaced with
    a permanent base station. The advantages are increased reliability, a built
    in standby system and most importantly a technical change whereby even on
    "talk through" the operator always maintains control. The intention is to
    similarly replace the equipment at the other football grounds and a paper is
    being submitted to the Finance & General Purposes Committee meeting on
    15 September for the necessary finance.


    13/89         ANY OTHER BUSINESS

            13.1 Tabards

    The Chairman stated that the designated officers under recommendation nine
    should wear a yellow tabard as a means of identification. He said that this
    decision should be implemented from the first match of the season and sub-
    divisional commanders should ensure they have sufficient numbers to comply.

    Mr Hayes added that it is intended to purchase 'purpose made' tabards for this
    use and asked members to suggest a suitable colour etc. at the next meeting.
             SYMPTOMS, SIGNS & TREATMENT OF
                 COMPRESSION OF THE CHEST



Compression of the Chest:

A^^rson      whose chest     is    crushed does      not breathe
col^ctly.      The chest cannot rise and fall and the
body is deprived of oxygen.


Synptoas and Signs:

The casualty becomes confused and distressed.
Difficulty     in    breathing      -   the   rate    and   depth
increase.
Breathing may become noisy with snoring or gurgling.
Possible frothing at the mouth.          If a lung is damaged
this may be blood stained.
Blueness of the face and lips.
Unconsciousness.
Breathing stops.


Treatment:

Remove the cause and ensure adequate fresh air.
A    the airway.
I^nio breathing commence resuscitation.
If   no      heart    beat        commence    external      chest
compressions.
Seek medical aid as soon as possible.
                                       - 8 -


     13.2 Advisory Groups - Recommendation 17

The Chairman promoted a discussion concerning the formation of local authority
advisory groups as recommended by the Taylor Report. It was agreed that the
s u b - G i v i sionai commander of his deputy would act as the representatives of the
Force.


     13 •^ Postponing Kick-Off

The Chairman said the earlier scheme whereby referees would-seek the final
permission of the police before starting the game will no longer apply.



There being no further business the meeting closed at 1.00 pm.
COMMUNICATIONS - A DISCUSSION PAPER

I was tasked with looking at recommendations 31 to 34 under the title of
*Conmunications'. These included radio, telephone, semaphore and any related
matters thereto. I was supplied with a paper that had been prepared by Chief
Inspector Creaser of the. Corrmunications Department and instructed to establish
a close liaison with his staff.

History has shown over the years that at any major event, whether it be a
disaster or not, conraunications have always presented problems. I am sure that
systems have been reviewed many times in the past and various recorrmendations
will have been made. In relation to Hillsborough, the. problems that were
encountered are well documented within the Taylor Report and it would serve no
useful purpose for me to go through these problems at this point. Suffice for
me to identify the paragraphs in the report that refer to corrmunications and
identify the fault.

Paragraph 65 - identifies the fact that radio corrmunications at Hillsborough
went down at 2.44 pm.

Paragraph 244 - identifies the fact that Channel 25 was subject to excessive
air traffic.

Paragraph 303 - identifies the fact that messages from officers on the perimeter
track were not received by the Control Room,: , .                              '

What I intend to do is work my way through Recommendations 31 to 34 as general
as possible. You must appreciate that local peculiarities may prevail and
require certain adjustments. You should also take into account that match
categories will to some degree have an influence on certain of my
recommendations.

As a thought, before commencing the critique it is perhaps worthy of note that
I am informed that our entire radio equipment throughout the force leaves a lot
to be desired.

Recomrrendation 31

There should .,t>e sufficient operators in the Police Control Room to enable all ?
radio transmissions to be received, evaluated and answered. The radio system
Should be such as to give operators in the Control Room priority over, and the ?
capacity to override, others using the sane channel. Additional channels should
be used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves. Consideration
should be given to sound-proofing the Control Room against excessive crowd noise.

This reconmendation deals with four separate matters and I will deal with each
on an individual basis.

a)   This deals with the staff in the Control Room at football grounds. It is
     suggested that there should be a minimum of two trained officers in every
     Control Room at football grounds together with a commander. The Force
     Communications School at Ecclesfield have intimated that they will be able
     to put a course together for officers carrying out these duties and that
     there may be merit in the commanding officers attending these courses. It
     is suggested that all officers working in football control roans should
     attend such a course as soon as possible. The Communications School state
     that radio discipline is vital at football grounds and that everyone
     connected with communications could benefit from this course.
b)   This refers to the quality of equipment presently in football control roans.
     It is fair to say that only Barnsley's at the moment is up to any reasonable
     standard. At Doncaster they operate the football control room by use of
     a hand held radio. On Wednesday, 16 August 1988, I attended a demonstration
     of new equipment that has been installed at Hillsborough Football Ground.
     This consists of the installation of a two-bay radio set capable of use with
     head sets and booster microphones. In the event of radio failure, all that
     is necessary is the flick of a switch and command is restored. In the event
     of electricity failure, it takes approximately ten seconds to switch to the
     battery back-up. This equipment is capable of being linked into tape
     recording facilities and this will be done in the ,,r«ar,Jut’
                                                                 ure« ...It, is.,
          mended that all grounds in South Yorkshire be brought !up to this’ /
     standard as soon as possible.

c)   This deals with the number of channels in use at football grounds. I have
     received strong representations from one ground commander virtually demanding
     a second channel to be used as a corrmand channel. He explained that Channel
     25 could be used by officers in and around the ground and Channel 29 could
     be used by himself, his two Chief Inspectors and his two Inspectors as a
     command channel and that his radio would use the scan facility to pick up
     the traffic from Channel 25. None of the other ground commanders are in
     agreement with the need for this facility, at the same time accepting that
     additional facilities nay be required from time to time dependent on the
     category of the match. It was pointed out that Channel 7 is a back to back
     channel and could be used by commanders for private conversation and also
     in the case of an emergency. It has been confirmed with the Communications
     Department that should any football ground at any time, for any particular
     occasion, require a secondary channel, then they will be able to install
     it for that particular incident. It is therefore considered that the
     provision of one football channel and the use of Channel 7 is adequate.
     As an aside, in respect of the two Sheffield grounds, provided they make
     previous arrangements with the Communications Department, they can have use
     of Channel 29 as a secondary channel, at any time they wish.

d)   This deals with Acoustics .in.CoKtrol/RoaiB: at football grounds. Being
     realistic, there is not perhaps the need to have the control roans at
     Doncaster and Bramall Lane sound-proofed, and Barnsley have intimated that
     it is not essential at Oakwell. Having regard to all the circumstances it
     is recommended that Control Rooms at the football grounds in South Yorkshire,
     in the fullness of time, be sound-proofed.

Whilst discussing radios it is perhaps pertinent to mention that at some grounds
all officers on duty are in possession of a personal radio whereas at others
it is restricted. The Commandcations Department inform me that to achieve a
satisfactory level of command no more than 100 officers should be in possession
of a radio.

Recommendat ion 32

To compliment radio conmunications, there should be a completely separate system
of land lines with telephone links between the Control Room and key points at
the ground. This identifies two issues which are:-

a)    Key points - obviously these will vary from ground to ground but during
     ray disSussions with representatives of the five grounds the following
- 3 -




     2

     3

     4   The Casualty Clearance Centre

     5

     6 All Police Rooms

     7 Various locations outside the ground


b)   Type of Equipment

     I am reliably informed that the main expense in establishing a telephone
     system at such a location as a football ground, is the provision of the 'ring
     circuit'. Thereafter it is quite cheap to take as many telephones as
     necessary from this one ring. It is suggested that for outside locations
     a weather proof jack-plug should be installed and that the telephone be
     connected to it on match days only. This should consist of a vandal proof,
     weather proof telephone with a flashing light to attract attention.

     It is recommended that each ground is given a full survey by the
     Communications Department in liaison with the ground commanders and that


Recommendation 33

With the Control Room there should be a public address systeiit^t^ cwttnahicate
with individual areas outside and inside the ground- with gr©ups of areas or with

to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the ground.
This arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for
every natch.

The
recommendation is the equipment installed at Hillsborough. Only recently has
m i s been issijed.;with.a signal preceding the message. Quite simply, it is
recamended that all grounds cg^ly with this recottwendation. It is an essential
form of communication and will enable ground commanders to pass messagers to
fans queueing outside as to the fact, for example the 1kick-off' has been delayed
or that they should move to other turnstiles to gain admission or indeed for
any emergency. This work should be done as soon as possible.

Recommendation 34

Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address
the crowd. Cons ideration should also be given to the use, by police officers,
of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to the Control Roan the existence
of certain emergencies or requirements.
In relation to the illuminated advertising boards, only two grounds in South
     'ire have, them, these being the two Sheffield clubs, and in both cases the.
boards are. not visible to everyone in the crowd. It is agreed that the Police
should have access to put messages onto these boards. This could be. done, perhaps
by telephone but the commanders must always be. aware that their message will
not necessarily be. going to everyone, in the ground. The final part of this
recommendation deals with hand signals. Many officers were surprised by the
inclusion of this recommendation in the Taylor Report. Hand signals were corrraon
place in the late 70s and early 80s by PSUs but were discontinued due to them
continuously being misunderstood, misread or not being visible to the officers.
It must be remembered that in a crowd situation the only hand signals visible
are those above the head, this immediately puts a limit on the use of hand
signals.

I have taken this matter up with the Forward Planning Unit at New Scotland Yard
and they share my views that if hand signals are. to be taken into use they should
be done on a national basis and kept to a minimum number. Superintendent Revill-
Johnson of the Forward Planning Unit is pursuing this matter on my behalf and
I expect to hear from him in the near future. Quitesimply, this mattershould
be referred to ACPO for them to evaluate.

It will be seen that a lot of the recommendat ions involve a lot of expense and
perhaps discussions with the club should take place as to where the money is
coming from. If we are to comply fully with theTaylor Report    as wemust, then
the money has got to be found from somewhere.




Superintendent
                                                                APPENDIX 5A*

(1)
■
                Sheffield Utd           Sheffield W       Barns lev                                Done    Rotherham
                          .




NO Of           13 (26}                  13 (26)          3 (6)                                    3 (6)   10 (20)
perimeter
gates

No of           23                       14               16                                       4       12
emersencv
exits
                                                                                                       •


Minimum         36 (49)                  27 (40)          lO 1?? 1                                 7 HOI   22 1 32
officers
required                      '
                                  '            ■
                      ■
                                                      ............   ...........- ........... ..




f2)

Minimum level with supervisors


                 Insp             Sgts             PCs
                 1                A
    SUFC                                           36
                 (2)              (6)              (49)


    SWFC         1                3                27
                 2                (5)              (40)


    Barnsley                      2                19
                 (1)              (3)              (22)


    Rotherham    1                3                22
                (1)               (4)              (32)



(Figures in brackets are those if two officers are allocated to each exit).
                                                                       APPSa€3IX *B*

(1)      Officers paid for by the Clubs using average gates for 1388/89 season
         and existing charging criteria.



       SUFC               1          9
       18,563


       SWFC               1      .   14.              32
       11,666
                          ....                   ■

                                                                   1
       Barnsley                      2                17           i
       8,336          '                                            t
                                                                   !
       Doncaster                     A                s
          (—• r~.
       z,xSa
                                                     ....
       Rotherham                     2                n
       4,923



( 2)

If minimum levels set by essential duties (appendix 'A') are added to above
using above as general crowd safety/management the figures are as below.

I
                                                                       |          1
                          0/                Insp            Sgt            PC


       SUFC               l                2                8              68
                          (i)              (3)              (10)           (81)


       SWFC                                 2               6              50
                          (i)               (3)             (8)            (63)


       Barnsley                                             4              36
                                            (1)             (5)            (39)


       Doncaster                                            2              15
                                                            (2)            (18)
\


       Rotherham                           1                5              33
                                           (1)              (6)            (43)
!

Figures in brackets (as appendix 'A')
                                                                APPENDIX *C'


Po:■.:e personnel c-n other essential duties


                               SWflC        Barnsley      Doncaster     Rotherham


                               Sgt     PC      Sgt   PC   Sgt    PC     Sgt    PC

   .*U i   j.   uw i
  i»                                           1     I
           — —              — —* —               r\j x        <T       w.        o    CO    r\    CD   — a            ->        rs   ro r - 7T    — rs
o 6             p      cc fTj * ’            Q       a        3    n   Q              CT          3                   5         p    rr     rjs       2
3 <        I—1 3            3         P      s   x o          ST   P   3         s    t-J         3"   X B            o X       s    P CD P       X 6S     c
CO cd      CD CD 03 CD CD 3                          0        P    3   O         (D   CD    rt    P       f5          WJ        to   3      ?         to   a
H* H       a                    •-S          g - C_( rt       3        r t cr
                                                                                 5
                                                                                      CD    Er    3    C 4*   .            o    *    a C.         o *      w
    CD     <.•' w-<                   C3         < C-         Cl   P r*»              rr    CD'   O       &           Cu G      p    *      3     o p      *3
CD CL      CT CT            r t s; f—        3 a              CD   i—1 o €                        CD   s              CT r—*            CL i—     h-*
H?               53 U—i         CD I-*                        CL   I-* 3         . M 2 CTQ        3         m         P o       53      <D        c •      3
■g_ P                  I—1 <“* 3                 c       03   *
                                                                   f— o “3O       a 3O ,T         \U   s. a           3 3w              *■5 f—    jz >     K
                 a              r “ r-                                                            3    M*             Cj                CO                 2
f— CD      .—          C“ o P P                  S   n             P      ; r—       1j a         CT   CT             3“                K* P
CD Q3      O £ rr* 5 u - 5                       o                          O            3             3"             t-i.              CL ZT     3
                                                                   CD                ^-r CL O                         C    Q            CD’       o
       . “H '          O -r- cq'                 O'                • q’ —             o                r-**           ” 3                         3
 a         w.               5 H* H*              pa                    & o                  H*         3                   3            O    rt 3
 <          —          :— <
           ft 3* CD w. !IT
       ?r 3- CD                 r r •t                             2 CO ct
           w
                 3 It 33
  " ~           =<          3 d5 5                                                    «<
       i ~z CO              u_ s 5                                                    CO          cc
 — * — r—
 CD* «■- .— L.                  CT —
 C         r- 6             s ST i~                                                   o           to                       CD
                                                                                                                           ct           CD
 r t CO C o hj                        =<                                              CD                                                a
       c         c t C £ Cc                                                                                                P.
      '3   CD          3    F* 03 €
 2 '■c           CO CT O' CO CD
       b~ JD CT 'W’             H*                                 a co cc            co    *o    co co       <     C- <                     00 <
 a << C P *                     CO I—1                             ^ ct w             c r 03 r t              H-    H* H-                    ct u».
 a                          JS r t                                   ►3 P             M hj p O                CD 0 5                         p    O
                 3                                                 c t (D 3           CD ?T                   S ft! H                        3    €
 i—^ r r i—1 a                  P CO
                                       o                           C CD :                         a    cd         3   rf                     a
 < O                       ?Q                                                                                                                              K
 CD — *-<
                 5 j— 3 C        ri
                            CD D <
                                                                                                                  o c_                                     >
lC               c i*« P               o                           CO H*
       3 __ r—i O c- Q r
           3 **■ ' s-           1—
”3         Ctf       i — rr
 = ,1; —*            j=         ~ *<
 o . H-* o . c5 IP N 1—            *•
 — _                            '—
 r^              —   l b Q CD rr
 .     — —           ‘                 U-T
       2* Z“ f     t Ir         ~ <
       3"   c    CD  ic         ~ •
 ^5 Tj                 IC ZJ —-
                 CO r— C* aq
       h—. 2 w                  03 a
                 —          ■<“
            £E                         =s
 cn c:                 r*s —           o
 c c CL t-r,                     i—.
  i— o           C    ■«        00 P
 CT ^ r s: n O CD
            c          c         p -IT
       rr        r” o           —  »
 rf         P               &
 zz C3                      i—i
 \     rr        a          CD
            ” Q ■—;                    F—
 >3 C       o          — •— —
  * 3"           23 CQ CD {-> 3"
 CT o =5 i-J r r r r 3 r r
  •"3 |3 c CD 05 rr\-t
  23        o 03                       — —
  O 05 c r CO ,— n O c5
 rt                    05        T
        —        >— — s? -—
            ■r Q U:. *                 r:
  r«                   Q
       <         cr 3                  T
  O         0 o             rr O o
            <          o Q i—■ <
 H* O vO *“5 I—■ M                     o •
 ^3 f— C- C*                H* o/— Cl
  u..
  C £ C"               P aq 3 Q-
       Ct <^< «< “              CO «<
                       5 Q !-*•
 s: .—• —                              —•
 c o jit o P                    Q CD
       03 CD _ u        t
 f — *—1 l        -J.           p CO
  -■             J—-       w -    —
       |_; 2 o iu ? H r r
       Q CO T              CL c H*
 CD 05 r t CD r t                      "Zj
 CD a 05 a r r o • CTQ
 Cl        !-: • C* c
     —i. l_l
     i                      —-       n*

rr CO     05         o    a    > i                                                                                                           H- 03
O         rt. >      o    H-   T3 p
    H-    H- T3      3    rt
CJ1       O          o    H-
CD        D          o    O    O H-K
    C         O      c    3    X n
CO CO     O X             CO   H- o
o CD          H-     CO        3 3
c               3    CD p      p
0Q -•—- CD 05            rt    rt rt
          D rt       P         CD
 .
 —           O           —
                         .
      o s            CD ZT     O
 o o D rt            P CD      o O
 D a O O             CO        CO o
      i—1 CD r t         O     rt 3
 r t H- a 05         p T3          O
 r r 0Q      I—1     rt         1 n
 H* r r i—1              O         CD.
 CO r t p . O        r t CO    ?*3 r t
      H- 0Q O        13* H-    CO CD
 H- D r r CO         CD r t    o
 CO 0Q r t r t           CD    o T3
 CO s_- H-           >"3       • H-
 c •« D 1            CD CD         I—1
 CD      0Q          P 3           !—*
 • rr                n a       o P
      ZT     ON                p h-
      CD 05 ■«
          M o
                     o    o    3
                     1
                     —1
                      ^ ^3 CD i-<
      O rt o               n 6
  •       H* o       CT CT p
      H* o •         3" ^T     CD
      CO             CD CD - M
          f
          —                CO M
     05 05 ^— V      CO 0Q   - CD
          hj D           n     CL
             o       P o s  :
                     3 c o c*
                         3 c O
          H-         P CL I—1•
                     —1 a
                     I
SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

Turnstile Arrangements

X.           Turnstiles are of the rotating barrier type, waist height.
             Turnstiles Number 1-6 give access to the new south stand on
             t*
              -v!      N      umber "'— 10 crivs scc^ss. iio th€ BiT3.iTis.il Ls.ns
             terracing, but are currently used.
             Turnstiles Number 11,12,14 & 15 give access to the
             Bramall Lane stand only.




             Turnstiles Numser         2 /-29 inclusive nor in use.
             Tu-rnstiles Number        30-32 inclusive •give access to the John
             Street terrace       (west side) only.
             Turns "Z2 6S I\uTuDS IT w w fJ t f O fj / Sc 0 m! V6 dCCccs    —G Zi"lw
             John Street stand         (centre only)
             Turnstiles Number         39-41 inclusive give access to the John
                       rr^rrac^ ^s£st si d e v c n 1_v •
             i U r n s n i s s Numb sir Sc 4j> Cjj_tv0 dccss s       to uns jonn
             StaHG   (caSt Wing-)*
             Turnstiles Numbers 44 & 45 give access to the John Street
             Terrace       (east side) only.
             Turnstile Number 46 gives access to the juvenile/disabled
             persons stand only.
             Turnstiles Number 50-feH* inclusive give access to the h a ;n
        "TW: Spion Kop (with the exception of Turnstile Number 52,
■'U.m l J)    which is used as an exit only).
             Turnstiles Number 74-79 inclusive give access to the new
             south stand only.
             It should be pointed           out that the turnstiles numbers are
             no longer consecutive in sequence                   - a number of
             turnstiles have been taken out of use over the years and
             converted to additional emergency exi t s .
2.           The counting mechanism is computer controlled from each
             turnstile with link to a visual display unit in                     the
             club's main office, which is in               the Police room at the
             ground.       (NOTE: This is not the Police Control Room).
3.           The system gives a 'bleep' alarm type warning when a
             particular area reaches 90% of authorised capacity.
4   .        The cost of moving the second VDU from the Police room to
             the Control room would be approximately £150.
to -       T              Fo I rr?          r~ •
O      1   —j
                           O ' »»- Xrr, •   D
C      I   a               c                3 !
<
m
       .
       :                   tr> a p :        ^J
           t"
—S     •

       ]
                          o . LT. <*•       o\
if*    :       ,
                               rn <u        f!-
               j          o
                          C '■ — >            1
                                    E.j
                             i D ft) i      Q.
                             i *> r         &!



               ' 133J d l S    AWW3H0




                      I




                                v^noS




                                                   j
                                                                                                                                                      k--
                                               1 £         Ml r t T3 fD & O                                                                 cc        ©
                                                           Q F- 0    3  F10                                                Z
                                                                                                                           F-g r
                                                                                                                                                      c
                                               Oj r t      o F1F1& 0 F1                                                    rt
                                                  fD tfl   c
                                                           cn r t F-   3 0
                                                                  o Ml U-i       c                                         rr                         H
                                                  H1 C                                                                                                *C
                                                      cr   •  S (D   M     M                                               51                         3
                                               t-2 H**
                                               Gi w             n 2                                                        2        s I               E
                                  P                                                       C
                                                                                          u£1
                                                                                            ) 13                              2 2.                    52
                        &
                                               .£> rr                t. n
                                                                Q = p—  r*                            QJ fD
                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                           Fr       a       m
                                               2                ft 8    5                                                  C                &
                        I                         K <3                     cn r f
                                                     cn         3  I
                                                                K* M
                                                                           rr fD
                                                                           gJ Qj
                                                                                                                           k        2
                                                                                                                           9„
                                                      rt                                                                   fe 2-
                        a?                            H-        s     .                               rr Qj                         =5 C j
                                                                          £       ±'
                                                                          ^      ‘d>                                       S.
i EJ C j fD                                                          fD:   8
                                                                           i—l.
                                                                                g                                          5?
                                                     m       e Ci £•’
                                                               5 i-S f t
                                                      fD     & Qj fD fD
                                                                     cn                   3 &S-S                           1        rr
3 »+ fcS'                                                                                      „ffl       .....
] © E?
  M* W
                                                                                                                                                      >
                                                                                               O
                                                                                               •      •    >
                                                                                                           •      o
                                                                                                                  O O 03
                                                                                                                  •                         D>
                                                                                                                                                      hr
                                                                           3 P
     8
                                                                                                                                                      >
                                                                          iq p.
                                                                                                   j-i 15         !?
                                                                           2 c5                    0 Q            u.
                                                                                               * ?t rr                                                <
                                                                           3 cn                r' r v             cn       F- F  cn                   S3
                                                                                                                                 r-
                                                                           cn Q
                                                                           rt“                     ‘•'            £;       2? 12 5i
                                                                                                  UD              Cj                & Qi
                                                                           5     ?5
                                                                                               cn  0 13           fV                        n
                                                                           r&                  rr c h             rr                        3
         [> 1 tC                                                                 i
                                                                                 —•
                                                                                               M   3
                                                                                               fD Qu              H                         Cj
                                                                                         3     fD • •             £
                                                                                                                  1i                        cn
                                                                                         ifl rr                   F*                        o
                                                                                         rt                       F1                        £ 1)
                                                                                 B"      F-                                                 rt
                                                                                 rt
                                                                                         S'
                                                                                               8“
                                                                                               rt
                                                                                                                  S                         F-
                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                 C
                                                                                 M              §                 5    I                                    s2H
                                                                                                IT*
                                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                                            Cj
                                                                                                                                            cn
                                                                                               Cj




                              M h3
                              F- 0
                                  0
                                              c h3
                                          fD cn Q
                                          o c 0
                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                           H T) Hi
                                                                                                                                    o cn
                                                                                                                                    & o
                                                                                                                                                      K

                             *o
                             : —i
                                  M       0
                                          F F1
                                                  M                                    nr fD                               fD &> rt
                                                                                                                           • cr                      ts
                              fD T03      a   F^ Cj                                                                          F- O                    a
                              cn          fD •< fD                                                                                                   (■£
         rr 05                   s        Pi      Ml                                                                                                 H
                                fD        cn P F-                                                                                   rr Mi            <
                             5 M          •   cn 3                                                                              *< o
                             &                cn F-                                                                                 - o
                                F1
                                F-t
                                               0
                                              o F-
                                                  rt                                                                                  c
                             5^ M             F-     0                                                                              Q •
                                                                                                                                    < w
                                                                                                                                      *              cn
                             3   fD           £1) 3
                                              rt
                                                                                                                                    f
                                                                                                                                    D
                                                                                                                                    F fn             cn
                                              fD F-                                                                                 £1) Q
                                 s
                              H lC
                                              Cj 3
                              cri c
                                                                                                                                    8f
                                   F1         i s . fD
                              Q £r1)t '         rt O                                                                            *       .
                              3                 ET   0                                                                                      i
                                   F-               M                                                                               hti
                             ^0  0              rt C j
                                                F- F-
                                                                                                                                    O f
                                                                                                                                      —1
                              F- 3
                              O •»              3 3
                              rt              n>                                                                                    i §
                              C ua
                              M F-            F1                                                                                    B
                             'D <;
                             cn F-            6
                                              c
                                  3
                                              fn
                             t
                                  U2           D
                                                                                                                                    Cj
                                                                                                                                    hf



                                                                                                                                                   o3
                                                                                                                                            3      o>
                                                                                                                                                   zH
                                                                                                                                                   1-3Z
                                                                                                                                            s      S3 t
                                                                                                                                                      -3
                                                                                                                                            F-
                                                                                                                                            cn     >K
                                                                                                                                                   o Z
                                                                                                                                            £      1-3>
                                                                                                                                                      Z
                                                                                                                                            H         o
                                                                                                                                            fD        K
              m    cr
              £1) • <



                  •<
ROTHERHAM UNITES FOOTBALL GROUND

Turnstile Arrangements


1-      All turnstiles are of a rotating barrier type waist;
        height.
         37 turnstiles giving access as follows:
         1-9       "   Main stand and Terrace.
        10-27 .        Tivoli Kop and Family Enclosure.   (Seated).
         28            Family Enclosure   (seated).
       . <£*   J       viSIICrS   ^ScGlcQ/.




2.       (a)           Computerised system - terminating in
                       Secretary's Office.
         (b)           A Police Link is possible.


3.     When the crowd is at S0% capacity in any section, an
         audible alarm is sounded, whereupon the relevant
         turnstiles will be closed.


4.     The cost of installing a link to the Police Room would b
         approximately £700.
                                                                                                             / L
                                                                                                             r                                »-.t•*y
                                    k         '
                                                                                                                              V           ‘
                                                                                                                                          f
                                    ?)       ■»        •            V; /i                                     fv'1         r ,1 /         I             (•/Is
                                    f A       U— J                    |g                                       O I c^p I

M     (J * jt T g g ,
                                                                                                                                 fcij ■
                                                                   ... .                              mmSTrisr'-
                                                                                                          m .                    Otl
                                               /,,;.         pS5$£.


                                                                                 "Tt VO U *
                                                                                 **v
                                                            ‘ N L^!        m t


                                                      a    \.> v
                                                                           \                                                                                          m
                                                                                                                           ■y2                   •.\v




                                                                                                                                                 \\V



                        Jiiii       .iiil

          iyg ■




.- \ ■' > v * ■\\\N v
                         VA \ \ \ N
" _ -\\                                                                                                                                                          ly

; ^ a ^ N:
\ \W 'V'\ -6'
          '

m        i


V P -' h
■ h \ ^ i
W'v \ ' 2
■••A'- '■ <^                                                                                                                                    Pj         I
* •,\ •'• £                                                                                                                                                J*.


    ■, . ' \ ■
‘x « G - > \
                                                                                                                                                                 0 /X o
                                                                                                                                                                 1
X V v^O -
' "El"-::                                                                                                                                        (a




                                                                                   ^ Pc(jj~y£ rg* *b+c>*6 P\_
                                                                                    Q                      fO                                                             -33-S7 ■


                                             u
                                             U*k *r


                                X
             I                           \        ^           =_=r
                                                              rjt*r
                                                  4*n»
                                                                                  TiiHnSTilU
                                                                                   1-37

                                                           M ain    C*iT &atts            PITC* A C C f U
                                                                                              & A TtS
                                                           A -G                                                         &£££" K
                                                           |otrt'n^iED 8V                     i   -   IO
                                                           W»ITT t«TTT«                   a.q. <q cpt*,*,,rnr®         VieiTotts
                                                               o~    R*»*                  rtva) *»*.«•▼«»
                                                                                                yeujw'
                                          o


OveraJl picture quality would
                                          OJ              rr e t
                                                    »     p) fD                                               H-
                                                                            r t ET
                                                    s                       fD f t td
                                                    H-    £ H-              P Cf Sf
                                                    cn    0 cn
                                          w               c
                                                    5     £ 5
                                                    o     A 0                               n 0      10 rr
                                          c               fD |
                                                                                                     rr ffi
                                          Ci              h
                                                          f\ 75
                                                             *-*>                           rr rr
                                                    'hj                                     H fD
                                                    0»    d »                               O CL        rt
                                          w
                                                          S rr,
                                                    S!    _ &
                                                    M-    w* |’
                                                     H-   cn r>*                                H-
                                          o          r+
                                                          H-NS
                                                               r+
                                                    *S
                                                    Cf
                                          cr        0
                                          *<
be enhance>d by up-qrad.ing of lighting




                                                          i
                                                          —*g
                                                                                                        H-
                                                          rt D
                                                          •    rr                       O   3   rr
                                                               C
                                                          L>

                                                          18                rt M
                                                          ix
                                                          * r&
                                                          *** <—■'   A*
                                                                     w
                                                    03
                                                    rr
                                                          rr rr      c
                                                    H*
                                                          s
                                                          S *T
                                           I              n- 5"
                                                             0)
                                          i-S
                                          fD        ft    m          cn
                                          Cb              ui o
                                                          - *
                                                                     D
                                                                     l_*U
                                                          O Q        n
                                                          o 5        fD

                                                               £     -
                                          ua
                                                    R,
                                          o                    o
throughout




                                          i-s       c t        c
                                                    ►-J
                                                    fD
                                          3.
                                          th
                                          D*        O          £
                                          rt        3
                                                    rf
                                                               fD
                                                    fD         S?                                                       M
                                          n         rt         &
the ground




                                                    Q)         Cb                                             H- M
                                                    n          9
                                                    33
                                          o         §Cb        fD
                                                               I-s
                                                               I-s                                      H-
                                                    cn         Q)
                                          H-        rt         O                                        H-
particularly




                                                    QJ         fD
                                                               cn
                                          rt        &                                                              H-
                                          fD
                                          O
                                          O
                                          cn
                                          rt        S’
                                           I
                                                ■   s                                                              H-
                                          m         K-
in covered




                                          c         5
                                                    fT
                                          o
                                                    (D
                                                    O
                                                    O
                                                    cn
                                                    rt
                                                    m                                                              H
areas.




                                                    ui
                                                    o
                                                    o                                                              H-
                                                    o
BARNSLEY FOOTBALL GROUND


Turnstile Ar ranaements


        All turnstiles are of the rotating Darner type, waist
        height.     There are 47 numbered turnstile entrances.
        Turnstiles number 1 - 10 are situated along the perimeter
        wall which faces into Grove Street Car Park and give
        admission to the brewery stand (Number 10 is for season
        ticket holders only).
        rarnstiies i\ujnc6:X' li ~ iz,    clt   <6 silUaicd aiono uhe


        give admission inro the Pontefract Read end Brand (they
        are not normally used).
        Turnstiles Number 13 - 26 are situated alcncr the
        perimeter wall in Grove Street and give access to the
        Ecnterract i\oad enc stand (Number 2x is for season Lickct
        holders).
        Turnstiles     Number 24 - 26      are 'Late E n t r y 1 turnstiles.
        Turnstiles     Number 27 - 34      are situated along the
        Perimeter wall in Grove Street and give access tc the
        south terracing of the main stand and to Blocks                 ’C' and
        ’E 1 of the main stand.       (Number 33 is for season ticket
        holders).
        Turnstiles     Number 27 - 28      are 'Late E n t r y 1 turnstiles.
        Turnstiles     Number 3 5 - 4 0    are situated along the
        perimeter wall in Grove Street and give access to the
        North Terracing of the main stand and to Blocks                 'A' and
        'B' of the'main stand.       (Number 4 0 is the Director's
        entrance).
        Turnstiles Number 38 - 39 are             'Late Entry' turnstiles.
        Turnstiles Number 41 - 47 are situated in the perimeter
        wall at rhe rear of the Spion Kop and the ground control
        complex.     They give access to the Spion Kop terracing.
        Counting Mechanisms are of the             'mechanical turnstile
        counter' type.     There is no notification to Police
        Control or monitoring at present.
        The system does not identify capacities unless an
        individual were to constantly gather totals.
        An approximate cost for fitting a computerised system
        would be in the region of £10,000 for the necessary hard
        and software with an added £100 per turnstile.
                                                             BARNSLEY
         :ICi

                 IC




   C;'




                                                             F.C
                                                             OAKWELL
■IO '           CL

                                                        CL




                      P o n t e f r a c t R ocd Stand
Tie limitation on low light capabi.'l ite-n is brought about by poor lighting, a problem encountered by all South Yorkshire
Enhancement o£ tlie Lighting, particularly in covered areas-, would greatly improve the picture quality.
                                                                                                                              s
                                                                                                                              a  K-
                                                                                                                                 u                                         C. m
                                                                                                                                              M
                                                                                                                              5  'r t         fQ <*'
                                                                                                                                                  i                        O O K
                                                                                                                              H- H-            H cn                   H-   ft U D
                                                                                                                              rot 3^          O H-
                                                                                                                                              < ry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r t tO
                                                                                                                               w ***—
                                                                                                                              h               (D H-              H-                                            I—i
                                                                                                                              O Qj                  3
                                                                                                                                              Ct^
                                                                                                                              rt c '          S     fi.
                                                                                                                              £         rr    < -
                                                                                                                              8        '«
                                                                                                                                              P. {S'
                                                                                                                                              <t H                           c   8
                                                                                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                                                                              t a
                                                                                                                              0 Q                          U3
                                                                                                                              C U
                                                                                                                              H" |
                                                                                                                              »>.       n     n> o
                                                                                                                              ST ^
                                                                                                                              ua
                                                                                                                                       t.jQ
                                                                                                                                        h-    S' H-        «
                                                                                                                                                           P-
                                                                                                                              h <             H- <         rt-
                                                                                                                                              H-1(D
                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                              •               *7^          fc-
                                                                                                                                                                                          <         cn
                                                                                                                                                                                          K' *
                                                                                                                                                                                          (5 r r• £
                                                                                                                                                                                                  SI
                                                                                                                              i- S.
                                                                                                                              Y6 <t>
                                                                                                                              fQ €            Q S.
                                                                                                                              !O        i—


                                                                                                                                              m oHI
                                                                                                                               s w
                                                                                                                              m         3"
                                                                                                                                                           n>
                                                                                                                                 ■'
                                                                                                                               0 ...          r t fD
                                                                                                                                              C
                                                                                                                                                           CiJ
                                                                                                                               o cn                                                  rr
                                                                                                                               ijj rr         n p-
                                                                                                                               r t Qj
                                                                                                                                              s §
                                                                                                                                              P- 55
                                                                                                                               m s            i— rr                                  H Q r r 5"
                                                                                                                               ui             fD H-                                  i—1 i—1 Qj O
                                                                                                                              - rt            cn i—1
                                                                                                                               o 3“           • fD
                                                                                                                                                 cn
                                                                                                                               O        QJ
                                                                                                                               .        m     £ §
                                                                                                                                                £
                                                                                                                                              d     &j
                                                                                                                                              x
                                                                                                                                        cr    M-1£3
                                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                                                        —1
                                                                                                                                        o     B <
                                                                                                                                              r t (D                                 ct
                                                                                                                                        N     fD
                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                              r~> 6
                                                                                                                                              3) <                                                             cr
                                                                                                                                              r t H-                                                                 H-
                                                                                                                                        QJ        fD
                                                                                                                                        O         1€                                           r t fD                     I-1
                                                                                                                                        H:                                                                                rt
                                                                                                                                              n a
                                                                                                                                        H-    CO rr
                                                                                                                                        rt    o                                           H- cn H
                                                                                                                                       ‘C     O
                                                                                                                                              •
                                                                                                                                                    QJ
                                                                                                                                                    I— ‘
                                                                                                                                              O I-1                                       fD t-Ti
                                                                                                                                                                                                    l-n
                                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                                        c
                                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                                                        —1    u a                                                                    H-
                                                                                                                                        Cb
                                                                                                                                        fD          £                                     k;   cn   h-
                                                                                                                                        3           fD
                                                                                                                                        QJ.                                                                          H i l-n
                                                                                                                                        U~
                                                                                                                                        I-1         o
                                                                                                                                        fD          cn                                                                    H-
                                                                                                                                                    cn                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          —1
                                                                                                                                                    H-                                                                    H-
                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                        fD
                                                                                                                                                    £
                                                                                                                                        0           0
                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                        1           2
                                                                                                                                        I—          &
                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                       ua
                                                                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                                                       Cb
                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                    (D
                                                                                                                                                                                                          O cr
                                                                                                                                                    *8                                                    3 k;
                                                                                                                                                    Q
                                                                                                                                       Cb
                                                                                                                                                                                                          r t l—j 3
                                                                                                                                       Cb           Cb                                                    O cCr ufD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a rQjt
                                                                                                                                       H-
                                                                       clubs.




                                                                                                                                       cn
                                                                                                                                       rt
                                                                                                                                       fD
                                                                                                                                                    E"
                                                                                                                                                    rt
                                                                                                                                       cn
                                                                                                                                       cn                                                                 rt   fD      (D
                                                                                                                                                                                                          QJ   r t H- 3
                                                                                                                                       rt           C                                                     H-   QJ 3 r t
                                                                                                                                        O           I-1                                                   3    i-i
                                                                                                                                                    Cb                                                    fD       t r cr
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cb       QJ c
                                                                                                                                       S’                                                                 .    l-h 3 r t
DONCASTER FOOTBALL GROUND


Turnstile Arrangements

       All turnstiles are of a rotating barrier type waist
        height.,                       .
        Turnstiles I-2-3-4 Feed visitors pen at Rossington
        (south) end of ground.
        Turnstiles S-6-7-8 feed open terracing on main stand
        terracing (south end).


        c^ 2.^d    ^ r 55r' iri'Cr»   'T’^cc 0 cs.ri Ids hroucrht intc cterat 2.cn
        should demand require situation•
        Turnstiles 13-14-15-16 feed both main stand terracing and
        north end terracing (capacity 600).
        Turnstiles 26-27-28-29-30 cover entry to popular stand
        terrace      (west siae).
        There is no counting mechanism on the turnstiles•
        Counting will be achieved by a ticket base situation.
        Nominated steward to act as logistics officer liaising
        with turnstile staff at each location.                   Steward on
        personal radio in.contact with Police Observation Point.
        No previous system used other than                 'All Ticket'    -no
        warnings etc.
        An approximate cost for fittincx a computerised system
        would be in the region of £10,000 for the necessary hard
        and software with an added £100 per turnstile.
                                cl




          H* P   Ct O
          M D    “ f-




                                                                   a a




      c- o




                                                                                                  iIIlil'“!•'I E L 1) WEDNESDAY
                                                                                   o
                                                                                        r-



                                                         C    CL




     Ct ct




                                                                                                  FOOTBALL
                                                                                   ct
                                     CL H-                                    ct
                                                         ct




                                                                                                  CLUB
                                                         H- 0
     ct (D
                        P crq

                                                                                        ct




                                       CO    I— 1
                                       ct H*
                                                    ct                                       ct
                                       CD *<                             ct
                                                                              ct
                                                                                             r-
CT   CO
                        ct <
                                                                         ct   ct p.
                                                                              H* D
                                                                              I
                                                                              —1CL




                                                                                             ct




rf


                        ct
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND


1.     The Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground has a total of S3
       Turnstiles of the rotating barrier type and are
       formulated as follows:

        i — o, 9 - ± 6 and A —u.

        For the forthcoming season, bearing in mind the west
        stand will only be used, turnstiles A-G will be in use.
        However, should there be an overspill in more spectators,
        than these can cope with, then turnstiles 9-16 will be
        used.



        turnstiles 22-28, 29-32, will be used for the south stand
        centre and wing sections *

        Turnstiles 33— 36 will be used for the uncovered seated
        area between the Kop and the halfway line of the south
        stand. Turnstiles 37-42, 43-48, 49-54, 55-72, 73 and 76,
        covering the whole of the Kop area.   Any persons entering
        into those turnstiles can go in any part of the Kop, he
        cr she desires.

        HpnT*n£ — i 1 <=<= 7 7 - 7 r will be used exclusiTTelv for the north
        stand.

2.      In relation tc the counting mechanism, the turnstiles at
        Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground are operated by a
        counting computer mechanism, which is relayed to the
        Security Room under the south stand.  At this stage in
        time, there is no Police link available from the Security
        Room to Ground Control.

3.     Identification of capacity is via a light warning in the
        Security Room, when figures get within 10% of capacity.
       However, it must be noted that this is total capacity of
        section, eg Kop and south stand.

        No other form of counting takes place at the Sheffield
        Wednesday Football Ground.

4.     The cost of extending the Computer VDU to the Police
       Control Room, would be £700 but the system currently does
       not have the capacity to achieve this and the Control
        Room has verv little snace available for such a facility.
                                                                                     n-Mu >             <;ca'nw
                                  a




                                                                                                                  cn w os
                                              •*
                                              \
                                              t
                                      STAND




                                                                                           .VN O I dS
                                       / ,




                                                                                         cfO
cj
m




                                                                               cc
                                              /




                                                                               i o
T URN ST I L E S . . . . ZZZZZi                    Directors   En t r a n ce
                                                           D CC/JEL
                                                           9 Augu st   1989

NOTE TOR FILE:


HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - RECOMMENDATIONS
- AMBULANCE" SERVICE


Had a meeting this date with Mr Alan Hopkins (Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer),
regarding .recommendations 35 to 38 contained in the above Interim Report,

I said the probability is that in future we will specifically include in our
Operational Orders certain of the details required by virtue of these
recommendations and supply the Ambulance Service with an Order in advance of
each football game.

After discussion it was agreed that Mr Morley (Assistant Chief Ambulance
Officer) will be the nominated officer required at recommendation 35, to
liaise regularly at each stadia. He will do this together with subordinate
officers who will be appointed in respect of each ground.

It was seen that meetings twice a year outside the Safety Certificate meetings
may well be sufficient.

It was also agreed that after receipt of an Operational Order the Ambulance
Service will notify the Divisional Commander concerned of a specific liaison
officer who, should there be any changes we feel they need to be aware of,
will be available to be contacted both in the days preceding and on the day of
the match. In this connection I will endeavour to achieve a similar
understanding with the Fire Service.




Deputy Chief Constable




** Distribution:

   Chief Superintendents rA ' , 'B', 'C', 'D', 'F1, Operations Divisions
   Chief Inspector Bettison
                                                                        DCC/JEL
                                                                        14 August 1939


NO TE F OR F I L S :



HI LL S BO R O UG H INQUIRY - R E C O M ME N D A TI O N S
* FIRE BRIGADE



This date spoke w i t h Mr H a r r y Wrigh t (Chief Fire Officer) reg arding
r ec o m me nd at io ns 35 to 38 cont ai ned in the above I n t e r i m Report.

After di s cu s s io n w e agreed that in future we (the police) w i l l include in our
Opera tio na l Orders in f o r m a t i o n i n .-relation to these specific recomme nda tio ns
concerning the i nvo lve me nt or possible in volvement of the eme rge ncy services
at football events.

We further agreed that Mr A l a n Seaman (Assistant Chief Fire Officer) wi ll be
the no minated office r as re q ui red at re com m e n da t i on 35 to liaise r eg u la rly in
respect of arrang em en ts C o u n t y wise.    He w i l l do this by w a y of internal
liaiso n w i t h the. re levant D ivi si on al Commander.

It was further agreed that for the time being meeti ng s at the rate of twice
per year, apart from the Safety Ce rt if ic ate meetings, w i ll sati sf y the
req uirements for 'regularity'.

Further that on receipt of Op er at i o n al Orders the D i v is i o na l Comman de rs in
each area, or their Deputies, w i l l be the liaiso n offi ce rs in respect of any
alterations w h i c h occur after they have received our O per ati on al Orders.

The above is p r ec i s e l y the same un d er s t an d i ng arrived at w i th the Amb ulance
Service and wil l f o rm the basis of our liai son arra nge men ts unless changed.




Deputy Chief Co ns tab le




** Distribution:
                          MINUTES OF A MEETING BETWEEN
            THE CHAIRMEN AND SECRETARIES OF THE FIVE FOOTBALL CLUBS
                       AND THE POLICE IN SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                  TO DISCUSS THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
                     INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS
            HELD AT THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE SPORTS & SOCIAL CLUB
                     AT 2.00 PM ON THURSDAY 24 AUGUST 1989


Present:

P Hayes Esq QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable (Chairman)
Chief Superintendent T F Broomhead, Operations & Traffic
Chief Inspector GChambers,   'A' Division
Superintendent R M Simpson, 'B' Division                       South Yorkshire
Chief Inspector C Warne LLB, 'C' Division                      Police
Superintendent P Hale, 'D' Division
Chief Inspector JDonnelly LLB, 'D' Division
Chief Inspector DBeal LLB,   'F' Division
Superintendent M J Torr, Training

                                   Rovers Football Club
Mrs K J Oldale, Secretary, Doncaster Rovers Football Club
Mr J Dennis, Director, Barnsley Football Club
Mr M Spinks, Secretary,   Barnsley Football Club
Mr NJ&rnil^, Secretary, Rotherham United Football Club
Mr D Dooley, Managing Director, Sheffield United Football Club
Mr D Capper, Secretary, Sheffield United Football Club
Mr G Mackrell FCCA, Secretary, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club


 1/1989    OPENING ADDRESS BY THE DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE

Mr Hayes reminded the meeting that he had written to football clubchairmen on
15 August expressing the hope that they could meet with himself and other
police representatives in the near future. Today's meeting was timely in that
it combined the normal annual meeting with an opportunity to discuss events
that had occurred since the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim
Report on the Hillsborough Disaster.

Mr Hayes reminded the meeting that the Chief Constable, Mr Wright, had
determined that the recommendations of the Report involving the police would
all be implemented in South Yorkshire. It was however not only the
responsibility of the police but also the clubs and the local authorities to
ensure that such implementation occurred.

At a press conference following a recent Police Authority meeting, Mr Hayes
said he had commented on the excellent co-operation which had for a long time
existed between the clubs and police in South Yorkshire. This had resulted in
all the immediately achievable recommendations of the Taylor Report being
implemented and showed a clear willingness on the part of the football clubs
to assist the police in every way possible to that end.

Mr Hayes said that with mutual respect, a proper understanding ofeach other's
problems, commonsense and goodwill, all things were possible. With this in
mind progress could be made rapidly. Much had already been achieved but there
was still more to do.

It was then agreed to follow the prepared agenda paper provided to assist
discussions.
 2/1989   FUNCTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE IMPLEMENTATION TEAM

Mr Hayes gave the meeting contact telephone numbers of key members of the
police implementation team. He reminded the meeting that the written
agreements had been completed as a matter of urgency but further work would
now progress with individual members of the team having responsibility for key
areas. Details of these areas and the officers concerned were given to the
meeting. A wealth of information was being collated and this would be
available to the clubs at any time.


 3/1989   THE WRITTEN AGREEMENTS

Mr Hayes reminded the meeting that the agreements had to be completed by
19 August 1989 and this had been achieved. Mr Hayes commented that although
the Taylor Report recommendations did not have the force of law they did
nevertheless have Central Government approval and as such they would be
regarded by ourselves as being imperatives.

He reminded the meeting of the mechanism that had been used to   achieve the
agreements, at the clubs' request drafts being prepared by the   police and
subsequent refinement being made by negotiation. Although the    agreements
differed slightly in some areas the core of agreement remained   the same for
everyone.

There then followed a discussion during which Mr Dooley (Sheffield United FC)
asked if the agreements were likely to change following Lord Justice Taylor's
Final Report. Mr Hayes said there was always the possibility of change and a
'notice of amendment' had been prepared should such change be necessary.

Mr Mackrell (Sheffield Wednesday FC) told the meeting that there might be
problems on the horizon with the local licensing authorities as Sheffield had
asked for a schedule of stewards' deployment to be prepared and forwarded to
them. Sheffield Wednesday Football Club did not at this stage wish to provide
a definitive list as matters were still in a position of change.

Mr Hayes said that he appreciated that in the short term some experimentation
was necessary. He was to have 'a meeting with the local authority in the near
future where he would raise the matter.

Mr Mackrell also commented that there was some difficulty in achieving an
effective working relationship with the local authority which was echoed by
Mr Dooley. The difficulty was compounded by the fact that there was no one
individual who could determine urgent policy, it being handled by an 'advisory
group'. Chief Superintendent Broomhead confirmed this.

Superintendent Hale also remarked that he had had difficulty in relation to
the agreement of safety matters at football grounds referred to the local
authority.

Mr^\.rnill (Rotherham United FC) and Mr Spinks (Barnsley FC) said that they
did not have similar problems with their particular local authorities.
Superintendent Simpson confirmed this for Barnsley.

Mr Hayes said that he would express the Sheffield clubs' concerns to the local
authority in Sheffield about the problem in terms of certification, clubs
being excluded from meetings and the unwieldy nature of the decision making
process.
 4/1989   FINANCE

Mr Hayes reminded the meeting of the scale of charges presently applied to the
policing of football matches. In the light of the recent police pay award it
was proposed to increase these charges by 9.25%. It was agreed that from the
start of the current football season the payment for police services would be
b&'Sfd on the existing 'contract, amended as necessary to take account of the
pay award, subject to a possible review as below,

Mr Dooley commented that the financial returns for a Littlewoods Cup match
between Sheffield United and Rotherham United had already been completed.
Mr Hayes said the principle was none-the-less agreed and that anomalies would
be resolved later by negotiation,

Mr Hayes informed the meeting that it was a consequence of the Taylor Report
the police numbers at football matches would increase. This matter would have
to be reported to the Police Authority as it would then be a matter for them
co determine if the scale of charges should be altered as a result of this
increase and such a change may occur during the present season.

Mr Spinks asked if all those organisations utilising police manpower paid for
those services. He was told that they did.

Mr Dennis asked whether the Police Authority would complete such a review and
what would the effect of Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report be on such a
review. Mr Hayes said he did not know if such a review would in fact take
place, it was a matter for the Police Authority following his report to them
on the matter. He did not know at this stage if his Report would include
recommendations for increase but that was obviously a possibility.

Mr Mackrell stated that clubs might well consider using private security
companies within their grounds. Mr Hayes remarked that this was a matter for
the club but that in the light of recent reports such as Popplewell and now
Taylor the presence of police officers inside the ground now seemed to be
almost mandatory.


 5/1989   LIAISON/THE WAY FORWARD

Mr Hayes said that following the implementation of all the recommendations
made by Lord Justice Taylor which had to be in place by the beginning of the
season, there were a number of residual matters which now had to be
considered.

Chief Superintendent Broomhead then outlined those matters which were
currently being addressed, referring to a briefing paper which had been
previously circulated (a copy of this paper is attached at Appendix 'A').

Mr Hayes commented that   these recommendations needed to be implemented as soon
as possible and suggested a method of rapidly dealing with them. A position
statement would be prepared by the police 'expert' on the matter. This would
then be discussed, refined and implemented at local level following
consultation with himself. It was accepted by the meeting that this would be
an excellent starting point and was welcomed by the clubs.

Mr Hayes emphasised the   local nature of such agreement and implementation, the
expert's position paper   being only a starting point.
  'E>
Mr^rnill (Rotherham United FC) said that the sooner those agreements were
reached the better so that the clubs could bid to the Football Trust for funds
to assist in any implementation necessary.

Mr Hayes said that a key element would be the training of both police officers
and stewards, such training concentrating in the main on how to interpret
crowd stress and .density.

Superintendent Torr at the request of the meeting outlined the proposed
training package. A video was to be prepared which would assist in
identifying signs of distress and analysing crowd dynamics. Such a video
would "havs to Ids cr0 d.1LId]_9 and of s h.isrh. oroduction ouaXi't'v. In tlis i.titsritn a
"boo"k.1.0 t of t>ho^osrsT^c- vas "b9 2.                 all of^ics^*s$ s^owins dl.^'^9r’iTi§
numbers of people in a similar area.

Superintendent Hale commented that the value of such a booklet was limited,
particularly to stewards who would relate far more to areas of the football
ground they knew. Superintendent Torr said that work was in hand to show
actual crowds on local club stands and terraces when they are half, three-
quarters and full by means of photographs which would be made.available to the
club for use by the stewards concerned.

Superintendent Torr continued saying that a laminated card had been circulated
to all officers on duty at football grounds giving signs and symptoms of
treatment of persons in distress from crushing. These cards could also be
circulated tp club stewards if the club so wished.


 6/1989     ANY OTHER BUSINESS

      6.1   Frequency of Meetings

The members of the meeting felt that there was not a need for regular meetings
at this level, most work now needed to be done at local level. If meetings
were needed they could be arranged as necessary apart from the normal annual
meeting now well established.


      6.2   Ambulance Service

Mr Mackrell commented that all members of the meeting should be aware that the
South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service required clubs to signs forms
of indemnity. Sheffield Wednesday Football Club were unhappy with this and
needed to look more closely at the matter with their legal advisers. All
clubs stated that they had received similar notices.

The fact was noted by the meeting.




There being no further business the meeting closed.
                                                                                                                 APPENDIX 'A'



                                      L I A I S O N / T H E WAY i-OHWARD




 TURNSTILES                                                                       •

 M ET H O D Or C O U N T I N G - RE SU LT S TO             BE A V A I L A B L E IN P O L I C E G RO UND CONTROL.



 CLOSE CIRCUIT TELEVISION

 TO    EE   IN STALLED       TO       ENABL E        CRO'.-T’ ~,ENCI r~~ rS               -“ -c-i-.r -ur       r .? - - -
 CONCOURSE      AREAS        ANL       IN     PENS     ANI       OTHER          S T AN DIN G    AREAS.     TO              -E M O NI T O R E r
                                                             _    r-v r r             ~     ^              ...........................—   _ _


 r r             r   -   —   7_-r   t^. - m     r\~                 —   r ^ -




 SIGNPOSTING

 IN RES PE CT OF SPE CTA TO RS BOTH INS IDE AND OUT SI DE THE GROUND, SIGNS TO BE
 C O M P R E H E N S I B L Y REVIEWED. IT SHOULD, IN REL ATION TO THE ARR ANG EME NTS FOR
 EACH MATCH, ^5 E U N - A M E I G U O U S . EYE-CATCHING, SIMPLE AND CLEAR ANI SHOULD
       iJCiiuNii/ iO ti'iSURr, RA Fi D .MOVEMENT OF SPE CTA TOR S TO THEIR APPROPRIATE




 INFORMATION ON TICKETS

 FOR LIAISON AS AG RE ED                 IN TH E WRITTEN AG RE E M E N T WITH T H E CLUBS.



 COMMUNICATIONS


 a) POLICE GROUND CONTROL

C ON SI DER ATI ON TO BE GIVEN TO SOUND PRO OFING TH ES E C O N TR OL ROOMS AGAINST
EXCE SS IV E CRO WD NOISES.

b) TELEPHONE LINKS

TO   CO MP LI M E N T RADIO COMMUNICATIONS, THE RE SH OU L D BE A                                                               COMPLETELY
SE PARATE SYSTEM OF LAND LINES WITH T EL EP HO NE LINKS BETWEEN                                                                 THE POLICE
GR OUN D CON TROL AN D KEY POINTS IN THE GROUND.

c) THE PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM

WITHIN THE POL IC E GRO UND CONTROL ROOM, THE RE SHOULD BE A PUBLIC ADDRESS
SYSTEM TO C O M M U N I C A T E WITH INDIVIDUAL AREAS           INS IDE AND OUT SID E THE
GROUND.        IMPORTANT ANN OU NC EM EN TS SHOULD BE PRO CEE DED BY A LiStf/D SIGNAL TO
C A T C H THE A TT EN TI ON OF T HE CROWD, DESPITE T H E H IG H LEV EL O F NOI SE IN THE
GROUND.         THIS AR RA N G E M E N T SHOULD BE PR OM IN EN TL Y AD V E R T I S E D ON EVERY
PR OG R A M M E SOLD FOR EVERY MATCH.

d) ILLUMINATED ADVERTISING BOARDS

T HE SE BOARDS SHO ULD BE USED WH ER E POS SIB LE TO A D D R E S S TH E CROWD.
                  MEETING OF THE IMPLEMENTATION TEAM
           TO BE HELD AT 2.00 PM ON THURSDAY 31 AUGUST 1989   j j l
            IN THE LECTURE THEATRE AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS


                                A G E N D A .




                                     'C w v ( &
Apologies for absence                    "t"

Minutes of the previous meeting (17.8.89)

Matters arising from the minutes

a.   Written agreements                                Chairman

b.   Additional manpower costs                          Chairman

c.   Contingency arrangements                          Ch Supt Broomhead

d.   CCTV/turnstile monitoring equipment                Ch Supt Broomhead

e.   Tabards                                            Chairman

f.   Advisory Groups                                    Ch Supt Broomhead


Meeting with football officials                        Chairman

Communications                                          Supt Marsh

a.   Transmitting equipment

b.   Control room staffing levels

c.   Training

d.   Radio channels

e.   Accoustics
                       /
f.   Land lines

g.   Public address systems

h.   Illuminated boards

i.   Hand signals

Any other business

Date of next meeting
             MEETING OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION TEAM
                     HELD AT 2.30 PM ON THURSDAY 31 AUGUST 1989
                 IN THE RECRUIT INTERVIEW ROOM, POLICE HEADQUARTERS


Present:

P Hayes Esq QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable - Chairman
Chief Superintendent Broomhead
Superintendents Brookfield, Hale, Marsh, Parker, Simpson
Chief Inspectors Beal, Bettison, Chambers, Hellewell, Purdy, Waring,
   and Warne

Apologies for absence were received from Superintendents Greenwood, Oughton,
Sleath, Torr, and Chief Inspector Donnelly.



Before the meeting was called to order Mr Broomhead reported that cn 30 August
1989 he had met with the Fire Service and SYMAS, Fire Service represented by
Messrs-Seaman and Ryder; SYMAS represented by Mr Morley. At the meeting it
had been pointed out to Mr Broomhead that the Operational Orders from around
the various divisions had material differences. The Fire Service were
particularly keen that emergency evacuation procedures - i.e. those that begin
'Mr Meadows' - are not consistently entered on Operational Orders. Chief
Superintendent Broomhead requested that all future Operational Orders contain
this information and that Superintendent Simpson take account of the
inconsistency problem apropos the model report he is preparing.

Mr Broomhead reported the agreement he had reached with the emergency services
representatives on delivery of the Operational Orders. Two copies to be
delivered to the Fire Service Headquarters Control, one copy to SYMAS Control.
For a Saturday game, on the Wednesday preceding that game; for a mid-week
match, on the Saturday preceding that game. The point of contact out of hours
is the Control Rooms of the respective emergency services who will determine
whether to handle the query within the Control Room or call out the respective
contact personnel.

It is important that any departures from the safety certificate, e.g. change
of turnstile allocation or alterations to sections of the ground, must be
brought to the attention of the emergency services contact officers. Chief
Superintendent Broomhead reported that the Chief Superintendent (Operations)
is to meet with the emergency services liaison officers bi-annually. He also
reported that the Fire ^Service is reviewing the emergency evacuation
procedures at each of the grounds.

Meeting called to order.


14/89        MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETING

The minutes of the meeting held on 17 August 1989 were accepted as a true and
accurate record, with the following exceptions:-

        a.   line one of paragraph 4, page 2, should read "paragraph 91".

        b.   line three of paragraph 13.2, page 8 , should read "sub-divisional
             commander or his deputy and the Operations Chief Superintendent or
             his deputy".
15/89        MATTERS ARISING FROM THE PREVIOUS MINUTES (17 AUGUST 1989)

        15.1 Written Agreements (item 9.1)

The Chairman notified the meeting that we have signed agreements from all
South Yorkshire football clubs.

        15.2 Manpower Costs (item 9.4)

The Chairman informed the meeting that on 18 August he had addressed the
Police Authority on the subject of the implementation of the Taylor
recommendations. He pointed out at that time that the implementation of these
recommendations would have increased cost effects which would need to be
addressed by them in due course.

The meeting was reminded that Superintendent Hale assisted by Chief Inspector
Donnelly is putting together a report on the cost arrangements for policing
football. Supt Hale confirmed that he was at the second draft stage of this
report and hoped to be able to present a working document in the next few
days. -

             Item deferred pending Supt Hale's report.

        15.3 Contingency arrangements (item 9.5)

Chief Superintendent Broomhead reported the results of the sub-meeting on
22 August 1989 which was attended by the five sub-divisional commanders or
their representatives who have a responsibility for each of the five South
Yorkshire clubs. He referred to a report produced as a result of that meeting
which details the core arrangements for contingency planning. These core
arrangements are to be fleshed out by each of the sub-divisional commanders
concerned to include local factors. Chief Supt Broomhead had set a deadline
for 1 September 1989 for the submission of those local arrangements. All,
with the exception of 'C' Division, were handed to the Secretary, Chief
Inspector Bettison. Chief Inspector Warne of 'C' Division promised delivery
of local arrangements in respect of Rotherham United by 1 September 1989.

It was agreed that copies of the plans would be passed to the Force Operations
Room and that each sub-divisional commander would be responsible for ensuring
the plans are available at each football ground on the day of a football
match, and a copy filed at sub-divisions.

        15.4 CCTV (item 11/89)

Chief Superintendent Broomhead referred to a previous discussion that he had
held with representatives of the football clubs in South Yorkshire and had
offered South Yorkshire Police assistance in obtaining 'best advice' regarding
CCTV equipment and siting. He informed the meeting of a discussion with
Mr Fordham of Sandrich Home Office Research establishment. Mr Fordham
confirmed that South Yorkshire Police were the first to enquire about the
suitability of equipment. Mr Fordham agreed to seek advice, and to research
the matter further. He did confirm to Chief Supt Broomhead however that CCTV
equipment for the purpose of safety may be very different to that which exists
for evidence gathering at the moment.

            Item deferred to next meeting.
        15.5 Tabards (item 13.1)

The Chairman confirmed that tabards had been ordered for use by police
officers engaged in gate control at perimeter fences of football grounds.
They would be lime green in colour and be marked with the words 'Gate
Control'.

Chief Inspector Warne informed the meeting of problems encountered at a recent
match at Rotherham United where yellow tabards issued temporarily to police
officers had clashed with the yellow shirts of the visiting football team. It
was confirmed that lime green was unlikely to create a similar difficulty.

        15.6 Advisory Groups (item 13.2)

The question was posed whether the advisory group referred to in the
recommendations was to be seen in terms of an extended officer working party
on the Safety of Sports Ground Act or whether it was in addition to that group
and subordinate to it. After some discussion the Chairman confirmed that it
was really a matter for the local authority to decide, but he felt that we
should, have consistency across the various local authorities within the
county. The Safety of Sports Ground Act of 1975 was consulted and this failed
to resolve the issue.

After some discussion the Chairman decided that the police stance would be
that such advisory groups should be separate from the officer working groups.
For one thing, the presence of a representative of the football club on the
group may compromise decisions taken by the group to enforce the club to take
certain action.


16/89       MEETING WITH FOOTBALL OFFICIALS

The Chairman introduced this item by referring to minutes of the meeting which
was held at Niagara Sportsground on 24 August 1989. The minutes were
circulated to this meeting and the opportunity was taken to read the minutes.

The Chairman informed the meeting that discussions had taken place about the
recommendations that still needed to be implemented, e.g. CCTV, and the
difficulties the clubs might experience in getting the individual advice to
enable them to implement the recommendations. The view of the club
representatives had been that our own deliberations, as an implementation
team, might well direct their own thinking on an individual basis.

The Chairman had told the representatives of the football clubs that it was
intended, now that the 19 August deadline had been met successfully, to de­
centralise some of the implementation team's functions to take account of
their individual local needs. The emphasis is therefore now placed upon
divisional efforts towards implementing the recommendations of the Taylor
Report. The central implementation team meetings would continue to provide a
co-ordination of effort and a focus for the individual members.

A discussion then took place about local difficulties that individual members
were experiencing, particularly Superintendent Simpson at Barnsley and Chief
Inspector Chambers at Doncaster Rovers. The difficulties raised by each
officer concerned turnstile counting arrangements which appeared to be
ineffectual at the two grounds. The Chairman confirmed that we must continue
to press both clubs to effectively implement the Taylor recommendations in
this regard.
17/89       COMMUNICATIONS

Reference was made to a paper prepared by Superintendent Marsh which had been
circulated prior to the meeting.

        17.1 Transmitting equipment

The Chairman reminded the meeting of the limitations of the present equipment,
most notably a. there being no contingency plan in case of equipment failure,
and b. talk-through does not allow for priority by ground control. The
equipment to remedy these limitations was now in place at Hillsborough.
Mr Hayes told the meeting that on 15 September 1989 the Finance and General
Purposes Committee would be asked for monies to provide similar equipment at
the remaining grounds.

Supt Parker pointed out that the equipment has a facility to complement sub-
divisional equipment at Barnsley, Rotherham, and Doncaster. A similar
facility can be provided for each of the Sheffield clubs back to the host sub­
division if required. Neither representative from 'F' or 'D' Division pursued
the matter.

        17.2 Staffing levels

Supt Marsh in his report recommends a minimum of two officers in each football
ground control room. A lengthy discussion took place regarding the numbers of
officers to be given radios and the numbers of radios which can be monitored
and controlled by an individual operator. Supt Parker suggested a sensible
maximum of 50 radios to each operator. Supt Hale pointed out that in normal
circumstances at Bramall Lane 100 officers are controlled via radios through
one operator. The Chairman pointed out that in implementing these
recommendations we were not catering for the normal but must take account for
abnormal circumstances such as occurred at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.
Supt Parker pointed out that at a time of an emergency such as occurred at
Hillsborough 20 radios would overwhelm the system. It was difficult therefore
to have a realistic network for normal circumstances which nevertheless meet
emergency demand. Supt Hale suggested a need to look more fundamentally at
separate channels and recommended the use of a command channel for ground
commander and selected senior officers up to a maximum of 12 in number. He
pointed out that the latest equipment had the facility to scan both a standard
channel and a command channel and therefore these commanders would receive all
messages.

Discussion then took place about the nature of the equipment and the
facilities available. The Chairman decided that trials of this dual channel
system of communications would take place at each of the football grounds in
the near future and asked Supt Parker to arrange. The results of these trials
would then be brought back to a future meeting and a decision could be based
on the empirical experience of each ground commander.

For the time being it was decided that two officers would operate the single
communications channel at all grounds, except Doncaster Rovers. Chief
Inspector Chambers confirmed that Doncaster Rovers, with a much lower radio
cover, could normally be controlled by one officer. The Chairman agreed that
one officer could continue to perform the task at Doncaster except where
exceptional circumstances, e.g. large or potentially unruly crowds. In these
cases two officers would control the communication system. Supt Parker took
the opportunity at this stage to remind the meeting that there is a limited
supply of radios within the Force and that early and realistic demands on the
existing supply would assist. All representatives from sub-divisions with a
football ground confirmed that they are now using the call sign that denotes
the football ground concerned, e.g. Hillsborough Control, Bramall Control,
etc. to overcome confusion which occasionally occurs when transmissions from
two grounds overlap.

     17.3 Training

The Chairman raised the question, is it required, for if communications
trained officers are utilised for the task, then there is little else for them
to be trained in? Chief Inspector Purdy confirmed that communications
training could not simulate emergency conditions at football grounds. It was
agreed by the meeting that the need for training is therefore not apparent.
Chief Superintendent Broomhead suggested a need for ground commanders to visit
the various grounds in South Yorkshire to identify best practice in terms of
communications and control. The Chairman put this to the meeting for
individual action of ground commanders where they felt necessary.

     17.4 Radio Channels

The Chairman suggested that this matter had been covered in 17.1.

     17.5 Acoustics

It was revealed that all ground control rooms were sufficiently soundproofed
with the exception of Bramall Lane and Hillsborough. Sheffield United were
providing new facilities at Bramall Lane and soundproofing would be taken into
account. Chief Inspector Beal confirmed that Sheffield Wednesday football
club are constructing a new control room within a south stand development at
Hillsborough before the 1990/91 season. He had already made representations
to the club that the control room should be adequately soundproofed.

          Item discharged.

     17.6 Land Lines

The Taylor Report recommends land lines located at appropriate points of the
ground - such areas might include the perimeter track, the rear of terraced
areas, and points outside the ground. Supt Parker confirmed that British
Telecom could install such equipment and estimate a cost of about £2,000 for
each system. The Chairman asked the'divisional representatives to visit each
of the football grounds in company with Supt Marsh to decide upon the optimum
numbers and positions of telephones required. The club should be informed
that telephones could usefully be sited on the perimeter track, at least four
in number, and that where possible telephone links should be established with
each of the turnstile areas within the ground. The telephones should be
waterproof, vandal-proof, have a two-way call facility, and be equipped with a
flashing light to warn officers nearby of a call. There should also be a
volume control on each of the handsets. Divisional representatives were asked
to return with the plans for such a system and Supt Parker was asked to
examine further equipment availability, costs, etc.

          Item deferred.

     17.7 Public Address Systems

Supt Hale confirmed that Sheffield United football club are installing, within
the next week or two, a zoned public address system of the type envisaged by
Lord Justice Taylor. The Chairman asked ground commanders from the other
football clubs to visit Sheffield United before the next meeting to produce a
plan of their own ground showing where installation should be made. The
various plans, estimates, etc. should be passed in the meantime to Chief
Superintendent Broomhead. The Chairman suggested that the review of public
address systems could take place at the same time as the review of the
telephone systems at the grounds.

             Item deferred.

        17.8 Illuminated Boards

It was discovered that only two of the five football clubs have illuminated
boards. Supt Hale informed the meeting that certain police messages are
passed at Sheffield United football club via the illuminated board. Supt Hale
was aware of the limitations of these messages as the board could not be seen
from all parts of the ground.

Chief Insp Beal stated that whilst Sheffield Wednesday does have such an
electronic board the police have never sought to use it for messages.

The item was discharged by the Chairman who asked Chief Insp Beal to examine
the use made of the Sheffield United board by Supt Hale and to examine the
value of implementing such use at Hillsborough.

        17.9 Hand Signals

Supt Marsh confirmed that an ACPO working party chaired by Mr Hadfield was
examining the question of hand signals by police officers nation wide. The
Chairman directed that South Yorkshire Police would await the recommendations
of that ACPO working party.

            Item deferred.


18/89       ANY OTHER BUSINESS

Chief Superintendent Broomhead asked all representatives to furnish plans of
their football grounds as they had been requested to do at a previous meeting.


19/89       DATE OF NEXT MEETING

The next meeting will be held at 10.00 am on Friday 22 September in the
Lecture Theatre at Police Headquarters.
                    MINUTES OF MEETING WITH LOCAL AUTHORITIES
                              RE. THE TAYLOR REPORT
           HELD AT SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE SPORTS & SOCIAL CLUB, NIAGARA
                       AT 2.00 PM, MONDAY 18 SEPTEMBER 1989


Present:

Mr P Hayes QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable - (Chairman)
Mr T F Broomhead, A/Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
Superintendent Sleath
Chief Inspectors Beal, Bsttison, Hellewell and Warne
Inspector Townend
Mr Roger Harvey         )
Mr Tony Paxton          )  representing Doncaster MBC
Mr Stephen Coliingwood )
Mr Robert Crosby       )
Mr D M Daley           )   representing Rotherham MBC
Mr Alec Harper          )
Mr Ken Jackson          )  representing Barnsley MBC
Mr Ward                )
Mr David Bownes        )   representing Sheffield City Council



The Chairman opened the meeting by explaining that whilst local authorities
tend to act as a discrete organisation it is necessary for South Yorkshire
Police officers to serve throughout the Force area which includes five
football league clubs representing the four football league divisions. There
is therefore the need for some area of commonality.

The aim of this meeting therefore is two-fold. First, to discuss areas of
common interest and, second to strengthen the relationship of the South
Yorkshire Police with the four separate licensing authorities for football
league grounds in the area.

The Chairman then explained to the.meeting the position of the South Yorkshire
Police subsequent to the Taylor Inquiry. He highlighted the various inquiries
and investigations that were taking place in relation to the incidents of
15"April 1989.


Police Facilitation Team '

The Chairman pointed out that he was nominated by the Chief Constable to
oversee the implementation of the Taylor recommendations as far as the South
Yorkshire Police was concerned. Of the 43 recommendations, 11 had to be in
place before 19 August. The Chairman explained how the in-force
implementation team was constituted and how it functioned. It was recorded
that each of the 11 recommendations had in fact been implemented be’
                                                                   fore the
start of the football season and that written agreements with each of the five
Clubs were in being.

He explained that the centralised operation based on Headquarters, that was
necessary at first, was now being increasingly delegated to the Divisional
responsibility to implement the remaining recommendations of Lord Justice
Taylor.
The Chairman pointed out that so far our dealings with the various football
clubs in the area had been very positive and he invited comment from local
authority members on this fact.

Mr Harper (Barnsley MBC) pointed out that at Barnsley most of the
recommendations are already covered. The Chairman pointed out that
computerised turnstiles are an objective of Barnsley Football Club. Mr Harper
agreed but pointed out that the Taylor recommendations allow for manual
monitoring and that the Barnsley stance - that they were complying with the
recommendations - was a sound one.

The Chairman emphasised the need for both ourselves and local authorities to
encourage Clubs to comply with .safety requirements. Mr Harper agreed pointing
out that often Clubs devote their resources to the football team to the
detriment of their stadium. Mr Harper suggested however that a conciliatory
and co-operative approach to the football clubs is likely to reap greater
rewards.

Mr Paxton made the point that he would not wish to see a dilution of the
single contact arrangements that existed, with local authorities as that
single contact, before the Taylor Report. He pointed out that the South
Yorkshire Police had necessarily been active in pursuing implementation of the
Taylor recommendations and feared that the local authorities co-ordinating
position may be overlooked.

The Chairman thanked Mr Paxton for this point and agreed to discuss the
process for future implementation at a subsequent in-force implementation team
meeting when Mr Paxton's views would be taken into account.


Ground Safety Certificates

The Chairman asked whether the agreements reached with football clubs should
be included in the ground Safety Certificates. Mr Paxton stated that
Doncaster are now considering re-writing the Safety Certificate (in
conjunction with their Legal & Admin Department) to take account of matters
arising from the Taylor Report.

None of the other representatives offered a view about the status of Safety
Certificates.
                         *

Mr Paxton raised the question of 'advisory groups' and how they might
influence licensing and certification. The Chairman took up the subject of
advisory groups and asked the various local authority representatives how they
foresaw the constitution of their group. Would it be an extension of the
existing officer working party or would it be something different, and in
addition to, that working party?

Mr Paxton and Mr Harper, representing Doncaster and Barnsley respectively, saw
the advisory group as an additional group outside of the officer working party
which would meet at infrequent but regular intervals under a neutral chairman
who would then convey that group's views to the officer working party.

Mr Ward (Sheffield City Council) pointed out that this matter amongst many
others was not resolved. He had submitted a report to members asking for
direction in certain areas. The nature of the advisory group was one of those
areas. Mr Ward's personal view was that it may well be a two-tier structure
along the lines envisaged by Barnsley and Doncaster and pointed out that it
would be unfortunate if technical officers were out-voted by Club and
supporter members of such an advisory group.

Mr Crosby (Rotherham MBC) said that the officer working group in Rotherham had
always included a representative of the Club who might not necessarily be
invited to meetings if the chairman of the working group felt it appropriate.

The position therefore is that Barnsley and Doncaster envisage the advisory
group as separate from the officer working group, Rotherham envisage it as an
extension of the officer working group and, Sheffield have yet to resolve the
matter.

Mr Harper asked if the Chairman could clear up the ambiguity with relation to
the intended constitution of the advisory group as far as the Tribunal members
were concerned. The Chairman pointed out that an ACPO Sub-Committee on
Hooliganism at Sports Grounds is pursuing this question with the Treasury
Solicitors and the Chairman agreed to report back to the local authorities if
and when this is resolved.


Delegation of Licensing Authority

The Chairman raised this matter by pointing out that Mr Webster of the
Sheffield City Council had written to say that no individual officer
representing the Council had any authority to act without full Council
approval.

Mr Harper, representing the Planning Department at Barnsley MBC, stated that
all matters were officially delegated to his Department by the members there.

Mr Paxton of the Planning Department at Doncaster MBC, pointed out that
technical matters are delegated to the Director of Planning and procedural
matters to the Director of Legal & Admin Department. He was hopeful that all
matters might become the responsibility of one Department.

Mr Crosby, representing the Environmental Health Department of Rotherham MBC,
pointed out that all powers are delegated to Environmental Health officers.

The Chairman's concern in this matter was that in the case of urgent need
there must be someone empowered to revoke or suspend the Safety Certificate as
required by the Safety at Sports Grounds Act.

Mr Ward (Sheffield City Council) stated that he had already appreciated the
need for genuine emergency powers and had flagged this need for members'
decision.

The representatives of Doncaster, Barnsley and Rotherham pointed out that
emergency powers are delegated to themselves.


Ambulance Dispute

The Chairman asked what action the licensing authorities intended to take in
the event of SYMAS being unable to provide an ambulance on stand-by at future
football matches. Mr Paxton (Doncaster MBC) stated that this was an agenda
item for a meeting of the Authority next week although he did not anticipate
many future matches where the crowd would reach 5,000.
Mr Harper (Barnsley MBC) suggested the ambulance position would not make a lot
of difference in his mind and he would advise allowing the game to go ahead.
He went on to express the view that this recommendation was one of several in
the Taylor Report that, in his view, were unnecessary.

The counter view was expressed by Mr Paxton who thought it a very necessary
recommendation.

Mr Ward (Sheffield City Council) pointed out that in Sheffield it would be a
decision for members of the Council but his personal view was that in such a
situation where an ambulance could not be provided the Safety Certificate
would be revoked.

Mr Crosby (Rotherham MBC) pointed out that the need at Rotherham is marginal
with crowds hovering around the 5,000 mark. He determined to look at each
individual match where this problem was likely to occur.


Concluding Remarks

The Chairman, in drawing the meeting to a close, thanked local authority
representatives for attending and asked if there was anything that the police
were doing that the local authorities would wish otherwise or anything that
the local authorities would like to see the police undertaking in relation to
the safety certification of football grounds. None of the members expressed
a view.

Mr Paxton thanked the Chairman for arranging the meeting. He said he felt
heartened by the fact that there was so much common ground between the various
local authorities and the police.

The Chairman asked if the local authority representatives would like a meeting
to be arranged on a regular basis. Representatives of Doncaster, Sheffield
and Rotherham thought such a meeting annually would be very useful (July was
suggested as a most appropriate time). Mr Harper (Barnsley MBC) suggested he
saw no benefit in such meetings as the procedures in Rotherham, Sheffield and
Doncaster were of little concern to the safety certification of Barnsley
Football Club.



There being no further business the meeting closed at 3.30 pm.
                    MEETING OF IMPLEMENTATION TEAM TO BE HELD AT 10.00 AM
             ON 22ND SEPTEMBER 1989 IN THE LECTURE THEATRE AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS

        Apologies for Absence.

        Minutes of Previous Meeting - 31st August 1989.

        Matters Arising:

        a)    Manpower costs                     Superintendent Hale

        b)     Contingency Plans                 (Perhaps this could be discharged once Mr
                                                 Broomhead is happy with progress by Sub-
                                                 Divisional Officers).

        c)     CCTV/Turnstile monitoring     -   Superintendent Sleath

        d)     Tabards                           Deputy Chairman

        e)     Advisory Group                    Deputy Chairman

        f)     Meeting with Local                Chairman
               Authorities - 18.9.89.

        g)     Communications

               i) Transmitting Equipment         Chairman
                  (report of F & GP meeting
                  15.09.89).

              ii) Control Room Staffing          Superintendent Parker
                  Levels/No. of channels         Superintendent Marsh
                  (report of Dual channel
                  trials)

         iii)      Land lines                    Superintendent Marsh to report
                                                 results of surveys.

             iv)   Public Address System         Superintendent Marsh to report
                                                 results of surveys.

             v)    Hand Signals                  Superintendent Marsh to report
                                                 latest position with ACPO Working
                                                 Party.

               Force Major Incident Room
               (Match Day deployment).           C/I Edmundson

               Training in Crowd Densities       C/I Purdy

               Manpower (inc. mounted            Deputy Chairman
               officers) requirements.

               Any other business

8   .          Date of next meeting
Outstanding Future Business

1.           INTELLIGENCE                  -    SUPT BROOKFIELD
2.           POPPLEWELL REPORT/GREEN
              GUIDE 1986                   -    C/INSP BEAL
3.           CONTRACTS WITH CLUBS          -    C/INSP DONNELLY
4.           MODEL ORDER                   -    SUPT SIMPSON
5.           MAJOR INCIDENT PLAN           -    C/INSP BETTISON
6.           FORCE STANDING INSTRUCTIONS
              ON POLICING FOOTBALL         -    SUPT GREENWOOD

7.           THE ROLE OF:

        i.   POLICE HORSES          INSP HAND-DAVIS    ] Perhaps these items
      ii.    POLICE DOGS -          INSP JACQUES        ] could be dealt with
     iii.    SPOTTER PLANE          SUPT MARSH          ] by sub-group already
      iv.    MOTORCYLE WING -       INSP SCHOLEY        ] established

8.           RAISING OF MANPOWER   SUPT MARSH
            MINUTES OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION TEAM
                   HELD AT 10.00 AM ON FRIDAY 22 SEPTEMBER 1989
                   IN THE LECTURE THEATRE, POLICE HEADQUARTERS


Present:

P Hayes Esq QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable - (Chairman)
T F Broomhead Esq, A/Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
Superintendents Greenwood, Oughton and Parker
Chief Inspectors Beal, Bettison, Donnelly, Edmundson, Hellewell, Purdy, and
   Waring
Sergeant Jackson


Apologies for absence were received from Superintendents Brookfield, Hale,
Marsh, Simpson (all on annual leave) and Sleath (on a course).


Before the meeting was called to order the Chairman reminded all members to
table discussion papers at a time sufficiently in advance of the meeting at
which those papers are to be discussed. A copy of all relevant papers to be
provided through Mrs Leah, Chairman's secretary, for his attention.

Meeting called to order.


20/89        MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETING

The minutes of the meeting held on 31 August 1989, which had been previously
circulated, were accepted as a true and accurate record with the following
exception:-

        item 15.4, page two, the representative of the Home Office Research
        Establishment should read Mr Ford not Mr Fordham.


21/89       MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

        21.1 Manpower Costs

The Chairman told the meeting that the process of collating the data to enable
costs to be calculated is on-going. Mr Hayes indicated that the ACPO may
attempt to establish some national guidelines in this regard and Mr Broomhead
told the meeting that the ACPO Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sports Grounds
is conducting a national survey to establish the costs involved in policing
football.

For the information of the meeting the Chairman reiterated that
representatives of the five football clubs in this area had agreed informally
to meet last year's agreement plus 9\% to cover recent pay increases. That
informal commitment is now being formalised. This arrangement will be
reviewed as soon as the on-going research into policing costs has been
completed.

(Please also see item 24/89 of these minutes in respect of manpower costs.)

Item deferred (pending further report from Supt Hale).
     21.2 C o n t i n g e n c y Plans

Mr Broomhead has now received contingency plans from each of the relevant sub-
divisional commanders and is satisfied with their content. He asked that
copies be placed with Force Operations Room and that each sub-divisional
commander place a copy of the relevant contingency plans with his own sub-
divisional and ground control rooms.

Mr Broomhead reported that the following scenarios are covered by each of the
contingency plans

     a.     all ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches
     b.     early arrival of spectators
     c.     unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators
     d.     individual section of a ground approaching capacity
     e.     whole ground approaching capacity
     f.     late arrival of spectators
     g.      emergency opening of external gates (or forcing of external
               gates) thereby allowing influx of spectators
     h.     early departure of spectators from ground
     i.     emergency evacuation

The Chairman asked whether these contingencies were contained in the various
Operational Orders or merely referred to by those Orders. A discussion took
place on this subject and the Chairman concluded by reminding the meeting the
aim of the Operational Order must be to be comprehensive but to retain
simplicity. He recommended that the methodology of documenting contingency
plans on the Operational Order be refined and captured by the 'model'
Operational Order currently being prepared by Superintendent Simpson.

Chief Inspector Hellewell pointed out that he had tabled a discussion paper
produced by himself and Mr Simpson which might be discussed at the next
Implementation Team meeting. The Chairman agreed and asked Chief Inspector
Hellewell to take note in respect of contingency plan arrangements.

Item discharged.


     21.3          CCTV and Turnstile Monitoring

This item was deferred until later in the meeting.


     21.4 Tabards

Mr Broomhead reported that delivery of sufficient tabards for Force use will
be completed in three weeks. Mr Broomhead also pointed out that the ACPO Sub-
Committee on Hooliganism at Sports Grounds is considering the use of the
colour green for distinguishing emergency gates. Mr Broomhead has suggested
to that Committee that the tabards of officers who man such gates should also
be green in colour.

Item discharged.
                                     - 3 -


     21.5 Meeting with Local Authorities (18.9.89)
     21.6 Advisory Groups

The above two items were taken together.

The Chairman reported the meeting with local authorities had taken place on
18 September and circulated to members a copy of the relevant minutes.

Mr Hayes highlighted a point made by Mr Paxton of Doncaster MBC regarding
police activity towards implementing the Taylor recommendations which was
taking place outside of the officer working group. He suggested the following
as a strategy for progressing recommendations through the officer working
group. He proposed that we continue to examine the means for implementing the
recommendations of the Taylor Report and, when complete, a package of
proposals will be prepared in respect of each of the football clubs. Sub-
divisional commanders will then be asked to consult with each club SEEKING
THEIR VIEWS NOT COMPLIANCE. Following this consultation we will present the
package through the officer working party to the various local authorities.
Our proposals should provide an agenda for advancing the recommendations of
the Taylor Report. The clubs should be advised not to implement changes until
the views of the officer working group was known to them.

The Chairman reported the different constitutions to the 'Advisory Groups' as
envisaged by the four local authorities and reported the different investiture
of emergency powers to officers of the local authorities. These matters are
fully documented in the minutes of the meeting of 18 September.

Items discharged.


     21.7 Communications

          (i)   New Transmitting Equipment

The Chairman reported that at a meeting of the Finance & General Purposes
Committee of the Police Authority on 15 September 1989, it was resolved to
spend £25,000 to enable football grounds within South Yorkshire to be equipped
with base stations. This resolution is to be ratified at the full meeting of
the Police Authority on Friday 29 September.

Superintendent Parker reported that following ratification the equipment will
be delivered and installed within two/three weeks at each of the grounds.

Item discharged.


For items (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) - Chief Inspector Waring submitted a report
which is attached to the minutes.

          (ii) Radio Channels

Chief Inspector Waring spoke to his report. There was a general discussion
regarding the scanning of two separate channels.

Chief Inspector Donnelly reported that at Sheffield United the dual channel
trial had worked well albeit there were certain problems in ensuring
uninterrupted traffic.  Superintendent Parker reported that this was due to
operator fault rather than any difficulty with the system.
Chief Inspector Hellewell reported that at Barnsley the trial was successful
but identified a further training need in that the inspectors using the
equipment could not get used to using the command channel without waiting for
a gap in general transmissions.

Chief Inspector Beal reported that at Sheffield Wednesday the trial was
successful albeit channel 19 chosen for the command channel interfered with
radio traffic from the Chesterfield football match in Derbyshire police force
area.

A general discussion took place and the Chairman concluded that the trials
with their separate command channel appeared to have been successful and
recommended our utilisation of the command channel in future. Regarding
training needs, the meeting felt there was sufficient expertise within
Divisions to carry out training 'on the ground'.

The Chairman recommended that a command channel be employed judiciously. He
asked Superintendent Parker to chair a sub-group to examine policy for
employment of a command channel. Mr Parker will meet together with Chief
Inspectors Waring and Hellewell.

Item deferred (pending recommendations of sub-group).


            (iii)   Land Lines

Chief Inspector Waring referred to his report and recommended that all clubs
be asked to adopt the policy of Sheffield United in inviting specialist
companies to prepare a specification.

There followed a discussion about problems envisaged with telephone land lines
and various alternatives were considered. The Chairman pointed out that land
lines were an imperative of the Taylor recommendations and must therefore be
pursued. He reviewed our progress to date in that the police have tried to
establish where the land lines should be located and suggested various
specifications such as security of equipment, flashing lights to indicate a
call, etc.

The Chairman asked that the same communications sub-group examine a common
specification for systems at grounds in South Yorkshire. Superintendent
Parker pointed out that Sheffield United must be told of this initiative and
asked to await our proposals. Mr Broomhead agreed to speak with
representatives of the club.

Item deferred (pending recommendations of sub-group).


     (iv)   Public Address Systems

Chief Inspector Waring referred to his report and said each of the grounds has
a public address system. Sheffield United are re-equipping and are likely to
acquire an excellent p.a. system but each of the other grounds had
deficiencies in respect of their systems. Surveys having been completed at
each of the grounds, the Chairman decided that our results should form part of
the package to be subsequently discussed with the clubs and put before the
officer working groups.

Item discharged.
        (v)    Han d   Signals

Chief Inspector Waring again referred to his paper and pointed out that the
question of hand signals had been raised by South Yorkshire Police with the
Public Order Forward Planning Unit. In turn they had referred it to the ACPO
Sub-Committee on Public Order. Superintendent Revill-Johnson had visited
South Yorkshire and had reported as recently- as 22 September that six hand
signals were proposed. These have to be ratified before the ACPO Sub-
Committee and ultimately before the ACPO itself. The Chairman proposed that
we await ACPO recommendation.

Superintendent Oughton raised the problem of the difficulty of seeing officers
deployed to areas around the ground. The Chairman suggested that the ACPO
Sub-Committee would presumably take this into account in arriving at
recommendations.

A discussion took place about the advisability of issuing officers with high
visibility clothing. The Chairman proposed that we await Lord Justice
Taylor's Final Report as he may offer further recommendations on such matters.

Item deferred.


        2 .8   CCTV/Turnstile Monitoring

Chief Inspector Beal referred to a report submitted by Superintendent Sleath
on 17 August 1989 dealing with this matter. He proposed to visit three
football grounds in the near future to examine CCTV equipment installed at
those grounds.

The Chairman thanked Superintendent Sleath and Chief Inspector Beal for the
progress they had made. He asked that they report back following their visits
by which time the research into CCTV and turnstile monitoring equipment would
be as far advanced as this Implementation Team could take it. The information
could then join the package of proposals to be discussed with the club and
laid before the officer working parties.

Item deferred.


22/89          FORCE MAJOR INCIDENT ROOM

Chief Inspector Edmundson referred to his report and pointed out that officers
deployed to the Force Major Incident Room were providing feedback to ground
commanders on the performance of their ground control rooms.

The Chairman enjoined the meeting to positively look at communications
procedure at their respective ground and to firmly manage the practices
employed there.

Item discharged.


23/89          TRAINING IN CROWD DENSITIES

Chief Inspector Purdy reported that the video was nearing completion but
required a commentary adding to the pictures. He agreed to arrange for a
showing of the video (without commentary) at the next Implementation Team
meeting.
In respect of crowd densities the Chairman established progress was being made
at each football ground to produce photographs showing varying densities in
the different sections of the ground.

Chief Inspector Beal told the meeting of an initiative at Hillsborough whereby
ground control obtains, from time-to-time, a computerised total of the number
of people entering a particular section. Officers on duty are then advised to
take note of that section and are told how many people are contained therein.
The Chairman commended this initiative to all other ground commanders.

Item deferred.


24/89           MANPOWER REQUIREMENTS

See item 21.1 previously.

The Chairman outlined a plan to develop a formula for establishing a standard,
but realistic, charging policy in respect of each of the five South Yorkshire
football clubs. He referred to a chart (attached) prepared by Superintendent
Hale.

The chart broke down policing deployment at football matches into 15
categories. Each of the categories was discussed by the meeting to establish
those which should, and those which should not, be included in the formula for
police costs. Resolved as follows


        1.      Perimeter gate officers                                In
        2 .     Emergency gates officers                               In
        3.      Control room officers                                  In
        4.      Officers deployed to emergency routes within stadia    In
        5.      Searching fans and enforcing ground regulations        In
        6   .   Chief supervision and management                       In
     7.         Preserving routes for emergency vehicle access         In
     8 .        Logistics staff                                        Out
     9.         Supervisors - to be established on a pro rata basis
                  when total manpower requirement is known
    10.         Mobile patrols                                         Out
    11.         Detention room staff                                   In
    12.         Civilian operatives                                    Out
    13.         Mounted officers                                       In
    14.         Dog section                                            Out
    15.         'Taylor' reserve                                       In

Ground commanders were asked to use the above list as a basis for determining
minimum manpower requirements for the purpose of levying charges on the
football clubs. He asked that they take account of two qualifications:-

     i)         that there should be no double counting of officers engaged
                at different duties at different phases of the match; and,

    ii)         the reserve be deployed inside the ground on a formula still
                to be resolved.

A proposed calculation formula for these reserves was distributed and the
Chairman asked that all members consider the formula prior to the next
meeting when manpower requirements will again be discussed.
Mr Broomhead made reference to the significant increases in manning levels at
football matches (discounting any increases made necessary by the Taylor
recommendations). Mr Broomhead asked that all members review their manning
levels for football matches to ensure that they are both necessary and
sufficient.

On this point Mr Broomhead made particular reference to the deployment of
mounted officers. There are 18 horses in Force and Mr Broomhead foresaw few
match days for the remainder of this year when it would be necessary to
request mutual aid from surrounding Forces. He asked all members to be
sensible when requiring mounted support.

Item deferred.


25/89     M Y OTHER BUSINESS

Chief Inspector Beal asked for direction on a temporary policy of taking the
sub-divisional major incident box to each football match. The Chairman stated
that the practice should be not to take the major incident box to the football
match whilst ever it is to hand at the sub-division concerned.


The Chairman fixed the date for the next meeting for 10.00 am on Wednesday
4 October 1989, to be held in the Conference Room at Police Headquarters.


There being no further business the meeting closed at 12.10 pm.
                                       S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E POLICE

                                                                                        REF:
   FROM   Chief Inspector EDMUNDSON                                                     STATION/DEPT Operations Room
   TO:    Chief Superintendent Operations & Traffic                                     DATE:       4 t h September 1989


            SUBJECT:            F o o t b a l l M atch Days - F o rc e M ajo r I n c i d e n t Room

            The ab o v e room a t F o rc e H e a d q u a r te r s w i l l b e o p en on f o o t b a l l m a tc h
            d a y s t o p r o v id e t h e f o l l o w i n g s e r v i c e s t o D iv is io n s i n s u p p o r t o f
            t h e i r m a tc h c o n t r o l s

            S h e f f i e l d U n ite d S h e f f i e l d W ednesday, R otherham U n ite d .
            T h e se t h r e e m a tc h c o n t r o l s c a n b e m o n ito r e d a t F o rc e H e a d q u a r te r s
            v i a t h e m u l t i - c h a n n e l UHF r a d i o i n s t a l l e d . T h is p r o v id e s a d i r e c t l i n k
            w i t h t h e I n c i d e n t Room and M atch C o n t r o l s s h o u ld u s e t h e f a c i l i t y
            when r e q u e s t i n g an y s e r v i c e o r i n f o r m a t i o n .

            By m o n ito r in g t h e r a d i o t r a f f i c o f G round C o n tr o l s t h e I n c i d e n t Room
            s t a f f w i l l b e in a p o s iti o n t o re sp o n d iim e d ia te ly t o any r e q u e s t
            made and on o c c a s io n s may b e a b l e t o a n t i c i p a t e w hat may b e r e q u e s t e d .

            The s e r v i c e s t h a t c a n b e o f f e r e d a r e l i s t e d : -
            1.   Any r e q u e s t f o r A m bu lances;
            2.   Any r e q u e s t f o r t h e F i r e s e r v i c e ;                                                       ;
            3.   Any PNC o r CIS c h e c k t h a t i s r e q u i r e d ;
            4.   U p d a te s on t r a f f i c m ovem ent, c o n g e s t i o n , e t c . ;
             %^sxy c o n t a c t w i t h n e ig h b o u r in g f o r c e s r e g a r d i n g t r a f f i c , w e a t h e r , e t c . ;
             6 . C o l l a t i o n an d d i s s e m i n a t i o n o f f o o t b a l l i n t e l l i g e n c e ;
             7 . Prom pt r e s p o n s e t o a n y im m e d ia te r e q u e s t f o r manpower;
             8 . Any o t h e r s e r v i c e a t p r e s e n t g iv e n b y F o rc e O p e r a tio n s Room.

            I t s h o u ld b e p o i n t e d o u t t h a t t h e room i s o p en i n s u p p o r t o f t h e
            G round C o n tr o l s an d i t i s n o t i n t e n d e d t h a t t h e y w i l l i n t e r f e r e i n
            a n y way w i t h t h e c o n t r o l o f t h e p o l i c e o p e r a t i o n .

             By m n o to rin g and h a v in g a n o v e rv ie w o f t h e p o l i c e c o n t r o l i t may b e
             p o s s i b l e t o h i g h l i g h t a n y p ro b le m s c o n c e r n in g c o n t r o l an d c c rrm u n ic a tio n s
             s c t h a t t h e y may b e r e s o l v e d on f u t u r e o c c a s i o n s .

             B a r n s le y F .C . an d D o n c a s te r R o v e rs .
             At t h e p r e s e n t tim e t h e s e tw o m a tc h c o n t r o l s c a n n o t b e m o n ito r e d
             b y t h e M ajo r I n c i d e n t Room. I n r e s p e c t o f B a r n s le y , a r e p o r t h a s
             b e e n su b m u tte d w i t h s u g g e s t i o n s on how t h i s c a n b e a c h ie v e d .

             H ow ever, a l l t h e ab o v e s e r v i c e s may b e p r o v id e d t o B a r n s le y an d
             D o n c a s te r G round C o n t r o l s p r o v id e d t h a t t h e c o n t a c t s and r e q u e s t s
             a r e made b y te l e p h o n e .

             T h is r e p o r t i s r e s p e c t f u l l y sucrru-ttea
                                                            s u b m itte d rf o r you
                                                                                  y o u r iiruoxiittLxuij.
                                                                                            n f o r m a ti o n .                         • ,   .

                                                                      \ ^ .              i      L         lii                            Ul
                                                              a . ;         ty * * *           h      i
             P .S .                                                 <•)
             Chief Inspector
             Operations Room
                                                                  iii) < 2 • -
                                                                  i'll)               K 4* * *            v " *~       ~                 .


GEN'2
                                                                              I'A I
          MEETING OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION TEAM
              TO BE HELD AT 10.00 AM ON WEDNESDAY 4 OCTOBER 1989
                 IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM, POLICE HEADQUARTERS


                                     A G E N D A



1.   Apologies for Absence

2.   Minutes of    Previous Meeting (22.9.89)

3.   Matters Arising:

     a.   Manpower Costs                                         - Supt Hale
            (i) Paper to Police Authority
           (ii)  Proforma for Post Match Statistics of
                   Manpower Employed
          (iii) Formula for Calculation of Costs

     b.   Communications (reports circulated)                    - Supt Parker
            (i) Command Channel
           (ii) Land Lines


     c.   CCTV and Turnstile Monitoring                          - Supt Sleath
            (i) Report of Visits to Other Grounds

4.   Ambulances at Football Grounds (report circulated)          - Ch Insp
                                                                   Waring

5.   British Rail Contingency Plans (report circulated)          - Ch Insp Waring

6.   Instructions to Stewards (Consistency across Force)         - Supt Sleath

7.   'Model' Football Match Order (report circulated)            - Supt Simpson

8.   Any Other Business

9.   Dates of Future Meetings (13.10.89 and 20.10.89)


Outstanding Future Business:

a.   Intelligence                                   (Supt Brookfield)
b.   Contracts with Clubs                           (Ch Insp Donnelly)
c.   Training in Crowd Density                      (Ch Insp Purdy - 13.10.89)
d.   Popplewell Report and Green Guide              (Ch Insp Beal - 13.10.89)
e.   Major Incident Plan                            (Ch Insp Bettison)
f.   Standing Instructions on Policing Football     (Supt Greenwood)


Mr Broomhead's Sub-Group to Consider:

a.   The role of      i)   Police Horses    - Insp Hand-Davies
                     ii)   Police Dogs      - Insp Jacques
                    iii)   Motor Cycle Wing - Insp Scholey
                     iv)   Spotter Plane
FOOTBALL GROUNDS


USE OF COMMAND CHANNEL


BACKGROUND


Radio communication at football grounds is provided by a UHF scheme                                         operating
on     one   of    the        4   available        emergency          frequencies.         These frequencies are
intended to be shared by all forces and whilst there are                                    limitations       to    the
range of transmission there is a need to consider neighbouring forces when any
of the frequencies are taken into use.


The anomaly of using 'emergency' frequencies for routine planned events,                                            such
as     football        matches,          is recognised by the Directorate of Telecommunication.
The national           allocation          of    all    radio     frequencies         is    controlled        by    the
Department        of     Trade          and Industry and the police service has to compete with
all other users for a share of what is a finite resource.                                    Because        there     is
only     limited        use       for     football      matches        in    terms of hours each week it is
difficult for the Directorate of Telecommunications to justify the                                      allocation
of     additional        frequencies.             It is therefore necessary to consider carefully
the need for a second or command channel at football grounds.


Because the 4 emergency frequencies are to be                               shared    nationally       it     is    not
possible     to        install      any     of     them    on     a    permanent       basis.    We can install
permanent equipment and whilst the effect may be the same it is                                    necessary         to
maintain      such       a    stance       to    keep     within       the regulatory requirement of the
Directorate of Telecommunications.


OPERATIONAL USE


It must be recognised that there are insufficient                              frequencies       to    provide        2
discrete channels for every ground if there is more than one game taking place
and the Force is to retain one channel                       for       a    genuine    emergency       should        an
incident develop.
The   effect       of channel sharing creates a possibility for interference between
grounds, not only within the Force, but with surrounding Forces.


Routine use of a command channel should be avoided.


To minimise disruption from surrounding grounds or Forces a                             radio    discipline
is essential to identify messages to particular events.


Because     of     the potential interaction with surrounding Forces it is essential
that use of the emergency frequencies is co-ordinated.                             To achieve this ground
commanders        should        advise     HQ       Communications       Department    of   their     channel
requirement        4     days     before        a    game   to   allow      for   consultation      with   our
neighbours.


MOTOROLA RADIOS


Use   of    a     command        channel in addition to the policing channel is to maximum
advantage if the scan facility is used.It                        is   clearly         necessary for        all
personnel        using     the     command channel to understand                  its operation. Training
should be undertaken at local level.                        It   is   not     considered    necessary      for
formal     training        to be arranged but the assistance of HQ Communications staff
should be sought whenever necessary.


It is advisable to carry out a series of transmissionbefore                             every       game    to
prove the equipment and the knowledge of the users.
FOOTBAT.T. GROUNDS - EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM


POLICE REQUIREMENT


CONTROL


The system should be independent of any other telephone installation.


The system must be operated from a control position in the police control room
at the ground.


The controller         must    have   a   display     which       indicates    the    status       of     all
telephones       on the system and those telephones which are interconnected at any
time.


All calls from a telephone must be routed                 to      the    controller    in    the        first
instance.




CONNECTIONS


The     system   must     be    capable   of connecting the police control room with any
telephone on      the     network,    either     singly      or     in   any   combination         at     the
discretion of the controller.


The     controller      must be able to call one or more telephones on the system and
have an indication on the control panel when a response is made by                           individual
handsets being lifted from their cradle.


Notification      of    an     incoming   call   at    the     control      position must be by an
illuminated display with an associated audible warning                      which     is    capable       of
being    controlled in volume and disabled by operator intervention.                         There must
be a display to indicate that the audible tone has been disabled.


The system must allow any telephone to be connected to any other telephone                                or
combination        of        telephones,    but    such    connection      must   be made through the
controllers position and with his intervention.


The system       must allow for a number of such interconnections                     to    be made        and
suppliers        shouldindicate the cost associated with the second                        and subsequent
such facility.


The controller must be capable of interrupting                      such    connections,         either     to
listen and talk to the parties involved or to disconnect if necessary.


TAPE RECORDING


There     should        be     a   capability     to   record   all activity on the system which
involves the control               position.      Cost     should    be    specified       for     providing
additional       recording facilities for connections between individual telephones
which have been linked by the controller.


TELEPHONES


The system must be capable of change by re-locating                        telephones       to     different
locations        in     or around the ground.          Costs should be given foradding further
telephones       to the system, including any modification to thecontrol                         position.
The location of telephones will be determined with police consultation.


Telephones sited in public areas must be of vandal proof design.                             The     handset
should    be     in     a      recessed    position      to prevent accidental removal and there
should be a reasonable pull required to take it into                       operational        use.         The
handset must not be in a locked cabinet.


Telephones located in secure areas can be of conventional design.                             The handset
must be designed to provide                maximum     elimination    of    ambient        noise     and   be
capable of single handed operation.


Removal     of    the        handset    from    the    cradle   position will be the only action
necessary to activate the call alarm at the controllers position.
Each telephone in a public    area   must   have   an   associated    light   which    is
illuminated when a call is initiated by the controller.        Telephones located in
remote areas must also have a second light fitted in a more prominent position
to   that   at the telephone point which is visible.      The light signal should be
blue and flashing and be eliminated as soon as the handset is lifted.


Telephones in public areas should be in yellow cabinets and          marked   with    the
word ’EMERGENCY'.


Telephones in secure areas should be clearly marked 'EMERGENCY'.
                                               SOUTH Y O R K S H IR E POLICE
                                                                                              Ref:

      From:    C h ie f I n s p e c t o r EDMUNDSON                                           Station/Dept:       O p e r a tio n s Roan
      To:      C h ie f S u p e r in t e n d e n t O p e r a tio n s & T r a f f i c          Date.       2 6 th S ep te m b er 1989



              S U B JE C T :    A m bulances a t F o o t b a l l G rounds

               W ith r e g a r d t o t h e A m bulance S e r v ic e p o l i c y on t h e ab o v e m a t t e r , I
               I h a v e sp o k e n t o Mr H o p k in s, D eputy C h ie f A m bulance O f f i c e r , who
               s t a t e s t h a t t h e A m bulance S e r v i c e p o l i c y i s a s f o ll o w s
               I n c i d e n t s o u t s i d e t h e g ro u n d , e v e n a t t u r n s t i l e s WILL NOT b e d e a l t
               w i t h b y t h e s ta n d b y am bulance an d c re w , b u t SYMAS s h o u ld be
               c o n t a c t e d v i a F o rc e O p e r a tio n s Room an d a n o t h e r am bu lan ce w i l l b e
               d ir e c te d to th e sc e n e .
                I n c i d e n t s i n s d i e t h e g ro u n d w i l l b e d e a l t w i t h b y t h e S t Jo h n s
                A m bulance B r ig a d e . I f t h e y r e q u i r e a s s i s t a n c e fro m SYMAS t h e s ta n d b y
                crew w i l l a s s i s t b u t o n ly i n e x c e p t i o n a l c i r c u m s ta n c e s w i l l th e y
                c a r r y t h e p a t i e n t t o h o s p i t a l . I f t h e s ta n d b y c re w an d v e h i c l e c a r r y
                o u t t h i s jo u r n e y t o a h o s p i t a l , SYMAS w i l l im m e d ia te ly d i r e c t
                a n o t h e r am b u lan ce t o t h e g ro u n d t o c o n t in u e t h e s ta n d b y d u t i e s . More
                o f t e n t h a n n o t , SYMAS w i l l r e q u e s t a n o t h e r am b u lan ce t o p e rfo rm t h e
                tra n s p o rt d u tie s , to h o s p ita l.

                Mr H o p k in s p o i n t e d o u t t h a t t h e am b u lan ce s on s ta n d b y a r e p a i d f o r b y
                t h e f o o t b a l l c l u b s p e c i f i c a l l y f o r m a jo r i n c i d e n t d u t i e s . He f u r t h e r
                s t a t a e s t h a t i f t h e s ta n d b y v e h i c l e s a r e u s e d f o r m in o r a c c i d e n t s th e n
                t h e c l u b c o u ld c l a im c o m p e n s a tio n f o r b r e a c h o f c o n t r a c t .

                SYMAS c o n t r o l a r e now aw are o f p o l i c y . I s u g g e s t t h a t t h i s m a t t e r
                b e in c lu d e d on t h e n e x t a g e n d a f o r t h e in f o r m a t i o n o f t h e Im p le m e n ta tio n
                Team.




                C h ie f I n s p e c t o r EEMUNDSON
                O p e r a tio n s Room




G e n /2
                            SOUTH Y O RKS HIRE POLICE

                                                        REF:
FROM:   A/Superintendent Waring
                                                        STATION/DEPT: Operations HQ
TO:     DCC                                             DATE:         0/:           -n
                                                                       26 September 1 9 8 9

        SUBJECT:       DISCUSSION PAPER - PROBLEMS FOR BRITISH RAIL AND BTP



        The British Transport Police have been lookiag at problems which may be
        coming their way which involve an accute shortage of rolling stock in
        the railway system. The situation may well arise where people will arrive
        over some hours for a football match and will all arrive back at the station
        together to leave and there will be insufficient train space available to
        cope. The worry is that a large crowd may be left for some time at or near
        a Railway Station and they are seeking to plan to aviod this happening.


        At a meeting with Supt Nicholas of the BTP on Tuesday 26 September       1989

        he suggested that British Rails option was to lay on bus trans port in
        lieu of trains where the latter was not available. His main query was that
        at each ground what would be our preferred contingency for this happening.
        Would we prefer
        1 Buses to be available at the Railway Station
        2 Buses to be available at the usual coach park location and the crowd advised
        accordingly.


        I would suggest that the decision may be different- for different grounds
        and that there may be differing resource implications. The item is submitted
        for discussion please.




        A/Superint ende
                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                      B1 SUB-DIVISION

DISCUSSION PAPER - MODEL OPERATIONAL ORDER TO BE USED IN CONNECTION

WITH THE POLICING OF FOOTBALL MATCHES WITHIN SOUTH YORKSHIRE



1     GUIDANCE

1.1   Guidance     for      the    preparation        of    all   Operational       Orders    has

       been    issued by       the    Association of Chief Police                Officer's and

       is set down in the Public Order Guide to Tactical Options and

       Related Matters at Section A (6) (See Appendix 1).



1.2   The     I.I.M.A.C.      System is recommended as the basic frsaework.

       The    Operational         Orders    currently       in use      for   the   5   football

       grounds    within      South     Yorkshire       comply to that basic system.

       The     South     Yorkshire         Police   Standing       Instructions         for   the

       Policing        of    Football       Matches        sets   out    guidance       for   the

       production of Operational Orders at Paragraph 3 and Appendix

        ’A 1. (See Appendix 2).



1.3   The     A.C.P.O.      Sub-Committee      on     hooliganism at sporting events

       - Guide -to Policing Football - Contains information whici needs

       to be included in operational orders, but does not deal with

       the actual preparation of such orders in respect of football

       matches.



2      SOUTH YORKSHIRE FOOTBALL OPERATIONAL ORDERS

2.1    whilst our orders             follow   the basic guidance              set down, those

        in use at Hillsborough,               Bramall      Lane and Barnsley have over
      xhe              years        been         d e v e l o p e d and        modified         in         the      lirht       of

      •experience to suit local conditions.




2.2   The        o rde rs      in    u se       at    Rotherham             and     Doncaster             follow       closely

      the    guidance               set     down      in        the    Force        Standing         Instructions             for

      t h e p o l i c i n g of f o o t b a l l matches.                      (Appendix 2)




2.3   It     is        true     to        say     that         the     orders           have   to     contain          ~arying

      information               to        suit       local        requirements,                but     one       thing       that

      is     apparent,               is     that       we       are        inconsistent          when        it       cones    to

      specific           infor m a t i o n        being set out in the orders.                               For example,

      at     'D'        Division all                 information             is c o n t a i n e d within ti= body

      of     the        order        whilst          at     'B'       and    'F'        Divisions,         appendices          to

      the        order         are    utilised,                 however,           'B'    Divisio n         n um ber      these

      1     to     5    w h ilst      'F'        D i v ision          letter       them    A to       C    with Appendix

      ’A'          having       Sub-sections                   (1) to       (6).        This    is just         one    example

      that          illustrat es                the        difficulty              supervisory             officers,           in

      particular,               experience                 when       perform ing          duty       at        the    Tarious

      g r o u n d s w ithin the County.




2.4   ’A'        and     'C'    Divisions,                as    mentioned           previously            closely        follow

      the        guidance           set     out       in       the    Force        Standing          Instructions            with

      their         o rders         being        produced             on    size    A4     paper.           'B1,       ’D'    and

      ’F 1        Divis ions          produce             their orders             on    size A5      paper,          with    'B'

      and        ’D ’ Divisi ons            having          a     "Standing         Instruction"             type      rooklet

      supplemented                   by     separate                 sheets        dealing           with         mate;       day

      i nformation,             i n t e l l i g e n c e and serial duties.




                                                           - 2 -
Whilst all 5 Grounds utilise the 3 Phase System for the Police

Operation the actual timing of these phases varies.                           and

'B' Divisions follow the recommendation in the Force Standing

Instructions:



Phase I          Before    kick-off         -        which         will include

                 arrangements       for    public     order       patrol,     the

                 escorting    and segretation             of supporters and

                 the control of traffic.



Phase II         During    the match from kick-off to 10 ninutes

                  before the end of the game.



Phase III        From    10 minutes       before    the    end of the game

                 before    walking    spectators          and     traffic    have

                 dispersed.



The Phases at 'A' Division are as follows:-



Phase I          From      briefing       until      10         minutes     before

                  kick-off.



Phase II         From 10 minutes before            kick-off to 10 ninutes

                  before the end of the game.



Fhase III        From    10 minutes       before    the    end of the game

                 until    walking     spectators          and     traffic    have

                 dispersed.
TLe arrangements at *D' and 'F' Divisions are as follows:-



F’
 tiase I                Before     the    kick-off until         10 minutes after

                        kick-off.



Fiiase II               From      10   minutes     into    the     match    until   10

                        minutes before the end of the game



Friase III              From 10 minutes before the end of the match

                        until the crowd and traffic have clear-id and

                        match control stands down.



isese      variations       are    obviously       necessary       to    meet   local

conditions but are used simply to highlight our inconsistency.



OPERATIONAL ORDERS - OTHER FORCES

Ir. order      to establish       the best possible practice               and father

a~   many      ideas   as   possible Operational          orders    in     respeot of

football were requested from all other forces in the Co-ntry.

Many    have    supplied      the orders and a paper has been prepared

cn this subject by Chief Inspector Hellewell. (Appendix 3 •



FORMAT OF THE PROPOSED MODEL ORDER

Taat    information which remains consistent should be contained

     the form of a          "Standing Instruction" type booklet, o: size

A5   paper.       These should be prepared by             Divisions      but printed

at   Headquarters       Supplies       utilising   both    sides of the taper,

having      a hard     back    and water-proof covering.                This booklet
should     closely      follow       the     I.I.M.A.C.          System      starting     at

’’Intention*    which     should      be     numbered       2    and   concluding       with

’'Communications'       which     should      be     numbered 5-            Appendices    to

that     Instruction     should      cover     the    following subjects and be

numbered 1,2,3 etc,



Emergency Evacuation Procedure

Crowd Safety/Club Responsibilities

Disposition of Fire-fighting Equipment within the Ground

Deployment of Club Stewards

Location/use of Emergency Telephones

Legislation

Ground Regulations

Contingency Plans

Map and Plan



These      standing     instruction        booklets        should      be   consecutively

cumbered      and     issued    to    Senior       and     Supervisory        Officers    on

either a permanent or match                  day     issue basis as appropriate.

Copies should be supplied to the Club, Chairman of the Ifficer

working      Party,      Emergency         Services        and     other      parties     as

appropriate.



MATCH DAY ORDER

A    separate simplified match day order on size A5 paper should

be prepared and produced at Division dealing with IHFOrMATION

on the I.I.M.A.C.         System which should be numbered 1.                       Command

E J id   Sectorisation     details         should     be    included        together    with
'an- overall manpower sheet.                      This part of the order should be

on white paper.



SERIAL DUTIES

Two   options        are    open       to       us   -     either    detailed      on     s sheet

appended to the Match Day Order as proposed at 4.2 'above or

by    the     utilisation             of        cards      issued     at   briefing.             The

disadvantage of the second system is that supervisory officers

are unable to read duties in advance.



SECTOR DUTIES

Officers         commanding       a    sector        should     be    issued with written

 Instructions as to their duties and specific problems affecting

■their sector.        The format should follow that of serial duties.



 INTELLIGENCE SHEET

 This should be produced on A5 coloured paper on the dav prior

 to   the     event        and    contain            all    relevant       and     up     tc     date

 Intelligence.             Details         of    transport,         with   train    times        etc.

 should     be    included,       together with relevant exclusion orders.

 Issued     immediately prior to the main briefing to all Senior

 and Supervisory Officers with additional copies being available

 for other personnel as considered appropriate.



SERIAL SHEETS



These       should     be        self-carbonating              and     printed          centrally.

 Information       currently          contained            on our    serial      sheets        should
fc*£ supplemented by details of those officers who are:

Casualty Bureau Trained, PSU Trained etc.



Luimediately      following      the   briefing     the     top   copy   should   be

handed      to Ground Control.            The   second     copy which should be

coloured,     retained by the Supervisory Officer being submitted

at    the   conclusion     of the operation         and    include all relevant

de-briefing       information.         Serial     sheets   should also be used

t;>   the   specialist     sections,       Mounted,     Dogs,     Motorcycle Wing,

Control Room, Logistics Personnel etc so that a total record

is    available    at    the    Control    Room    of   all   personnel    actually

on duty.



FORCE POLICY

W'rilst it is feasible to set down a format for the model order

at this stage, before the actual information contained in that

o~*der can be detailed Force Policy needs to be determined with

regard to the following areas:-



1            Overall Strategy

2            Command

3            Sectorisation

4            Deployment of Resources

5            Briefing and Debriefing.



Ideally     an overall simple plan encompassing the above should

be    set down,    being       scaled up    in accordance with anticipated

cr-owd attendance and the potential for disorder.                        Whilst the
plans need         to vary     to take account of local conditions,                    the

■overall strategy and principle should remain constant.



PROVISION OF INFORMATION TO EMERGENCY SERVICES

'.The    South     Yorkshire      Fire    Service    and     the    South     Yorkshire

Metropolitan         Ambulance      Service       should     be    provided     vith     a

sufficient         number    of   Standing       Instruction       Booklets     relating

 tc     each ground within the County and then in respect of each

 fixture,        supplied    witK   an    information      sheet     as   set    out    at

 Arpendix     4.     On every occasion this should be accompanied by

 a    copy   of    the   Appendix    to    the    standing     instruction       dealing

 with the Emergency Evacuation Procedure.
                                                               Xppen ::• i




               A6 OPERATIONAL ORDERS
    INTRODUCTION
    T h e IIMAC S y s te m is a b a s i c f r a m e w o r k for t h e
    compilation of Police Operational Orders. It is sufficiently
    flexible to be used as a p lan n in g aid for:—
    (a) previously notified events;
    (b)   contingency plans;
    (c)   briefing


    OBJECTIVES
    T h e fra m e w o rk e n a b le s t h e Operational Order to be
    u s e d for m any types of event e.g. dem onstrations, football
    m a t c h e s , public meetings, etc. It can be sca le d up to
    co p e w ith an escalating situation without th e need to
    a lter t h e initial structure.


  CONSIDERATIONS
1 Aim of an Order                                                       Am
    After identifying th e n u m b e r of m en a n d material
    re q u ir e d its main p u rp o se is to co-ordinate t h e m ain
    t h r u s t of effort tow ards achieving aim s a n d objectives.
    Its p u rp o s e is t o —
    (a) identify th e problem;
    (b)‘ impart instructions a n d directions;
    (c)   co-ordinate re s o u rc e s so th at th e     aim s and
          objectives are achieved.
    T h e fram ew o rk of th e Operational Order is b a s e d on the
    w ords—
           INFORMATION
          INTENTION
          METHOD
          ADMINISTRATION
          COMMUNICATIONS
2   In f o rm a tio n -'W h a t is taking place'                        Information
    This s h o u ld cover the time, day, date, place a n d n atu re
    of t h e event in brief, concise terms.
3   I n t e n t i o n - ’What do w e intend to do about it’             Intention
    The a im s an d objectives should be clearly defined
    Officers should know w h y th e operation is being mounted
    a n d w h a t is required of them.
                                                                                                a p p e n ::x




MatfrroC                3.4    M e th o d -'H o w d o w e in tend to deal with th e situation
                               It m ay be d e s i r a b l e to s t a r t by identifying the
                               o rg a n isa tio n a l s t r u c t u r e with a su m m a ry of police
                               m a n p o w e r. This will allow all officers to tak e in at s
                               g lance t h e g e n e r a l o rg a n is a tio n a n d s e e w h e r e th ey f *
                               in-simplicity s h o u ld be t h e keynote.
                               (a) S ecto rs The division of t h e gro un d into a r e a s t:
                                                      m a k e supervision easier, usually u s irc
                                                      a colour code.
                                (b) P h a s e s       T  he te rm u s e d to describe a s tag e c*
                                                      events. For example, P h ase 1 -p re marc*
                                                      a n d a s s e m b l y , P h a s e 2 - t h e m a rc "
                                                       P h a s e 3 - t h e dispersal.
                               (cj     Duties          It is s o m e tim e s n e c e s s a ry to identify t"-r
                                                       sh ifts to be w o rk ed an d th e n to outlir*e
                                                       t h e S e c to r C o m m a n d e r's duties, t h e f v
                                                       d e ta ils of w h ic h c a n be outlined in s*
                                                       appendix. The d u ties of support service;
                                                        like t h e M o u n te d Branch, T r a n s p c i
                                                       S ection, Motor Cyclists and CID sh o u o
                                                        also b e specified in an appendix,
                                (dj     P riso n ers   D e ta ile dinstructions of the sy stem t o t e
                                                       u s e d an d form of d o cu m e n ta tio n shot; >-
                                                       also be given in an appendix.

 A d m in istra tio n    3.5    A d m in is tr a tio n
                                (a)   T ransport It is a d v a n t a g e o u s to identify t r -
                                                       tra n s p o r t by m e a n s of t h e P S j
                                                       identification num ber.
                                 (bj    R e fr e s h ­ P e rs o n n e l s h o u ld be a w a re of w h e-e
                                        m e n ts       a n d w h e n they can obtain refreshm ents

                                 (cj    Dress          Details of d r e s s should be s h o w n to
                                                       e n s u r e uniformity of ap p e ara n ce. In
                                                       c a s e of special protective clothing e t:
                                                       it s h o u l d b e i s s u e d at t h e h o ld rg
                                                       centre(s) or in th e field d ep e n d e n t u p tn
                                                       circu m stan ces.
                                 (dj    Traffic        Detailed traffic a r r a n g e m e n ts should te
                                        A rr a n g e ­ included specifying road clo su re;
                                        m e n ts       d iv ersio n s a n d th e police a r r a n g e ­
                                                        m e n t s n ec es s ary to implem ent s u :n
                                                       procedures.
                                 (ej    Com­           T he n a m e a n d location of th e office's
                                        plaints         a p p o in te d to deal with c o m p l a i n s
                                        Officer         sh o u ld b e included
                                                                      A6 2
                                                                                     APPENDIX r




      (f)   M aps          It is useful to is s u e sm all d eta ile d m aps
            and            of v ario u s localities to a s s i s t officers
            P la n s       fro m different Divisions w h o are
                            unfam iliar with th e area.
      (g)    Recording Details of accepted policy on w h a t duties
             of Duties will b e w orked in re g ard to :—length of
                       to u r of duty, overtime, rest day working,
                       s h o u ld be agreed upon. An officer should
                       b e d e s ig n a te d for t h e compilation of
                       s u c h information.
3.6   Communications                                                                 Com munications
      T h e level of p e r s o n a l radios will accord w ith t h e type of
      o c c a s io n a n d its n atu re . Details of t h e officers w h o will
      be e q u ip p e d w ith VHF (or UHF) p ers o n al radios should
      be s h o w n in ap p e n d ic e s . The detail s h o u ld include
      s e c t o r / u n i t n u m b e r s , call signs, radio ch a n n el(s) to be
      u sed . Similarly w ith radio equipped v ehic le s or fixed
      locations t h e d eta ils sh ould include d u ty /lo c a tio n , call
      s i g n s a n d channel(s). A s e p a r a t e appendix sh o u ld list
      th e t e le p h o n e n u m b e r s of Incident Controls, Reporting
      S ta tio n s etc., rele v an t to th e operation.
      In th e c a s e of complex written instructions, this seq u e n ce
      m ay be s u p p le m e n te d by an INDEX a n d APPENDICES.




                                     A6 3
OPERATIONAL ORDER                                                                         ftPPENIIX 2

H .l /       I t i s n e c e s s a r y t o u s e a s t a n d a r d fo rm a t f o r o p e r a t i o n a l o r d e r s
             f o r f o o t b a l l m a tc h e s w i t h i n t h e f o r c e a r e a w ith a d d i t i o n s t o
             c a te r fo r lo c a l c o n d itio n s .        The fo rm a t shown a t A ppendix 'A '
             w i l l b e a d o p te d .


BRIEFUNG ARRANGEMENTS
                        ♦


4 .1         The O f f i c e r i n Conmand w i l l , a s f a r a s i s p r a c t i c a b l e , u n d e rta k e
             h is b r ie f in g w ith in th e                c l o s e c o n f i n e s o f th e ground in
             s u f f i c i e n t tim e t o a l l o w o f f i c e r s t o t a k e up t h e i r d u t i e s w ith i n
             t h e g ro u n d b e f o r e t h e g a t e s      a r e o p en t o t h e p u b l i c , and o u t s i d e
             t h e g ro u n d b e f o r e t h e m ain body o f s p e c t a t o r s a r r i v e i n t h e
             v i c i n i t y o f t h e s ta d i u m .

4 .2         A l l o f f i c e r s w i l l b e b r i e f e d w i t h u n ifo rm ed o f f i c e r s b e in g
             p a ra d e d in th r e e ra n k s re a d y f o r in s p e c tio n .                 I t w i l l be t h e
             r e s p o n s ib ility o f th e b r ie fin g o f f ic e r to see th a t each o f f ic e r
             is       fu lly in s tr u c te d     in h is            d u t..e s and i s s m a r t ly tu r n e d c u t
             i n c l u d i n g h a v in g h i s h a i r c u t t o an a c c e p ta b le le n g t h end h i s
             b e a r d o r m o u s ta c h e trim m ed                - o n e man o f s c r u f f y a p p e a ra rc e
             s t a n d i n g b e f o r e a cro w d o f s p e c t a t o r s d i s c r e d i t s t h e f o r c e as a
             whol-3. O f f i c e r s n o t c a n in g up t o t h e a c c e p ta b le s ta n d a r d w i l l be
             ad v i-sed and r e t u r n e d im m e d ia te ly                  t o t h e i r s u b -d iv is io n o r
             s ta tio n .        The o f f i c e r i n conmand w i l l s u b s e q u e n tly r e p o r t t h e
             m a t t e r t o t h a t o f f i c e r ' s d i v i s i o n a l commander.

4 .3         P o i n t s t o c o n s i d e r d u r i n g i n s p e c t i o n s and b r i e f i n g , w h i l s t n o t in
             th e m s e lv e s e x h a u s t i v e , a r e s e t o u t i n A p p en d ices 'B ' and ‘C 1.


MANPOWER REQUIREMENTS

 5 .1        In e s t i m a t i n g m anpow er r e q u i r e m e n t s , t h e       f o llo w in g f a c t o r s m ust
         '   b e c o n s id e r e d :

                 i)     t h e im p o r ta n c e t o e a c h c l u b o f t h e r e s u l t , i e                le a g u e
                         p o s i t i o n , l o c a l r e p u t a t i o n i n 'd e r b y ' gam es, e t c ;

               ii)      t h e h i s t o r y o f p r e v i o u s e n c o u n t e r s betw een       c lu b s and th e
                         s u p p o rte rs o f th e c lu b s;

             iii)       th e ab sen ce o f o th e r f ix t u r e s in th e a re a ;

               iv )     th e l i k e l y      num ber      of      v is itin g      s p e c ta to rs    and     th e ir
                         re p u ta tio n ;

                v)      r e l a t i o n s h i p s o f p u b l i c t r a n s p o r t sy ste m s t o t h e stadium,
                         i e r a i l s t a t i o n s , bus r o u t e s , e t c - p e r s o n n e l vill be
                         r e q u i r e d t o p r o t e c t p r e m is e s 'e n r o u t e ' t o and from the
                         s ta d iu m ;

               v i)     t h e g e o g r a p h i c a l f e a t u r e s o f e a c h ground and lo c a ti o n in
                         r e l a t i o n t o tow n o r c i t y c e n t r e s - th e a r r i v a l o f e a r l y
                          t r a n s p o r t e n c o u r a g e s s u p p o r t e r s t o in v a d e sr. z: ::'j ... as
                         W hich r e q u i r e e x t r a p r o t e c t i o n .
                                                                                (13)
                                                                                                                                       Appendix           2   *

                                                                                                                                       APPENDIX 'A'

STAir-*' “ OPERATIONAL ORDER



                                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                                                     '       ' DIVISION

                                                          .................................................. POLICE STATIC


OPERATIONAL ORDER NO:                                                                                                MATCH CATEGORY: '                            '

                                                         HOME TEAM V AWAi' TEAM

DATE......................................................................         KICK OFF..................... AM/R-5


1.                   INFC RMATION

1 .1                  On ..........................................................1985, ........................................ - ...........................
                      w i l l p l a y ...................................................a t .....................................................................
                      F o o t b a l l G round (m e n tio n an y s i g n i f i c a n t p o i n t s r e l i r . i v e t o t h a t
                      f i x t u r e , e g p r e v io u r . e n c o u n te rs b etw een t h e tw o cl_:3 r e s u l t i n g
                      in s e r io u s o u tb re a k s o f p u b lic d is o r d e r , e t c ) .


2.                   INTENTION

2 .1                 I t is        t h e i n t e n t i o n o f t h e p o l i c e t o a llo w t h i s n ^ 'c h t o t a k e
                      p l a c e an d t o e n s u r e p u b l i c o r d e r and s a f e t y b c ~ i n s i d e and
                      o u t s i d e t h e g ro u n d , t o s e g r e g a te an d c o n t r o l oppo^ir.g         f a n s and
                      p r e v e n t u n n e c e s s a r y o b s t r u c t i o n o f t h e highw ay srz damage             to
                      p ro p e rty .        T h i s w i l l be a t t a i n s d an d d i s p l a y e d v i t h a liig h
                       s t a n d a r d o f s m a r tn e s s and p r o f e s s i o n a l i s m .


 3.                  METHOD

 3 .1                Id e n tify          o f f i c e r i n o v e r a l l com rand        an d t h o s e v i t h                                 s p e c ific
                      r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s b o th i n s i d e and o u t s i d e t h e g ro u n d .

 3 .2                OPERATIONAL PHASES

                       The o p e r a t i o n w i l l b e i n t h r e e p h a s e s , v i z :

 3 . 2 .1            P h a se 1 -               b e f o r e k i c k - o f f - w hich w i l l i n c l u d e a r r r r .g s .i tn t s f o r
                                               p u b l i c o r d e r p a t r o l s , t h e e s c o r t i n g and s e g r e g a tio n o f
                                               s u p p o r t e r s and th e c o n t r o l ' o f t r a f f i c .

 3 . 2 .2            P hase 2 -                 d u rin g th e      m atch from k i c k - o f f t o t e n r _ ~ u te s b e f o r e
                                               th e end o f th e g a ie .      (The s p e c i f i c d u t i e i b e in g shown
                                               b y A p p e n d ic e s . )
                                                                     U4)
                                                                                                               jgfENDIX 2 *
      3 .2 .3       P hase 3 -          fro m t e n m in u te s b e f o r e t h e e n d o f           t:     gem?u n t i l
                                        w a lk in g      s p e c ta to rs   and t r a f f i c    h av; d i s p e r s e d .
                                        ( D u t i e s t o b e p e rfo rm e d a s d i r e c t e d i n tie: A p p en d ice s)

      3 .3          PARADING ON DUTY

      3 .3 .1       T in e an d P l a c e .

      3 .4          BRIEFING

      3 .4 .1       T h is s h o u ld b e d e s c r i b e d i n        t h e S ta n d i n g I n s t r j c t i o n s         and
                    p a r t i c u l a r r e f e r e n c e made t o t h e n e e d f o r p o l i c e o f f i c e r s t o
                    m a rch t o t h e i r t a s k s o r a p p o in te d p o s i t i o n s an d f c r u n i t s l e s s
                    th a n s e r i a l s     t o m arch o r w alk i n s i n g l e f i l e           e s p e c i a l l y aro u n d
                    th e p e rim e te r tra c k .

      3 .5          CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION DEPARTMENT

      3 .5 .1       D u tie s o f CID o f f i c e r s .

      3 .6          PLAIn! CLOTHES DEPARTMENT
 f
I I
       3 .6 .1      D u tie s o f P l a i n C lo th e s o f f i c e r s .

       3 .7         SPECIAL CONSTABULARY

       3 .7 .1      D u tie s o f S p e c i a l C o n s ta b l e s .
      <   . ..

       3~8          POLICE ROOM

       3 .8 .1      I d e n tif y o f f i c e r in c h arg e .

       3 .9         PRISONERS

       3 .9 .1       The f u l l p r o c e d u r e f o r d e a l i n g         v .'ith d e t a i n e d p e r e i e :   s h o u ld be
             ,      fu lly o u tlin e d .

       3 .1 0       MATCH CONTROL

       3 . 1 0 .1    I d e n t i f y l o c a t i o n and o f f i c e r s in v o lv e d .

       3 .1 1       TRAFFIC CONTROL

       3 .1 1 .1    T ra ffic       P o in ts -       s p e c if ie d in      t h e A p p e n d ic e s , w ill be       w orked
                                                        b e f o r e and a f t e r t h e m a tc h .

       3 . 1 1 .2   Traffic Division's involvement

       3 .1 1 .2     P a r k in g a r r a n g e m e n ts and r e s t r i c t i o n s

       3 .1 2       PUBLIC TRANSPORT

       3 . 1 2 .1     G iv e d e t a i l s o f p u b l i c t r k i s p o r t , r o u t e s , t e r m i n i , e e : .

       3 .1 3       OBSTRUCTION OF THE HIGHWAY

       3 .1 3 .1     P r o c e d u r e s r e g a r d i n g o f f e n c e s and o f f e n d e r s .
                                                      (15)

                                                                                      # f p e n : : x 2/
4.       ADMINISTRATION

4 .1     D re ss f o r a l l o f f i c e r s a s i n d i c a t e d a t A p pendix 'B '

4 .2     TRANSPORT

4.2.1    P a r k in g a n d u s e o f o f f i c i a l p o l i c e v e h i c l e s .

4 .3     REFRESHMENTS

4.3.1    E x p la in arrangem D r.-_s.

4 .4     MAPS

4.4.1    To tie a v a i l a b l e when n e c e s s a r y .

4 .5     REPORTING OFF DUTY

4.5.1    D e t c i l d e - b r i e f i n g s y ste m and how o f f i c e r s w i l l re p o rt: o f f d u t y .


5.       COMMUNICATIONS

5 .1     I d e n t i f y f r e q u e n c y and c h a n n e l t o b s u t i l i s e d d u rin g th e ev en t -
           l e v e l o f a l l o c a t i o n o f p e r s o n a l r a d i o s - p u b l i c a d d re ss s y s te m s
           t o b e c h e c k e d b e f o r e t h e e v e n t by a p o l i c e o f f i c e r .
 <-..
6.       EMERGENCY PROCEDURES

6 .1     I d e n t i f y p r o c e d u r e f o r d e a l i n g w ith an y em ergency in tfce g ro u n d .


THE Or:::-U\TIONAL ORDER WILL CARRY APPROPRIATE APPENDICES IICIC8TING THE
SPECIF! r SERIAL DUTIES ANT RESPONSIBILITIES AND A SCHEDULE SEEING THE
OVERALL POLICE COMMITMENT BY RANKS AND BY DUTIES - SEE APPENDLX *J* .
                                                                          APPENDIX 3



                       EVALUATION OF FOOTBALL OPERATIONAL ORDERS



As a r*esult of a request from other Forces to supply copies c? their

Operational          Orders       in      connection with     Football matches,         tciate      we

have received 45 such Orders.



It is     quite clear from                the outset that there is such a diversity                 of

ideas,     emphasis,         formatand content         that    it    is    not    surprising     that

some Frrces have refused to supply copies.



It appears appropriate to have a standard core-Order within tl.~ Force

area     with   additions/deletions              to   cater    for     local     conditions.       The

vast     majority      of     the      Orders    examined     follow      the    A.C.P.O.   1-uidance

I.I.M.A.C.           The     following      headings    have    been       retrieved    free     these

Orders     and have         to be         considered for inclusion or otherwise and                 if

included,       to    what       depth.     To    include everything would be f'lly as

this    would    take       on    such proportions       so as       to make      it unwieldy and

even ir read, incapable of absorbtion.



1          Safety

           Emergency Services

           Evacuation Procedures

           Reference to Contingency Plans

           Ground Capacities/Densities

           Over-crowding

           Location of Telephones
Duties of Stewards

Cutting Equipment

Location of Fire Fighting Equipment.



Legislation

Ground Regulations

Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol) Regulations



CJ Act 1988 (Articles with Blades)

Searching



Administration

Dress

Meals

Police Transport

Overtime

Communications



Duties

Serials

Control Room

Detention Room

C.I.D.

Horses

Dogs

Motorcycles

Traffic

No-Waiting Signs/Barriers
           Special Constabulary

           Aircraft



6          General

           Intelligence

           Written Agreements

           Police/Club

           Respective Responsibilities

           Prisoners

           Reporting Off Duty

           Confiscation of Property

           Brief ing/Debrief ing

           Hold-Back Policy



The   actual    designs,      sizes,    depth   of    content      etc.   are   matters    to

addressed and agreed upon by this Forum.                 Examples can, and will be

provided    to assist with tbose          deliberations.           It will be seen that

they range     from an extensive A4 size book to a 5" x 5" booklet                         to

a simple 3~A4 sheets - a corpromise has to be reached.



It is recognised       that    an Operational        Order   is a vital part          of any

police   operation     and    careful    attention     to    its    content     is   critical

if the Order is to be of any value.
                                                                    APPENDIX •»/




                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                      DIVISION



          NOTIFICATION OF SPORTING EVENT AT A DESIGNATED STADIUM



                                        v.




    1   : -;rE



    2   VENUE



    3   TIME OF     (1) COMMMENCEMENT

                     (2) GATES OPEN TO SPECTATORS

                    (3) FINISH



    4   'NUMBER OF SPECTATORS ANTICIPATED



    5   ANY      VARIATION   OR    AMENDMENT   TO   AGREED   EMERGENCY   ROUTES    OR

^       PROCEDURES



    6   ANY      VARIATION   TO   ARRANGEMENTS WITHIN    THE   GROUND (STRUCTURAL

         ALTERATIONS, GATES NOT IN USE ETC.)



    7   ANY ADDITIONAL INFORMATION



    8   POINT OF CONTACT (DETAIL OFFICER AND TELEPHONE NUMBER)
9      SIGNATURE



10     OFFICER IN COMMAND OF OPERATION.



THIS FORM TO BE FORWARDED TO:-



CHIEF FIRE OFFICER,     ............................

CHIEF AXBULANCE OFFICER,        .......................



AT   LEA£T   5   DAYS   PRIOR    TO   THE   EVENT.   ANY   SUBSEQUENT   RELEVANT

INFORMATION TO BE PASSED BY TELEX AS SOON AS POSSIBLE.
          MINUTES OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION TEAM
                'HELD AT 10.00 AM ON WEDNESDAY'% OCTOBER 1989
                 IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM, POLICE HEADQUARTERS


Present:

P Hayes Esq QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable - (Chairman)
T F Broomhead .Esq, A/Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
Superintendents Brookfield, Greenwood,' Hale, Oughton, Parker, Simpson,
   Sleath,
Chief Inspectors, Bettison, Donnelly, Hellewell, Waring, Warne

Apologies for absence were received from Superintendent Marsh and Chief
Inspector Beal (annual leave) and Chief Inspector Purdy (other duties).


26/89       MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETING

The minutes of the meeting held on 22 September 1989, which had been
previously circulated, were accepted as a true and accurate record.


27/89        MATTERS ARISING*FROM THE MINUTES

        27.1 Manpower Costs

             (i)   Paper to Police Authority

The Chairman outlined to the meeting that a paper was being prepared to be
presented to the Police Authority suggesting a review of the recovery of
costs arising out of policing football in South Yorkshire. He highlighted
the fact that over the last two years costs had been in the region of £2
million and the Police Authority had recovered approximately 22" of that.

The South Yorkshire Police had received an opinion that police performing
duties outside the ground exclusively in relation to an event taking place
inside the ground were equally chargeable to the club.

The Chairman asked Chief Inspector Bettison to prepare a general paper for
the Police Authority updating them ofTthe progress of implementing the
Taylor recommendations etc. The Chairman, in consultation with
Superintendent Hale, would provide a proposal for the review of charging
arrangements no be included in chat general report.

            ar

            (ii)   Proforma for pose macch scacis"ics of manpower employed

Superintendent Hale introduced this item. In trying to cost the policing
of football matches for the last two seasons he had found disparity in the
collation of statistics of manpower employed. Supt Hale felt that any
future review of these costs ought to be based on accurate and consistent
statistics. He therefore asked ail sub-divisional commanders to complete
and return the proformae which he had previously circulated to them. As
well as providing the basis for a review of costing arrangements these
proformae will also provide useful management information. Costs will be
extracted from the information by Finance Department and will form the
basis of Sunt Half's subseauer.t reoort.
                                                                            - 2 -

The Chairman asked all sub-divisional commanders to complete the proformae
accordingly.

Item discharged.

                  (iii)           Formula for calculation of costs
                                                                                              \


The formula for calculating the standing charge would be captured from the
proformae referred to above.

The Chairman then raised the question of calculating reserves to meet any
contingency at football grounds. Mr Broomhead pointed out that a national
review of 'reserves' had shown that there is no commonality of approach,
the numbers ranged from very small to very large numbers of reserves with
no apparent justification for differences. The Chairman pointed out that
the word 'sufficiency' in the Taylor rectrtnnendation was crucial. How are
we to calculate this? Superintendent Sleath pointed out that each
individual ground with its own contingency plans cannot be captured in
either a national or forcewiae formula for reserve calculation.

A discussion took place on this point with several members pointing out
the need for local experience to determine need on an individual match
basis. The Chairman agreed that the ground commanders discretion was an
important factor.

Superintendent Simpson raised the question of having mounted officers in
reserve. A discussion took place on this issue. Chief Inspector Waring
pointed out that mounted and dog section officers were not plentiful and
therefore may not be suitable as reserve officers.

The Chairman proposed the calculation of reserves on the principle of
providing 'first aid'. In other words, the reserve should not be expected
to perform monumental tasks alone but should be available for rapid
deployment to an area of need and may be supplemented by additional
officers subsequently. These additional officers could be involved in
other aspects of the operation itself or be drawn from normal policing
strength or even from Operation Support.

On this basis the Chairman proposed that a reserve should never be less
than one sergeant and five constables., but need not in the majority of
cases be more than two sergeants and 20 constables. If a ground commander
thought      it n e c e s sa ry to increase the reserve beyond                                                   this         figure   Chen he
should     seek   aonrsval fr^m AC C (Operations).

v           3 ’1 ci 2 ’
                      .1   ,~i   •- -i r '•>     n {••• 0   p   Q i. ** ^   "’"ICl ~ L '' ^            ~w    r     * ■*-n \        17^1“.u         f! *2 L* ~

produce a L oc al formula nor c a l c u l a t i n g the rese.rv-3 ba.-:ed u p o n p r e v i o u s
experience of cert ain fixtures a n d anticipated n e e d in respect of
subsequent fixtures, having regard Co local co nt in gen cy plans etc.                      The
clubs would be charged on the basis of this formula but Che local ground
com man de r might increase or decrease Che reserve if war ra nc e d b y intelligenc

After    some d i sc u s si o n the C h a i r m a n invited all ground command er s                                                          to
a t t e m p t to p r o v i d e a               l oc al      formula         and         to c o n s i d e r   the      .vo p r o p o s a l s       put
to the m e e t i n g , i.e.


i1 ■    a m in i m um
                    r e s e r v e v h i c h -nay be supplemented a c c o r d i n g - to the g r o u n d
        comman der 's dis cr eti on up to a certain l e v e l a nd thereafter on toe
        ap nroval of A CC (Ooerations ):
                                                            - 3 -

(2)      the reserve to be at the ground commander's decision based upon a
         local formula for each club.

The Chairman asked for comments on these two proposals at the next meeting.

Item deferred.

Ac this point Superintendent Oughton raised the question of what he
considered to be wasteful deploya«nt of officers manning gates onto the
perimeter track which were set In very low and easily climbed walls. The
Chairman's response was that, having set the high standards which had been
required in respect of the Taylor recommendations, it was proposed that an
inspection team would subsequently review the arrangements at each club
aiming to achieve adequate, but realistic, standards.

         27.2       Communications                                      "***'

                    (i) Command Channel

The Chairman asked two questions of Superintendent Parker.

(1)     With just four emergency radio channels can we cope with more than
        two games on any one-day in South Yorkshire?

        Supt Parker's answer was a qualified 'yes', the channels could be
        mixed and matched so that each ground had two channels available
        without interfering with neighbouring grounds. Any of these
        permutations however would need to be tested.

(2)     What is the criteria                  for judicious use of these emergency channels?

        Supt Parker's answer was that the use is reallyat the discretion of
        the ground commander.

There followed a discussion about the perceived need for a command channel
at each of the five football grounds and the Chairman agreed that subject
to four days' notice to ACC (Operations) ground commanders could employ an
executive channel at any particular football match. The four days' notice
would enable Supt Parker's department to resolve any problems of
interference with the communications ...-equipment at any other ground in
South Yorkshire or neighbouring force.

S u p e r i n t e n d e n t H a l e r e m o l d e d the m e e t i n g    that the c o m m a n d       channel      even
t h o u g h e m p l o y e d w o u l d not be u s e d e x c e p t         in an e m e r g e n c y .     Whilst
r o c u i a r l v e m p l o y e d at S r s m a l l L a n e the c o m m a n d char.:',el -1s l it t le usr;:d.
T h e C h a i r m a n s u g g e s t e d to    S u p e r i n t e n c e n t Simpson., that he m i g h t r e f l e c t t he
use of c o m m a n d c h a n n e l in         his m o d e l orde r.


Item discharged.

                 (ii)      Land    Lines


T h e C h a i r m a n e s t a b l i s h e d that e a c h c l u b        w a s a w a r e of the p o l i c e inspection,
in r e s p e c t of p r o p o s a l s for a t e l e p h o n e           network.        There would follow a
response       to   each     l o c al    authority       where     the          proposals   for      Land   l ines     etc.
w o u l d be i n c o r p o r a t e d .   T h e C h a i r m a n t h e r e f o r e felt it w a s         c o u r t e o u s to
i n f o r m the c l u b s of o ur        p r o p o s e d r e s p o n s e to the l i c e n s i n g      authority.
When- the      resnor.se       in r e s o e c t   of   an   individual             club   was   completed        the
ground commander concerned would be asked to liaise with the club before
its formal presentation to the local authority.

Item discharged,

               (iii)    GCTV

Superintendent Sleath reported his intention to visit Chester Football
Club on Saturday 7 October to inspect an advanced CCTV system. The
Chairman asked that following this visit Supt Sleath should visit each of
the grounds in South Yorkshire and confirm ghat the existing report in
respect <?£ .CCTV--was accurate in its proposals for each of the South
Yorkshire grounds. The proposals for CCTV would then form a part of the
package to be laid before the relevant local authority after discussion
with the clubs.

Item deferred.

        27.3    Turnstile Monitoring                      .                        ;

The Chairman felt that the existing report captured what was in existence
at each of the football grounds in South Yorkshire but asked the meeting
if there were any recommendations of what should be in existence.

.There then followed a discussion about local'difficulties in respect of
 turnstile monitoring that are encountered at Rotherham, Barnsley, and
 Doncaster. Mr Broomhead pointed out that the written agreements with each of
 the clubs made it clear what their responsibilities were in this area. It
 appeared now that these three clubs were each failing to meet those
responsibilities. Mr Broomhead proposed to review the arrangements with each
 individual ground commander.

The Chairman agreed and reminded the meeting that where the written
agreement with the club was revised in some way, or was being broken by the
club, then these matters should be raised centrally with ACC (Operations).
Also that any changes, even for a single match, had to be agreed first in
writing on the form designed for this purpose.

Item discharged.


28/89          AM B U LA N C ES AT F OO TB AL L GROUNDS

The C h a irm an refer re d to'a report by Chief Inspector Ed mun ds on and asked
all members to note the report for in f or m a ti o n only.

Item discharged.



29/89          BRITIS H RAIL CO N T I N G E N C Y PLANS

C hie f Inspector W a rin g in tro d u ce d this ite m by speaking to the report
w hic h had been circulated.

The ite m was dis ch a rg e d by the Ch a ir m a n asking individual ground
command ers to liaise with Chief Inspector W ari ng in order to est ablish
                                                      - 5 -

where, in the event of British Rail being unable to "provide rolling stock,
the stranded supporters should be collected.

Item discharged.


30/89              INSTRUCTIONS TO STEWARDS

Superintendent Sleath introduced this item by pointing out that at
Hillsborough written instructions to stewards were provided by the police,
and ...were in the process of being revised in accordance with the
recommendations of the Standinj Instructions on Policing Football. Supt
Sleath proposed that such written instructions should have a forcewide
commonality.

A discussion ensued during which the question of training of stewards was
raised. The Chairman pointed out that the responsibility for stewards'
duties at each ground remained with the club, but training and briefing of
stewards is certainly something with which the police can assist.

The Chairman asked whether photographs were being prepared at each of the
grounds to show the variable density of spectators in sections of the
ground. The photographs were either prepared or in the process of
preparation at each of the grounds.

The Chairman asked Superintendent Oughton to look at the question of
training and briefing of stewards and the written instructions provided to
stewards throughout the force and to report back at the next meeting.

Item deferred.


31/89              'MODEL' FOOTBALL MATCH ORDER

Superintendent Simpson introduced this item and spoke to the report which
had been previously circulated.

Chief Inspector Hellewell had compared football match orders frota many
police forces in England and Wales. After describing several such orders
he referred to the Hampshire orders _.a-s- a model for the preparation of
orders in South Yorkshire. After some discussion this was agreed by the
meeting.
                                    ., '
Sd'pc S i m p s o n t h e n r e f e r r e d to p ag e 7 of his r e p o r t , in p a r t i c u l a r


                   overall   strategy
                   command structures
                   seccorisation
                   deployment of resources
                   briefing and debriefing of personnel

            ( i>    Overall     strategy


A   f o r m of w o r d s   r.vas to   be   produced   by   ;l;” t Sircson. and   brought   back   to   a
subsequent tneetins for a n o r o v a i .
                                                         - 6 -

            (ii)     Command structures

After discussion it was agreed that different command structures were
necessarily employed at different grounds and this was quite acceptable.
The model order should reflect this variation.

           (iii)     Sectorisation

After some discussion it was agreed there was no perceived advantage in
colour coding and that sectorisation of South Yorkshire grounds would
remain as it is at present.

            (iv)     Deployment of resources

The consideration was whether officers should be deployed to static
positions or be deployed to alternating positions at different pharses of
the operation.

After some discussion it was agreed chat phasing was both necessary ana an
efficient use of resources. The model order should therefore reflect this
practice.  It was pointed out however that the phases do not coincide at
each of the five grounds and, in order to overcome any difficulties that
this creates, the various phases should be announced by ground control at
the time of change-over.

             (v)     Briefing and debriefing of personnel

Supt Simpson would like to capture these items in the model order. Current
policy is that the match commander fully briefs sergeants and above and
performs an initial briefing of all officers involved in the operation.
The sergeants are then expected to more fully brief their individual serial.
This was echoed by other members of the meeting.

The Chairman asked that each officer pass to Supt Simpson their individual
format for briefing from which he might establish best practice and
include such in the model order.

The Chairman asked Supt Simpson to produce a model order including a
briefing document and to hand that out at a subsequent meeting for further
discussion.                          ^

Supt       Simpson    raised     the    question       of   providing       information         about     a football
a a t c h e v e n t :o the emersjjr.cy s e r v i c e s .        C u r r e n t l -.*' we o r o v i d e a c o p y   of the
f ul l o p e r a t i o n a l o r d e r . He p r o d u c e d a p r o f o r m a w h i c h m i g h t i n c l u d e   the




T h e C h a i r m a n a g r e e d that the p r o f o r m a be t a k e n in to use            a n d a s k e d Mr B r p o m h e a d
to c a l l a m e e t i n g w i t h the e m e r g e n c y s e r v i c e s to r a t i f y      t hi s p r o p o s a l .


The    'model'       football     match order         i t e m was    deferred.



32    S°        Air.' OTHER      B USINESS


•ir B r o o m h e a d a s k e d that   all g r o u n d c o m m a n d e r s a c q u i r e a n d p r o v i d e
from the f o o t b a l l c l u b s     s h o w i n g the d e p l o y m e n t       s t e w a r d s mor.iro:
:rou\-. for si 'r.s of o v e r         crowdin'* cr o n the oeri:r.c-t er track.
Mr Broomhead told the meeting that he had asked Operations Division, in
particular Inspector Hand-Davis., to project the need for mounted officers
at forthcoming football matches in South Yorkshire. From these projections
ground commanders would be cold what mounted support was available for
their use.

Supc Sleach asked che meeting co consider a policy for non-cickecholders.
Mr Broomhead cold the meeting that at a pre-season meecing with football
clubs i n 1987 a policy had been established that n o n - t i c k e t holders would
not be allowed to enter the ground. Supt Sleath pointed out that this
rigid policy was causing him local difficulties. Because of the closure
of Lepoings Lane terraces, 'away' supporters were restricted to cickec-
holders only. Supt Sleath had, and needed, a contingency plan for dealing
with large numbers of non—ticketholders by allowing them entry to a section
of the ground. The Cnairman asked that this be-.an agenda item for the next
meeting at which it could be fully explored,*-                                   “

The Chairman pointed out that by the end of October it was his intention
that the Taylor recommendations should be completed insofar as che SouCh
Yorkshire Police were involved in cheir implemencacion. It was proposed
now thac ground commanders would visic Mr Broomhead individually ana
review Che progress in respecc of cheir parcicular ground. As a resulc
Che SouCh Yorkshire Police^, would be in a posicion co provide a package of
proposals for each local auchoricy in which we can highlighc local
arrangemencs or deficiencies in che implemencacion of chese recommendacions.
Once chis process was compleced che need for a cencrally direcCed
implentencacion ceam would disappear. Ic was obvious however chac there
would be on-going discussions and proposals in respect of policing
football grounds in Souch Yorkshire (not arising as a direct result of
Lord Justice Taylor's interim reporc). These discussions would concinue
under the chairmanship of Mr Broomhead.


DATES OF FUTURE MEETINGS

The Chairman fixed the dates for the next two meetings for 10.00 am on
13 October and 20 October, Co be held in che Conference Room ac Police HQ.
            MEETING OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION TEAM ___
                 TO BE HELD AT 10.00 AM ON FRIDAY 13 OCTOBER 1989      j/j.
                   IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM, POLICE HEADQUARTERS


                                       A G E N D A


 1.   Apologies for Absence


 2.    Minutes of Previous Meeting (4.10.89)


 3.   Matters Arising:

      a)   Manpower - Formula for Reserves                          - Chairman

      b)   CCTV (report circulated)                                 - Chairman

      c)   Briefing and De-Briefing of Stewards                     - Supt Oughton

      d)   'Model' Football Match Order                             - Supt Simpson

      e)   Contingency Plans for Non-Ticket Holders
           (report circulated)                                      - Supt Sleath


 4.   Popplewell Report      andGreen Guide (report circulated)      - Ch        InspBeal


      I-Rt-O'lli-gcncc                                              — Supt Brookfield


 6.   Training in CrowdDensity                                      - Ch Insp Purdy


 7.   Any Other Business


8.    Date of Next Meeting (10.00 am, Friday 20.10.89, Conf. Room)




Outstanding Future Business

 a)   Contracts with Clubs                             Ch Insp Donnelly
 b)   Major Incident Plan                              Ch Insps Bett.ison/Edmundson
 c)   Standing Instructions on Policing Football       Supt Greenwood
eft        IHCJ-CUC
            lCU2HCJ2.

Mr Broomhead's Sub-Group to Consider

The role of:     i)      Police Horses                 Insp   Hand-Davis
                ii)      Police Dogs                   Insp   Jacques
               iii)      Motor Cycle Wing              Insp   Scholes
                iv)      Spotter Plane                 Supt   Hale
                                                                 0b1ifi~       *              0742523409;tf
ROM                                                <M0N >10.09.’89 16:49              NO .1       POSE 2


                                                                   All correspondence must be
                                                                   addressed to the Chief Constable

                                                                  P 0 Box 22 (S West PDO)
                                                                  Chester House
                                                                  Boyer Street
                                  iSouth Yorisshira. Psik#!       Manchester M 1 6 ORE
                                  i'        -2x6$                 Telephone 061 855
                                  I 1 9 ^C}"iS89                  Fax 061 872 414 5
                                                                                           2014
      4   AND p*°                 f   Chii‘^ rCon^tr.&'"5         Your reference
                                                                  Our reference          GMG/JD
                                                                  When calling or telephoning
                                                                  please ask for
                                                                  Date        29 September 1989




           Dear Sir,


                                         CCTV AND PUBLIC SAFETY


                  I write in my capacity as Secretary of the ACPO G.P. Sub-Committee on
            Hooliganism at Sporting Events. As you will be aware, the Sub-Committee
            produced a document th is year on CCTV and S till Photography. The report
           ,yas approved by the General Purposes Committee and ACPO Council, i t was
            subsequently forwarded to all Forces, England and Males, in July th is year.

                     At a meeting of the Sub-Committee in May t h is year, i t had been
           resolved to convene a small Working Group to further consider the use of
           CCTV placing p articu lar emphasis on i t s use for the promotion of public
           safety.        It was, correctly, anticipated that th is would be an area of
           concern for Lord Justice Taylor during his enquiry into the Hillsborough
           d is a s te r. Indeed recommendation 21 of his Interim Report     re q u ire s...
           "Closed c irc u it television should be so installed as to enable crowd
           densities outside the ground, within concourse areas and pens and other
           standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a match".

                       Accordingly, the inaugural meeting of the Working Group took place at
           Greater Manchester Police Headquarters on Wednesday 20 September 1989 when
            I was appointed Chairman. At that meeting I was able to apprise the Group,
           in my capacity as ACPO Trustee to the Football Trust, that that Trust had
           intimated provision may be made towards the cost of implementing a CCTV
          j ^ t e i r T t q meet the requirements.of Recommendation 21.




                                         /continued
                                  <M0N >10 ,09 .’89 16:50         NO .1    POSE< 3t




          The Group acknowledged the need for a speedy implementation of that
Recommendation.           However i t remained acutely aware that the wide-ranging
systems deployed, post 1985, had been chosen without common guidelines.
Experience has since revealed that some CCTV systems lacked efficacy as a
r e s u lt. The Group anticipate i t will be possible to provide an analysis of
the       problem of public safety and will endeavour to design a "package" to
use        as a t e s t for a common minimum standard of performance. This will
apply for any system which the myriad companies professing to supply CCTV
systems may offer. To that end, the Group, aissjsted by Jechn1cal.„advisors
from the Home Office "Sclent1f 1c Research and Development;Branch, wi11 -v is it
a.small, representative number of stadia to compare existing systems.
      I t 1s not possible at th is stage, to forecast ,_a _date _for the
conclusion of our recommendation's however the matter-4s- being treated as
urgent.




                                Yours sincerely,




                          Assistant Chief Constable
                    Secretary - ACPO G.P.Sub-Committee on
                        Hooliganism at Sporting Events



TO COMMISSIONERS, CITY OF LONDON AND THE METROPOLIS
ALL CHIEF CONSTABLES, ENGLAND AND WALES.
                                                  C James Anderton CBE, CStJ, QPM, DL, CBIM
                                                  Chief Constable
      * * it4
                                                  Chief Constable's Office
                                                  P O Box 22 (S.West PDO)
                                                  Chester House
                            Yoricahira F-         Boyer Street
                                                  Manchester M 16 ORE
                         Ji *“ 2370.,..,          Telephone 061 872 5050
                         > ^
AND                       Cher



                                                  CC/MH/JD
                                                  22 September 1989


Dear Colleague,
                  INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

      I am writing in my capacity as Chairman of the ACPO General P’urposes
Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events. pJ.h.®
Friday 8 September 1989 at Greater Manchester Police Force ^ d q u a r t e r s
and, amongst the items .on the agenda, the Interim Reconmendations of Lord
Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough d isa ste r   J'f
                                                   ™         *       $              %
meeting the Committee resolved that I write to the Chief offlcers of JJ
forces, England and Wales drawing attention to a number of aspects of the
discussion.
        As vou are aware, one of the effects of the interim recommendations
has led to a reduction of some 15% or so of the capacities a t most football
grounds. Additionally, the attention of most ground commanders has bee
properly focussed on the requirement to monitor those capaclties to Preve
overcrowdinq. The Committee had received a number of reports where
capacities a t football grounds had^been .reached, or part ground capacities
f F t R T T a s e of v isitin g s u p p o r O « r ^ n r y e t supporters insisted on
cajtinuing t o J h o s e j r o u n d s despite police advice that tteyj would not be
l ^ e J T T f i i l S b U n i highlighted was                             with ttose
 supporters, some of whom had been detained at the ground or elsewnere o
prevented from proceeding, say, to a town centre.
        Accordingly, the Committee nought to draw attention to this Problem
so that a ll forces could consider the provision                            raM o r iS
deal with an excess number of supporters. I t was mindful that the majority
of ersons conce^ed'were ordinary football supporters pursuing th e ir r g t
of free tra v e l, but th at any contingency plan n e e d e d to allow for
hooligans who might evoke the same principle as a subterfuge.            “^ t the
Committee accepts each contingency plan is a mat t e>^-f-9,lJ k h e _ ^
o f^ h e force concerned i t was mindful that
weaken the strategy of all ground c o m m a n d e r s T r ^ ^
ranar-itip<; not be exceeded but in the case of all ticKet matcnes,                ay
excess numbers of fans without tick ets
there is space in the stadium in which to do so. Thougl             h      nay p
testin g i n i t i a l l y , i t will soon become accepted provided there is this
national conformity which will effectively negate
emDloved by the supporters of certain teams. All forces           will beassisted
by information from the National Football Intelligence m .
                                                                                      '   !   •>




       The matter of a l l - t i c k e t matches was considered more fully. I t was
noted that the nationwide spread of support for some of the largest
Football Clubs suggested th a t, in the absence of compelling reasons, viz: 2
no ti£ke£^-jTO_enj£y, people will continue to arrive without bothering tc
oBfaTrn^ckeHTeforehand.                I t is to be encouraged, therefore, that in
th eir liaison with football clubs, the police should seek the clubs
assistance by refraining from selling tickets on the day of the fixture.
One consequence may be a resurgence of activ ity by tic k e t touts, a
possibility which will be monitored by the Sub-Committee.
      A second issue concerned press speculation, fuelled by a declaration
by the Football League, that the decision to delay the kick^off. a t football
matches had been abused by some ground commanders.            This option,
highlighted by recommendation 29 of the Interim Recommendations, had, the
League suggested, the effect of encouraging football supporters to arrive
a t football matches even l a te r , anticipating that the delay would be
implemented by the police anxious to avoid a crush.
      I t was resolved not to respond publicly to this speculative
journalism. At all sports events, not j u s t football matches, the fact of
late arrivals has been with us for generations.      I t is a matter for the
Chief Constable and the ground commander on the day to make the decision on
whether or not to delay a kick-off. The Committee considered i t was
prudent, however to ensure that Chief Constables were apprised that the
matter had been discussed. I t may be that there have been occasions when
excessive caution has been understandably exercised or value judgements
slightly distorted immediately post-Hillsborough. Nevertheless, i t was not
envisaged that i t would be used by Ground Commanders as a matter of routine
but only in truly exceptional circumstances.
           Finally, though a number of the Interim Recommendations had proved
d i f f i c u lt , the Recommendation 4 which required for written agreements
between the police and the football clubs wherein the re sp o n sib ilities of
the two groups would be resolved, proved most d i f f i c u l t .   I t became
apparent that there remained widespread d ifficu lty on the form and content
of same; whereas some police forces and police authorities were content to
sign agreed minutes of meetings with clubs, other forces had sent l e t t e r s
to clubs setting out parameters of responsibility and yet others had
drafted all-embracing contracts.        _
      Accordingly, in the lig h t of such disparity, the Committee decided
that an approach be njade to Lord Justice Taylor for a meeting with the
Chairman and Secretary to resolve a number of key areas of the Interim
recommendations. That meeting has been arranged for 18 October 1989. I
have undertaken to forward such guidance as I am able a fte r that meeting.


                                   ours sincerely,


                                \> ll I L I   U U I I O IC IU I C

                      Chairman - ACPO G.P. Sub-Committee
                      on Hooliganism at Sporting Events.
TO ALL CHIEF CONSTABLES ENGLAND AND WALES




                                               - 2 -
    MINUTES OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION TEAM MEETING
                HELD AT 10.00 AM ON FRIDAY 13 OCTOBER 1989
               IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM, POLICE HEADQUARTERS

Present:

P Hayes Esq QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable - (Chairman)
T F Broomhead Esq, A/Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
Superintendents Greenwood, Marsh, Oughton, Simpson, Sleath
Chief Inspectors Beal, Bettison, Donnelly, Hellewell, Purdy, Waring
Sergeants Milner (Secretary), Foster (AVA)

Apologies for absence were received from Superintendents Parker, Hale, and
Brookfield, and Chief Inspector Warne.


33/89       MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETING

The minutes of the meeting held on 4 October 1989, which had been
previously circulated, were discussed.

Superintendent Sleath made reference to an error in item 30/89 - Instructi
to Stewards. The first paragraph states that written instructions to
stewards were 'provided by the police'. This should read 'provided by the
club1.

The remainder of the minutes were accepted as a true and accurate record.


34/89       MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

        34.1 Manpower - Formula for Reserves

This item was introduced by the Chairman who said that these reserves of
manpower were intended to be utilised for instant response to incidents
and it is essential they are not encumbered by other duties of any kind.
They should be sent direct without delay to the problem and added to as
required if necessary. We do not need a substantial number of reserves
that are capable of working without assistance at large problems, they are
essentially a first response to be augmented if required.

Superintendent Sleath said that after applying the formula prepared by
Inspector Jones to both previous and future matches he found that the
formula gave him exactly what he wanted. He proposed the formula be used
as a basis for calculating the reserves required and for charging the
clubs.

After some discussion this proposal was agreed by the members and was
approved by the Chairman, with the qualification that inspectors will not
normally be part of the formula, ground commanders may include them
but they will not be charged for. These proposals, however, would not
apply to Doncaster which because of its low attendances is a unique
situation and may adopt a lower figure for the reserve number.

It was decided that should it be required to exceed the formula for
reserves then approval must be obtained from ACC (Operations).

Item discharged.
The Chairman then took the opportunity of discussing item 5 on the agenda
'Training in Crowd Density'.


35/89        TRAINING IN CROWD DENSITY

Chief Inspector Purdy presented this item with assistance from Sergeant
Foster (AVA). The presentation took the form of a video film which was
intended to be used for in-force training purposes relating to crowd
dynamics, densities, and reactions. The film was incomplete, comments had
to be added, and Chief Insp Purdy requested members to consider the
video's content and suggest any amendments, additions, and conclusions
they felt would be of benefit.

Following viewing of the video the members discussed the benefits of the
film and the use of graphics to emphasise the pertinent points. The
general opinion of the members was that actual film would have more impact
than graphics, but that film of Hillsborough should not be used due to its
distressing nature. The members suggested various incidents at football
matches that they were aware had been recorded on film.

In conclusion the Chairman suggested that the video be progressed in more
general terms, bearing in mind the suggestions made by the members and the
use of certain graphics, and that the film would be viewed again when it
was nearing completion.

The Chairman thanked Chief Insp Purdy and Sergeant Foster for their
presentation. Sergeant Foster then left the meeting.

Item discharged.


             MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES (continued)

        34.2 CCTV

The Chairman introduced this item and referred to a letter received from
the ACPO General Purposes Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events,
which had been previously circulated. The Chairman pointed out that CCTV
was the basis of recommendation 21 of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry and
that a sub-committee working group had been set up to consider in detail
the use of CCTV. This working group will endeavour to provide a 'package'
for use as a test for ^common minimum standards of performance of CCTV as a
matter of urgency. The Chairman wished for the members and Mr Broomhead
to be aware of this national initiative and said we will suggest to the
local authority officer working party and the clubs that we await the
recommendations before any changes to CCTV facilities are made.

Item discharged.

     34.3 Briefing and De-Briefing of Stewards

This item was presented by Superintendent Oughton and he referred to a
report previously circulated. He had recommended that stewards should be
briefed by the police regarding their duties during a game and he
suggested that this should be undertaken at the beginning of the season
and twice again during the season. Supt Oughton made the point that if
they were briefed in detail by the police at every match then there was a
likelihood that they would be seen as becoming a police responsibility.

The matter was discussed and mention was made that at Barnsley and
Doncaster the practice was to brief all stewards for each match. At
Sheffield and Rotherham only the senior stewards were briefed at each
match.

Chief Inspector Bettison brought to the attention of the members paragraph
165 of Lord Justice Taylor's Report and mentioned that this aspect would
be the subject of further review by Lord Justice Taylor and would be
included in his second report.

The Chairman determined that stewards at each of the clubs were being
briefed at the very least in excess of the minimum requirements and the
situation should continue as at present pending the outcome of the second
report on this subject from Lord Justice Taylor when it will be further
considered.

Item deferred.

     34.4 'Model' Football Match Order

Superintendent Simpson presented this item and referred to a proforma he
had circulated the purpose of which is to create a routine method of
notifying the Fire and Ambulance Services with standardised information of
impending football matches. Use of the form was discussed and Chief
Inspector Waring suggested that the format could   be included on the
Command and Control for use by message switch. The form was agreed, and
the Chairman decided that because it was an integral part of the model
football match order it could not be put into use until the order was
agreed. Because of that the form should be agreed with the emergency
services and implemented along with the model order.   (See Appendix 'A')

Item discharged.

     34.5 Contingency Plans for Non-Ticket Holders

The Chairman addressed the members on this subject and referred to a
letter received from the ACPO General Purposes Sub-Committee on
Hooliganism at Sporting Events regarding latecomers at football matches.
The Chairman outlined the contents of the letter which related in part to
football supporters continuing to grounds even though the capacity of the
football ground had been exceeded and they had been informed of this. The
problem was identified so that forces could draw   up contingency plans on
how best to deal with these supporters, a course   of action that has
already been completed in South Yorkshire.

A further problem associated with latecomers was the non-ticket holder at
all ticket matches. The Sub-Committee was of the opinion that these
supporters should not be allowed into the ground even if there was
sufficient space inside in an attempt to create a national policy to
discourage this apparently deliberate practice. Clubs should be asked not
to sell tickets on the day to help comply with this policy. The views of
the individual clubs within South Yorkshire should be sought. A direct
consequence of large numbers of latecomers is the delay in the kick-off
time of matches. It has been suggested by the press that this option had
been abused by some ground commanders. The Sub-Committee did not intend to
0respond to this speculative journalism but wished to draw the matter to
 the attention of all chief constables.

The final matter raised in the letter was that of the difficulties some
clubs were experiencing regarding recommendation 4 of the Taylor Report.
This required for written agreement between the police and the football
clubs. In the light of such disparities the Sub-Committee had arranged a
meeting with Lord Justice Taylor to discuss and resolve a number of key
areas of the interim report. This meeting was arranged for 18 October
1989.

The contents of the letter were discussed by the members in detail and
Chief Inspector Bettison brought to their attention the fact that certain
of these points would form part of Lord Justice Taylor's second report.

With regards to all ticket matches and supporters arriving without tickets
the national recommendation seeking to provide a common purpose for the
police will be implemented with due consideration for public safety. The
Chairman also decided that each of the clubs should be informed of this
national initiative and their opinions obtained.

Regarding delay of kick-offs, it was determined that this was not a problem
evident in South Yorkshire. Ground commanders should retain the option of
delaying the kick-off time if circumstances demanded it.

Item deferred.


36/89     POPPLEWELL REPORT AND GREEN GUIDE

Chief Inspector Beal introduced this item by speaking of a report he had
previously circulated. He highlighted the 'grey' area of club/police
demarcations which Popplewell did not clear up. The written agreement
South Yorkshire Police has with each club covers these 'grey' areas and it
may be further clarified in Taylor's final report. Chief Insp Beal stated
that he had looked at any discrepancies between the Popplewell report and
the Taylor report. He immediately pointed out that paragraph 46 of the
Green Guide (arising from the Popplewell report) created a club
responsibility to have contingency plans to deal with large crowds
gathering outside. The Chairman asked if any clubs had such contingency
plans. None were known.

Chief Inspector Bettison was asked to raise this aspect with all local
authorities when they were presented with the police 'package of
proposals'.

Item discharged.


DATE OF NEXT MEETING

The Chairman fixed the date for the next meeting for 10.00 am on Friday
20 October 1989 in the Conference Room at Police Headquarters.
                                                                      Appendix 'A'


                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                      DIVISION


          NOTIFICATION OF SPORTING EVENT AT A DESIGNATED STADIUM




                                       v.




       DATE



       VENUE



      -TIME OF (1)   COMMENCEMENT
               (2)   GATES OPEN TO SPECTATORS
               (3)   FINISH



       NUMBER O F SPECTATORS ANTICIPATED



       A NY VARIATION OR A MENDMENT TO AGREED EMERGENCY ROUTES OR PROCEDURES




       A NY   VARIATION  TO   ARRANGEMENTS    WITHIN   THE   GROUND    (STRUCTURAL
       A LT ERATIONS, GATES NOT IN USE E TC .)




       A NY ADDITIONAL INFORMATION




8     POINT OF CONTACT (DETAIL OFFICER      AND TELEPHONE NUMBER)



9     SIGNATURE



10    OFFICER IN COMMAND OF OPERATION.



THIS FORM TO BE FORWARDED TO:-

CHIEF FIRE OFFICER        ...................................

CHIEF AMBULANCE OFFICER   ...................................

AT LEAST 5 DAYS PRIOR TO THE EVENT.    ANY SUBSEQUENT RELEVANT INFORMATION
TO BE PASSED BY TELEX AS SOON AS POSSIBLE.
             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                      REF:
Superintendent Oughton                STATION/DEPT.:   Rotherham Cl
Deputy Chief Constable                DATE:   11th October 1989

SUBJECT:    STEWARDS AT FOOTBALL HATCHES




Appendix 'L' of the standing instruction for the policing
of football matches deals with the briefing of stewards,
qualifications of stewards, duties of stewards and
training and briefing of stewards. For the most part, the
instructions are adequate and I will go through each
section of the appendix in turn and add my
recommendations.

Briefing of Stewards
To paragraph 4 should be added the instruction that
stewards should be briefed by a Senior Police Officer
prior to the commencement of the league season and on a
further two occasions during that season. They should be
briefed as to their duties and responsibilities with
regard to crowd safety, crowd densities, signs of distress
and emergency and evacuation procedures.

Qualifications of Stewards
To the fifth sub-heading under paragraph 1, I would add a
sixth:
Stewards should be trained with regard to the recognition
of crowd densities, signs of distress and crowd dynamics.
The standing instructions make mention of ensuring that
written instructions detailing the action to be taken in
the event of an emergency should be given to all stewards.
I would go a little further and suggest that these written
instructions, supplied by the club, should include
specific duties for all matches as well as instructions
regarding emergency and evacuation procedures. These
should be prepared on substantial laminated numbered
cards: One card for one steward, relating to general and
specific duties. For example with regard to emergency and
evacuation, each card would contain a coded message and
then go on to describe what that particular steward should
do on hearing the coded message. Some would go to a gate,
some would go to another specific point, others would
simply remain where they were and be alert.   It should be
stressed that the coded message is simply an alert to
Police Officers and stewards.  If an order to evacuate was
given obviously the crowd would be informed by means of a
PA Announcement.



Continued
i   *

                                      -   2 -




        The individual cards would then specify what that steward's
        duties and responsibilities were. The cards would be given out
        prior to each match by the Chief Steward and when the stewards
        come to collect their pay they should hand the card back to the
        Chief Steward.

        Duties of Stewards
                         2,
        In fefee paragraph.of the appendix, duties of stewards are
        divided into four main categories.    I would add a fifth, ie:

        Monitoring crowd conditions for possible overcrowding or
        distress.

        The remainder of appendix 'L' is adequate. It must be borne in
        mind that the majority of stewards are not of the same calibre
        as Police Officers and so we should be mindful of this when
        giving them further duties and responsibilities.

        Perhaps this could be discussed at the next meeting of the
        Implementation Team to be held on Friday, 13th October 1989.




        Superintendent
Aerial photographs may be advantageous in giving clearer definition
of the physical characteristics of the ground and surrounding area.

Plan of the Surrounding Area

This should include agreed access routes and rendezvous points as
at (12) and (13) together with other information, useful to officers
performing duty, such as locations for potential disorder, ie public
houses, railway stations, coach parks.

Briefing Police

This should include how and where officers are briefed and by whan.

In addition to the normal pre-match briefing* officers must be informed
of evacuation procedures which will include coded messages.

The coded message at all league grounds in the county which will indicate
to police officers and stewards that .'there may be an emergency affecting
the ground will be -

’The attendance of Mr Meadows is urgently required at police control1.
When the emergency has been resolved the message will be -
’Mr Meadows is no longer required at police control'.

Officers performing duty in different areas of the ground must be made
aware of the exit routes, emergency telephones and fixe points in that
area.

Consideration should be given to providing officers with returnable,
individual, briefing cards, containing essential facts in relation to
policing the ground generally and specific roles.

Consideration should be given to issuing to police officers who are
unfamiliar with the ground and surrounding areas a map of same to
enable them to be fully conversant wit.h the layout of the ground.



Stewards should be briefed by a senior police officer prior to the
commencement of the league season to ensure they are aware of their
duties and responsibilities in the event of evacuation or emergency.
(These instructions contained in Appendix 'L1 have been issued to club
secretaries on 6 8 86 for their information and attention of all stewards.

Clubs should appoint a chief steward and a senior police officer
should liaise with the chief steward prior to every match, identifying
any deficiencies, problems etc, in stewarding at the ground.

Dedicated Officers at Dedicated Posts

Consideration should be given to deploying dedicated*officers at key
points on a regular basis. The key points, together with the officers'
responsibilities in an emergency, should be included under this heading.

Details of Deployment, Duties and Instructions to Stewards

These details should be drawn up by the club in consultation with the
Police and Fire Brigade, v/ith particular reference to stewards1
responsibilities in assisting police in evacuation situations.
                                            40

          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS                            STEWARDS


The       prime       responsibility                for     the arrangement     of
a f f a i r s at    s p o r t s g r o u n d s l i e s wi t h the cl ub.  To t h a t
end        they     should ensure that                stewards    are   suitably
qua I if ied .

QUAL I F I C AT I ONS ;

Stewards         should:

a)         Be t r a i n e d      and        instructed         to     deal  with            any
           emergencies           r e l ^ t i n a to f i r e    or    evacuation.

b)         Be g i v e n w r i t t e n i n s t r u c t i o n a b o u t t h e      a c t i o n to
           be       taken         in    cases      of      emergency,            including
           a r r a n g e m e n t s f o r c a l I ing t he e me r ge nc y         services.

c )        Receive             practical         instruction    and                training
           a p p r o p r i a t e to t h e i r    responsibility.

d)         Should           not  be e mp l o y e d as          a steward         unless       so
           i n s t r u c t e d and t r a i n e d , and

e )        Be a d e q u a t e   in number , p h y s i c a l l y             and m e n t a l l y
           capable.of performing their duties                                effectively
           deployed,          efficiently   supervised                      and  readily
           identifiable.

           NB. S t e w a r d s s h o u l d n o t b e l e s s t h a n 1 8 y e a r s o r
           mo r e       than     bg y e a r s        of age    and   should      wear
           distinctive dress                 such      as   fluorescent jackets
           s u i t a b l y i n s c r i b e d f r o n t and b a c k .


On t h e o c c a s i o n o f e a c h m a t c h s t e w a r d s s h o u l d        at tend a
pre-match briefing                 and   b e ma d e      f u l l y awar e         of t h e i r
r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s and t he l o c a t i o n of       me mb e r s      of    the
Emergency S e r v i c e s ,        if   appropriate,            in    the         area for
which they are r e s p o n s i b l e .


S t e w a r d s s h o u l d «re        d i s t r i b u t e d throughout              the ground
in       accordance with a                   detailed           pre-arranged schedule
agreed         between          the        police           and    ma nageme nt .          Their
numbers         and        Io c a t i o n       should        not     be      l e s s than the
mi n i mu n n   stated          in t he           safety        certificate.               Their
d u t i e s ma y b e d i v i d e d i n t o                    ma i n c a t e g o r i e s :

a )       C o n t r o l l i n g or  d i r e c t i n g me mb e r s of       the        public
          wh o a r e e n t e r i n g o r l e a v i n g t h e g r o u n d .

b)        Patrolling            the    ground to          deal   w i t h any emer-
          gencies.              eg;     raising          alarms,     extinguishing
          fires etc.

c)        Ma n n i n g   entrances,  exits                and       other    strategic
          points,        particularly exit               doors       and g a t e s wh i c h
          are  not              continuously           open    whilst    the ground        is
          in use .

 d)      Undertaking s pecific                duties        relating          to     emer­
         g e n c i e s and e v a c u a t i o n p r o c e d u r e s ,


 Eme£3encY_Procedyres

The i m p o r t a n c e o f t h e         provision          of     f or ma l e me r g e n c y
procedures             a t e a c h g r o u n d c a n n o t be o v e r - e m p h a s i z e d .
Joint        consultation               in t h i s r e s p e c t s h o u l d  be     taken
between         the       p o l i c e , the      ma n a g e me n t    of t he    ground,
f i r e , a mbul a nc e and            other services.              It is     essential
t h a t s t e w a r d s and t h e i r s u p e r v i s o r s a r e f u l l y awar e of
the part           t h e y h a v e t o p l a y in         the      plans     which       are
produced.

Ma n a g e me n t   should         ensure       that     written instructions
detailing         t h e a c t i o n t o be t a k e n in t h e            event      of an
emergency are s e r ve d             on    a l l s t e w a r d s , and t h a t s t a f f
and      stewards       receive          practical              instruction           and
training appropriate                 t o t h e i r r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s in t h e
e v e n t o f an e m e r g e n c y .

Bodies        such       as   the f i r e    service,   the  police  and
ambulance s e r v i c e        have      expressed    a  willingness  to
a s s i s t in s u c h      training      and   clubs are urged to take
f u l l a d v a n t a g e of the o f f e r .

E x e r c i s e s f o r s t a f f a n d s t e w a r d s s h o u l d be c a r r i e d o u t
r e g u l a r l y to ensure           the    s moot h       o p e r a t o n of t he p r o ­
cedures          for    d e a l i n g w i t h an       emergency,             A    record
s h o u l d be k e p t c o n t a i n i n g     d e t a i l s of t he t r a i n i n g and
instruction            given         and    exercises           held,       and   should
include the f o l l o wi n g m a t t e r s :-

a)      Dat e      and       t i me    of   the   instruction      or   exercise,

b)       Dur a t i o n .

c)       Name      of    the       person     giving     the    instruction.

d)       Na me s    of       the      persons     receiving      the    instruction,

e)       Nature         of     instruction        or    exercise.


Control      of   stewards  s h o u l d be f r o m a  centra! point
containing       efficient   me ans      to      communicate   with
stewards      at   key  points         identified    in  discussion
be t we e n management and t he p o l i c e .


Qt2i§i_§i£w l£ d s

Clubs should    appoint a        Chief Steward r e s p o n s i b l e for
co-ordinating       the      duties    of      stewards     and  to   be
immediately a v a i l a b l e for d is c u s s i o n s with the  senior
                                                 42
       police officer            present       concerning             any    problem        in    the
       ground .


7 .   S g e c j _ f j. c_Dy_t_[es_of_S_t e w a r d s

       Specific        duties      to   be    undertaken         by    stewards        include:

       a)        Preventing          overcrowding,     ensuring   that      crowd
                 limits       in     various   parts    of   the  ground       are
                 complied        w i t h and t h a t gangways and   e x i t s are
                 k e p t cI e a r .

       b>       Preventing,             so f a r      as    possible,             standing   on
                 seats,         and      the     cl i mb i n g o f       f e n c e s and   other
                 structures.             Wh e r e by v i r t u e o f t h e s c a l e o f t h e
                 i n c i d e n t s t e w a r d s a r e u n a b l e to compl y w i t h t h i s
                 requirement,               they      should without               delay report
                 the m a t t e r to the n e a r e s t p o l i c e o f f i c e r , or, if
                 no      police        officer         is p r e s e n t ,      to    the   Chief
                 Steward or d e s ig n a te d club o f f i c i a l .

       c >      Th e      investigation            and     identification             of       any
                 i n c i d e n t or o c c u r r e n c e , r e p o r t i n g t h e i r f i n d i n g s
                 to      police         or  ma na ge me nt        in       accordance         with
                 i n s t r u c t i o n s given at the pr e- ma t ch b r i e f i n g .

      d)        B e i n g a wa r e of t h e l o c a t i o n of f i r e f i g h t i n g and
                 m e d i c a l e q u i p m e n t in t he a r e a f o r w h i c h t h e y a r e
                 responsible             and. b e i n g capable       of     effectively
                 o p e r a t i ng t h e s a m e .

      e)        Being f u l l y        conversant          with    the       methods    and
                 s i g n a l s u s e d t o i n d i c a t e an e m e r g e n c y   situation
                whi ch s h o u l d have been              previously          set   down i n
                w r i t i n g a n d s e r v e d on t h e m.

      f)        Being        capable    of      recognising            potential        fire
                h a z a r d s and    suspect packages.               Such f i n d i n g s to
                be r e p o r t e d t o   t h e n e a r e s t p o l i c e o f f i c e r or in
                h i s a b s e n c e the c h i e f s t e wa r d or d e s i g n a t e d cl ub
                of f i c i a I .

      g)       E x c e p t in an e m e r g e n c y s t e w a r d s s h o u l d n o t l e a v e
                their place         of d u t y     w i t h o u t t he c o n s e n t of t he
                Chief Steward          or      senior police o ffice r prssent
                wh o      should,     if     it    is      considered          necessary,
                a r r a n g e f or a rep I a c e m e n t .

      h>       A l 1 e x i t g a t e s s h o u l d be ma n n e d w h i l e t h e g r o u n d
                is      u s e d by t h e p u b l i c , a n d be           c a p a b l e of be i ng
                o p e n e d i m m e d i a t e l y , f r o m i n s i d e , by a n y o n e i n a n
                erne r g e n c y .
                                                                     i

      i )      Reporting        to      the      Chief Steward              any damage           or
               defect        likely        to     cause  injury             or danger             to
               p e r s o n s in a t t e n d a n c e .

      J*       In             event  of an             emergency or           incident    the
                senior      police officer             present will           take  c o mma n d
          and a l l s t e w a r d s s h o u l d p r o m p t l y   compl y w i t h any
          instructions             given    by     him      or     by   any p o l i c e
          o f f i c e r a c t i n g on h i s b e h a l f .


IlliQing

T r a i n i n g of s t e w a r d s   should  be c o m p l e t e d p r i o r     to the
s t a r t of t he       season        to  a standard acceptable                 to the
poI i c e ,      fire      and        ambulance     services          and        Local
Author i t y .

Refresher           training      should           be      g i v e n by  a competent
p e r s o n d u r i ng t h e m o n t h s o f     O c t o b e r and J a n u a r y .

S t e w a r d s s h o u l d be s u p p l i e d   with         a handout      detailing
their         responsibilities              in   g e n e r a l t e r ms as    set  out
above.

T h e a b o v e l i s t o f d u t i e s i s by n o m e a n s e x h a u s t i v e a n d
cl ub management shoul d l i a i s e c l o s e l y wi t h a p p r o p r i a t e
senior police, fire,                and a m b u l a n c e services officers
to    arrive        at    a final version that takes account                       of
local f a c t o r s.
        MINUTES OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATONS IMPLEMENTATION
                             TEAM MEETING
              HELD AT 2.00 PM - FRIDAY 8 DECEMBER 1989
             IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM, POLICE HEADQUARTERS




Present:

P Hayes Esq, QPM, LLB, MA, Deputy Chief Constable - (Chairman)
T F Broomhead Esq, A/Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
Superintendents Marsh,    Brookfield,  Oughton,  Hal'te, Greenwood
and Simpson
Chief Inspectors Beal and Purdy


37/89        MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETING

The Minutes of the Meeting held on Friday 13 October 1989 which
had been previously circulated were discussed. They were accepted
as a true and accurate record.


38/89        TRAINING VIDEO - FACES IN A CROWD

Chief Inspector Purdy introduced this item which emanated from
Recommendations 5 and 6 of the Report.    This referred to police
officers   and  stewards   being  trained   and   briefed  in the
recognition of crowd densities, distress and dynamics.        The
Force Training Department had produced a short video on the
subject entitled 'FACES IN A CROWD1.      This was shown to the
members present.    At its conclusion the Chairman reflected on
the  quality   of  the   finished product    congratulating those
responsible for its compilation.

A discussion then ensued on the distribution and circulation
of the video.    Chief Inspector Purdy stated that it would be
shown to the majority of in-force courses at Ecclesfield whilst
the Divisional Training Officers would have the responsibility
of ensuring that Sub-Divisional personnel also viewed the same.
Additionally it was decided that Sub-Divisional Commanders would
write to their respective clubs informing them of the film,
in order that stewards could be suitably informed.    On receipt
of a blank tape the Force Audio Visual Aids Department would
provide a copy for their use.

All Police Forces in the UK would be circulated with regard
to the existence of the video, they would also be provided with
a copy on production of a blank tape.
The Chairman also asked that Local Advisory Groups be shown
the video in order to acquaint them with our work in this area.

finally the Chairman stated that he would provide            the Police
Committee with full details of this area of training.

Item discharged.


39/89       THE GROUND SAFETY CERTIFICATE - ALL TICKET MATCHES

This item was introduced by Superintendent Simpson. A discussion
took place on all ticket matches and the rationale behind such
games.    Superintendent Greenwood stated that in his opinion
it should form part of the club's safety certificate, whilst
Superintendent Oughton thought that the club should assume more
responsibility than is the case currently.

After this exchange     of   views, the Chairman decided it was a
subject that should     be   further explored as part of a future
agenda item.

Item deferred.


40/89       ACTION BY    THE   LOCAL   AUTHORITIES   ON   RECOMMENDATION
            PACKAGES

The Chairman     in his thoughts on the above stated that the
individual Local    Authorities must be encouraged to    consider
their package   and subsequently have    special meetings in respect
of the same.     He said he would look at each package and then
convene an extraordinary meeting to consider the various aspects.

Superintendent Oughton said that he expected Rotherham to await
the final Taylor Report before arriving at any firm decisions.

In conclusion the Chairman said it would be the responsibility
of individual Commanders to ascertain the Local Authority's
reaction to the package before any HQ involvement would be
implemented. He welcomed any feedback for the next meeting.

Item deferred.


41/89       PROGRESS OF THE OPERATIONAL ORDER

Superintendent Simpson distributed a package to members present
explaining that it was based on a similar one originating from
Hampshire.    The order he enunciated consisted of standard
instructions, serial duty sheets and personnel sheets.
In thanking Superintendent Simpson for the material presented
the Chairman stated that this matter would feature as an agenda
item at the next meeting.

Item deferred.


42/89       FOOTBALL INTELLIGENCE/INFORMATION

This item took the form of a presentation by Superintendent
Brookfield who had previously circulated all members with an
appropriate paper illustrating its content.

Summarising the document Superintendent    Brookfield outlined
the historical aspects of football intelligence,      the ACPO
involvement, the recent extension of CCTV, post match analysis
and the need for an enhancement of duties for the Liaisoa
Officer.

Utilising a series of overhead projections to explain the
structure of his argument, Superintendent Brookfield began by
highlighting the objectives of the National Football Intelligence
Unit in the field of analysis and distribution of information.
He further stated that ultimately a Home Office Circular would
be produced defining the necessary commitment to intelligence
gathering and dissemination.

He then explained the role of the NFIU in the extension of the
Local Intelligence Officer,    its ability to advise on best
practice and the utility of a standard administrative system.

Subsequent slides concerned the role of the NFIU in relation
to known football hooligans, their travel patterns including
international movement.   The British Transport Police and their
liaison with all Forces relative to football intelligence were
discussed in addition to past and current intelligence operations
and the football index held by Local Intelligence Officers.

Reflecting on the South Yorkshire experience, further slides
outlined the role and responsibilities of the football/major
events manpower officers and the Detective Sergeant at HQ who
has responsibility for monitoring community tension, football
supporters movements and exclusion orders. It was Superintendent
Brookfield's opinion that such a diversity of responsibilities
was too great for the individuals involved.

He then described a flow chart depicting the in-force staffing
and structure necessary under the NFIU, emphasising the need
to keep a Football Intelligence File at Divisions in order to
update new Commanders. Such a file would include ground
profiles.    Superintendent Brookfield stressed the importance
of accurate post match summaries, the result of which was a
general discussion on this subject.    The Chairman stated that
p»st match debriefing and ground profiles would be agenda items
for the next meeting.

Superintendent Brookfield pointed out that we must employ a
flexible forcewide system of debriefing and that Sergeants should
personally debrief each of their men before standing down.
It followed, therefore, that Inspectors should debrief Sergeants
in a like manner.

Finally Superintendent Brookfield mentioned the importance of
pre-match liaison with our local clubs and in conclusion showed
members the prospective South Yorkshire form relative to football
intelligence.   He strongly emphasised the need for our Force
to show a definite commitment in support of the newly formed
national unit.

The Chairman in thanking Superintendent Brookfield for his
presentation said that as far as South Yorkshire was concerned
we would not move in advance of the Home Office Circular.

Item deferred.


DATE OF NEXT MEETING

The date of the next meeting was arranged for 10.00 am, Friday
29 December 1989 in the Headquarters Conference Roop.
MEETING OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMERDATJQNS IMPLEMENTATION TEAM
                                 STOni 2b JANUARY 1990
     TO BE HELD AT 10.00 AM, itlE'
       IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM, POLICE HEADQUARTERS




                             A G E N D A




APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE.

MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETING.               '             '"
                        \.                                    *



ACTION BY THE LOCAL AUTHORITIES ON RECOMMENDATION
PACKAGES.
                                       Mr Hayes

THE MODEL OPERATIONAL ORDER.
                                               Superintendent Simpson

THE GROUND SAFETY CERTIFICATE - ALL TICKET
MATCHES.
                                               Superintendent Simpson

MAJOR CRIME CONTINGENCY PLAN.
                                               Superintendent Hale
                                               D/Chief Inspector Meek

MATCH DAY INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED TO LOCAL
AUTHORITIES.
                       ■*              Mr Hayes

POST MATCH BRIEFING - GROUND PROFILES.
                                               Superintendent Brookfield
ANY OTHER BUSINESS.

DATE OF NEXT MEETING.
            MINUTES OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION
                                TEAM MEETING
                 HELD AT 10.00 AM - FRIDAY 29 DECEMBER 1989
                IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM , POLICE HEADQUARTERS




Present::

P Hayes Esq, QPM, LLB, MA, Deputy Chief Constable - (Chairman)
T F Broomhead Esq, A/Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
Superintendents Marsh, Oughton, Greenwood, Brookfield, Hale’ and Simpson
Chief Inspectors Beal and Purdy

42/89         MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETING

The Minutes of the Meeting held on Friday 8 December 1989 which had
been previously circulated were accepted as a true and accurate record.


43/89        MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

43.1.        Training Video - Faces in a Crowd

             In   response to a question from the Chairman, Chief
             Inspector Purdy confirmed that all Police Forces in the
             United Kingdom had been circulated with regard to the
             existence of the video.

             Item discharged.

43.2.        Action by the Local Authorities on Recommendation Packages

             •The Chairman introduced this item by asking individual
             members for the reaction of their Local Authorities on
             the Recommendation Package.      Superintendent Greenwood
             stated that at Doncaster informal discussions had taken
             place and that further meetings were planned to consider
             the recommendations in detail.

             Superintendent   Simpson    in  reflecting    the  Barnsley
             experience said that the package had been well received
             by all concerned.     Formal meetings had already been held
             and although more    were planned it was fair to say the
             recommendations were being actively pursued.

             In Rotherham, Superintendent Oughton reported that the
             Package had been received and a formal meeting was planned
             for 9 January 1990 when all the recommendations would
             be subject of debate.
                                                                             *



          Acting   Assistant  Chief   Constable   (Operations),  Mr
          Broomhead, said that in Sheffield a two hour presentation
          had already taken place, and that on 2 January 1990 an
          additional one would be given to the General Purposes
          Panel.   There had been a co-operative response from all
          concerned.

          Item deferred.


43 .3 .   Progress of the Operational Order

          The Chairman reported that Superintendent Simpson had
          produced a model Operational Order which was now in final
          draft form.   It had previously ,been circulated' to members
          who were now asked for their views.
                              \.

          Reflecting on an issue raised by Superintendent Hale the
          Chairman agreed that the Order should be particularised
          for each ground in the Force area.           A discussion Chen
          took   place   on    contingency   planning.      The Chairman
          emphasised that it should be viewed as the first step
          in the overall strategy for the day.         Whilst considering
          the   content     of    the   Order   its    distribution   and
          accountability were reviewed.        Summarising the position
          the Chairman stated that Sergeants and above should receive
          a copy of the booklet as a personal issue.          On transfer
          or retirement the booklet would be returned to its place
          of issue.     It was decided the forcewide cover for the
          document would be blue.

           Superintendent- Marsh    then    addressed   the -meeting _on
          emergency communications, given a scenario of the match
          control room proving to be        inoperative... .Those present
          were reminded that, base stations at Barnsley, Doncaster
          and Rotherham were not situated at the football grounds
          i.e. Doncaster at Coal House and Barnsley and Rotherham
          at the respective Divisional Headquarters.             Therefore
          loss of control room useage at those locations would not
          be critical     as the base      station would still be in
          existence.      Utilising   the talk through facility via
          personal    radios   would     ensure   the    continuance    of
          communications in Sheffield, however, the situation was
          slightly different in that the base stations are at the
          ground.    In addition both venues have a command channel,
          19 at Hillsborough and 29 at Bramall Lane.           In respect
          of these channels their base stations are at Shirecliffe
          and Hyde Park and should a major problem exist with match
          control,   the command channel could be operated.              A
          discussion followed thereafter concerning the procedure
          to be    followed   in the     light of a break down in
          communications at the ground.
            It was evident that practical variations existed throughout
            the county relative to this problem and in view of this
            the Chairman asked Superintendent Marsh to write         an
            APPENDIX   'E' (EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS)   particular   to
            each ground in South Yorkshire, and produce the same for
            the next meeting.

            Following an observation by Superintendent Greenwood,
            the attention of members was drawn to Paragraph 3.1. of
            the booklet, relative to the physical position of the
            officer in overall command on match days.      A protracted
            discussion took place but ultimately the following was
            held to be the definitive response.       "BRAVO ONE, XRAY
            ONE will be in overall command. ' Unless there is something
            which warrants his personal attendance, he will remain
            at Oakwell Control".      This paragraph will of course
            ultimately reflect the different grounds in the Force
            area.

            In   concluding    this   section,   the  Chairman   asked
            Superintendent Simpson to update the booklet and circulate
            the same in time for the next meeting.

            Item deferred.

43.4.       Ground Safety Certificate

            Superintendent Simpson introduced this item by briefly
            outlining the ACPO Guidelines relative to all ticket
            matches.    In essence this criteria merely covered cup
            fixtures involving teams from different Divisions i.e.
            a Fourth Division side playing a top First Division team.
            The general feeling was that this needed to include
            ordinary fixtures and furthermore it should feature as
            part of the Ground Safety Certificate.

            The Chairman requested Superintendent Simpson to prepare
            a document including the ACPO Paper, and circulate this
            for the next meeting.    It would be fully discussed at
            that juncture.

            Item deferred.


44/89       MAJOR CRIME CONTINGENCY PLAN

Acting Assistant Chief Constable (Operations), Mr Broomhead, commenced
a discussion on the above by reminding those present that in the
compilation of the model order, under APPENDIX 'H1 - Contingency Plan,
it was felt that such action ought to include the implications of
 a major crime being committed on a match day.      He sought the views
 of members on this subject.     In reply, Superintendent Simpson said
 that a uniform plan should exist applicable to all the Force.

Superintendent Hale stated that Detective Chief Inspector Meek,      'D'
Division, had done some preparatory work in this area.

As a result, the Chairman asked Superintendent Hale to ensure Detective
Chief Inspector Meek's attendance at the next meeting, in order that
he could acquaint members wi~h his progress, thus far, relative to
this matter.

Item deferred.


45/89       TAPE ON PERIMETER GATES

The Chairman illustrated the practice at Barnsley of taping the
perimeter gates now open as a result of the Taylor Report. He observed
that this appeared to satisfy both the needs of the Report, in that
the tape would not be a physical barrier in the event of necessary
movement on to the perimeter track/pitch, whilst at the same time
the very existence of the tape appeared to be satisfactory in
restricting the crowd to the terracing.    He asked for members' views
on this topic.

In agreement with the previous thoughts, Superintendent Oughton stated
it was now standard practice at Rotherham where no problems had been
encountered.

Mr Broomhead extended the discussion in stating that the use of tape
could also be implemented to promote sterile areas and pens.   These
sentiments were shared by Chief Inspector Beal.

In conclusion the Chairman said that as a result of the above we would,
in future, therefore, as a matter of force practice, tape perimeter
gates and also use tape as a means of lateral development for pens
etc, where necessary. This was agreed.

Item discharged.


46/89       MATCH DAY INFORMATION SUPPLIED TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES

Mr Broomhead reported that we have recently been requested by the
Local Authorities in Barnsley and Sheffield to update them with match
day information on the Friday before the match.  As we already submit
these details to the emergency services, he saw nothing wrong in the
idea.
The Chairman agreed with the principle and suggested that the mechanics
of distributing such information be discussed at the next meeting
in the light of the progress of the model operational order.

Item deferred.


47/89       ANY OTHER BUSINESS

Superintendent Marsh informed members chat che Home Office Circular
relative to Football Intelligence would be published in February 1990.

The Chairman thanked him for chis information.

Item deferred.


DATE OF NEXT MEETING

The date of the next meeting was arranged for 10.00 am, Tuesday 23
January 1990 in the Headquarters Conference Room.
       MINUTES OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION
                            TEAM MEETING
             HELD AT 10.00 AM - FRIDAY 26 JANUARY 1990
            IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM, POLICE HEADQUARTERS



Present:

P Hayes Esq, QPM, LLB, MA, Deputy Chief Constable - (Chairman)
M N Davies Esq, LLB, BA, Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
Chief Superintendents T F Broomhead, H G McNally MA, J Nesbit
Superintendents Greenwood, Simpson, Oughton, Hale and Brookfield
Chief Inspectors Hellewell, Waring, McRobbie and Purdy
Detective Chief Inspector Meek

1/90        APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

Apologies for absence were received from Superintendents Marsh
and Sleath.

2/90        MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETING

The Minutes of the meeting held on Friday 29 December 1989 which
had previously been circulated were accepted as a true and
accurate record.

3/90        MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

3.1.        Chief Superintendent Nesbit referred     to Item45/89
             of the previous minutes relative to the taping on
             perimeter   gates.     Reflecting   the  Hillsborough
             experience where perimeter gates were      manned   by
             two police officers and a club steward, the further
             addition of tape was becoming a source of potential
             embarrassment to those officers who were occasionally
             the target of local criticism from the crowd in
             relation to their presence and the placing of the
             tape.    Mr Nesbit requested, therefore, that the
             use of tape on perimeter gates be a matter of
             discretion for the Commander on the day.

            The Chairman in acceding to Chief Superintendent
            Nesbit's request commented that the numbers of police
            officers and stewards on perimeter gates may not
            be the same forcewide, in which case he saw the
            use of tape as a worthwhile contribution to crowd
            safety.   Nevertheless it would be a matter for the
            Match Commander to ultimately decide.

            Item discharged.
4/90        ACTION BY LOCAL AUTHORITIES ON RECOMMENDATION
            PACKAGES

The Chairman introduced this agenda   item by asking individual
members for the reaction of their     Local Authorities on the
Recommendation Package.

Superintendent  Greenwood reported    that  in August    1989 in
Doncaster a conditional safety certificate had been issued.
Work contained in that document had not been carried out, and
an amended safety certificate was due to be put before the
Council on 1 February 1990.      Mr Greenwood further commented
that the basic requirements were contained in this document.

In Barnsley, Superintendent Simpson reported that there were
three areas still requiring the attention of the club, these
were the loud speaker system, the telephones and the crowd
monitoring facility.   However, it was fair to say that the
Council were pressurising the club towards positive action,
and in effect the package was acting as a catalyst in this
respect.

Superintendent Oughton reflected that during a recent meeting
with the Local Authority in Rotherham they appeared to fully
accept the contents of the package, albeit at a somewhat later
stage than elsewhere.   It would be a matter of record that their
reaction was now gathering momentum.

A refreshing air of urgency had punctuated action in Sheffield,
and Chief Superintendent Nesbit was confident of further positive
movement between the clubs and the Local Authority.

Item deferred.

5/90        THE MODEL OPERATIONAL ORDER

Introducing this subject the Chairman briefly outlined its
background, origin and basic format. Discussion areas had arisen
in the construction of the order, one of which was emergency
communications, given a scenario of the match control proving
to be operative, due to some unforeseen malfunction.     In order
to assist officers in the event of such a problem occurring,
Chief Superintendent McNally reported that instructions on the
personal radio scanning facility had been circulated to all
Divisional Commanders. He further stated that a survey relative
to the emergency communications at each ground in the county
had been undertaken by Superintendent Marsh.     The survey which
would appear at APPENDIX 'E' in the new operational order was
now complete but had not at this stage been circulated.
In discussing the content of any operational order, Assistant
Chief Constable (Operations), Mr Davies reported the increasing
likelihood of certain individuals and/or non-police organisations
requesting copies of the same.       Illustrating a recent civil
case in Wiltshire concerning the Summer Solstice Public Order
Operation, where a minority group had obtained a copy of the
order, the Judge in his deliberation stated that certain sections
of such a document could be for public consumption, whilst it
would be inappropriate to disclose others. In essence, therefore,
a claim of privilege could properly be made in respect of
operational   orders   and   disclosure   could   be  successfully
contested, however, operational orders could not be seen as
confidential documents per se.       In looking at our recently
compiled   operational   order,  Mr   Davies   asked whether   its
construction made for an easy disection of what one could, or
could not, give to an outside agency given a proper request
for such a document.

In reply the Chairman said in answer to such a request we would
merely   provide  an   order  giving   details   of planning and
contingencies,   in  other words     a core    section devoid of
intelligence or confidential material, similar to that provided
for the Local Authority, Fire and Ambulance Services.

Continuing this theme the Chairman assisted by Superintendent
Simpson discussed the form already circulated to members entitled
'NOTIFICATION OF SPORTING EVENT AT A DESIGNATED STADIUM'. This
document is forwarded to the Chief Fire and Ambulance Officers
in addition to the Local Authority, five days before a match.
Any subsequent change in relevant information would be either
telexed or faxed as soon as possible prior to the event.

Referring to Item 7 on this document, Chief Superintendent Nesbit
asked whether the terminology "anticipated behaviour of away
supporters" was appropriate given that some sections of society
including certain Local Authority figures have criticised the
police for having pre-conceived ideas on football supporters
which they claim ultimately affect our police operations.

A prolonged discussion then took place on the style and content
of information we should disclose to the Ambulance Service and
the like.    After suitable representations by Superintendents
Hale   and Oughton,   it was decided     to replace     the words
"anticipated   behaviour"    in   Item   7   with    "reputation".
Additionally, any significant information thought applicable
to the Ambulance Service etc would be faxed to them.

Item displiarged.   (M A (Lm
6/90        MAJOR CRIME CONTINGENCY PLAN

Detective Chief Inspector Meek introduced this subject, reminding
those present that it appeared in the proposed model order under
APPENDIX 'H1.     In this context he had prepared a discussion
document covering, command responsibilities, the implications
of   crowd   safety   priorities and   culminating   in  thirteen
recommendations.    The Paper was handed to each member and it
was decided to discuss its contents after due deliberation,
at the next meeting.

Item deferred.

7/90        POST MATCH BRIEFINGS

Superintendent   Brookfield   in   referring   to his   previous
presentation on this subject, outlined the current procedure
in this Force, relative to the method of transmitting to
Headquarters post-match summaries, utilising the Command and
Control System. By adopting this mechanism such summaries were
despatched without being    'vetted' by a Senior Officer. In
comparison Superintendent Brookfield suggested that post-match
summaries be compiled by the Divisional Football Liaison Officer
who should then pass the document to the Match/Ground Commander,
and perhaps the Divisional Commander in a concerted effort to
obtain all the relevant information.         He added that the
statistical information concerning the official attendance and
arrests etc could still be forwarded by using the Command and
Control System.

Chief Superintendent McNally concurred with the sentiments echoed
by Superintendent Brookfield and emphasised the need to perform
a wider trawl for information and intelligence sources.      Such
items as incident logs should be consulted to widen the scope
of our information base.

Superintendent Brookfield then reminded members that a previous
decision had been made not to activate any staffing requirements
regarding football intelligence until the publication of the
Home Office Circular on the subject.        Whilst it had been
envisaged that such a document would be produced in February,
this was not now the case and the earliest date of publication
was now thought to be March 1990.   The recently formed National
Intelligence unit are to have a computer based PROD System at
their disposal - Photographic Reproduction on Disk, and that
until installation of this system is complete, the Home Office
Circular will not be forthcoming.

Superintendent   Brookfield    then   summarised   his   previous
recommendations on debriefing, re-emphasising the critical nature
of this subject and the possible sources of such information.
These included:
1.   Police Officers inside or outside the ground.
2.   Police Officers on/off duty.
3.   Stewards, supporters or members of the public.

He further stated that the importance and mechanics of post-match
briefing should be re-enforced at pre-match briefing.

Secondly that whatever the category     of match, the Commander
on the day     should always hold a    post-match briefing with
Inspectors and above.

After some discussion it was decided that forcewide, the present
system of post-match debriefing was adequate, in that Inspectors
personally debrief their Sergeants and thereafter hand the
appropriate debrief document to Match Control/Police Room.
It was, however, noted that this did not preclude the Match
Commander debriefing all officers if circumstances dictated
this acion.

The question of serial Sergeants having the responsibility of
debriefing Senior Stewards was then raised by Superintendent
Brookfield.   Was this he asked the club's responsibility?
Accepting the premise that our overall aim was to gather any
useful information from whatever the source, the Chairman in
relation to debriefing stewards stated that we would await the
outcome of Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report before coming
to any firm conclusions. It would be an agenda item for the
next meeting.

Superintendent Brookfield then reiterated his view that we
should, as a Force, take into use a new intelligence form.
Taken from a Greater Manchester document this form would provide
a vehicle for officers to report football intelligence at any
time via the intelligence officer.      Copies of the same were
then distributed to members present for their consideration.
Superintendent Brookfield was of the opinion that ultimately
this form would be circulated by the National Intelligence Unit
to all Forces, in an effort to formalise procedure.

Finally Superintendent Brookfield commented on the role of the
general public in providing relevant football intelligence.
In an effort to reflect our commitment and support of the new
Intelligence Unit he suggested publicity to this end, perhaps
via a confidential hot line in conjunction with the match day
information desk.     In response, Chief Superintendent Nesbit
cast some doubt as to canvassing the public in this respect.
A general discussion then took place, and the Chairman decided
that we would await both the Final Taylor Report and the Home
Office Circular regarding football intelligence, before arriving
at any firm conclusions.
To summarise this item the Chairman said that in terms of
post-match summaries we would continue to forward the statistical
information immediately after the game via the Command and
Control System.   A more expansive report would then be compiled
via the auspices of the Match/Divisional Commander.

Superintendent Hale in highlighting a need for a standardised
reporting system, asked that a basic proforma be produced by
the Operations Division, to assist Commanders in reporting on
issues of a like nature.      The Chairman asked Superintendent
Brookfield to liaise with Ground Commanders and the Operations
Division in order to produce such a form.

In relation to match day information and football intelligence
in general the Chairman asked Chief Superintendent McNally to
construct a paragraph to be numbered 3.5.5. in the operational
order, regarding this topic.    This would be written so as not
to encroach on Superintendent Greenwood's more specific 'Standing
Instructions' document.

Item deferred.

8/90        THE GROUND SAFETY CERTIFICATE - ALL TICKET MATCHES

Superintendent Simpson in reference to the above, explained
the ACPO Guidelines contained in Paragraph 5.5. of the ACPO
Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events - Guide to
Policing Football.    In essence the requirement to insist on
the match being 'all ticket' or played at an alternative venue,
or that the day and time of kick off be controlled referred
only to cup fixtures.    A proposal had been made to extend this
criteria to include all fixtures in South Yorkshire both league
and cup, and with this in mind Superintendent Simpson had
prepared a draft document covering all the aspects.    This would
be eventually placed before the licensing authority for inclusion
in the Safety Certificate.   The Paper was circulated to members
for their perusal.

A debate followed thereafter during which the wording and tenor
of the document were discussed.

In concluding this item the Chairman stated we would await the
judgement of Lord Justice Taylor in respect of this matter.
Furthermore, he would contact the Secretary of the appropriate
ACPO Sub-Committee dealing with football and associated matters
to canvass their current approach.      The Chairman also asked
Superintendent McNally to make suitable enquiries in other areas
of the country as to the extent to which this had been adopted.

Item deferred.
9/90       GROUND PROFILES

Superintendent Brookfield reminded members as to the content
of his previously circulated paper on the above subject.      The
recommendation was that the Local Football Intelligence Officer
and the Football Liaison Officer would pool their knowledge
and expertise in order to produce a Ground Profile. This document
would be useful to any Commander taking over a different ground,
and not having prior experience of policing such a venue.
Details   in it would include, plans of     the ground, turnstile
capacities and any relevant intelligence designed to assist
the new Ground/Match Commander.

In response to this prospective initiative the Chairman stated
that he would leave Divisions to their own devices as to
individual ground profiles, although he would expect them to
file the current hard copy details so as to form     the basis of
ongoingground profile information.   In  addition we should await
both the outcome of Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report and the
distribution of the Home Office Circular on Football Intelligence
before commencing an official ground profile system.

Superintendent Brookfield felt that in terms of the practical
application of football intelligence this Force was to some
degree,   behind others in the field, and     as we were naturally
under the spotlight post-Hillsborough,       positive action was
required.      The Chairman noted    Superintendent   Brookfield's
comments.

10/90       ANY OTHER BUSINESS

10.1.       Chief Superintendent McNally referred to the Model
            Operational Order - Paragraph 3.7.3. - which outlined
            the deployment and use of     the Dog Section in the
            football scenario. He posed     the question that the
            strict wording of this section may be contrary to
            ACPO Guidelines on the subject.     The Chairman asked
            Chief Superintendent McNally to consider a re-draft
            of the Paragraph which would be discussed at the
            next meeting.

            Item deferred.

  . .
10 2        In continuance of the Model Operational Order theme
            Chief Superintendent McNally then made reference
            to Paragraph 3.15.3.     He had been asked by Chief
            Inspector Edmundson    (Headquarters Operations)   to
            raise the subject of the function of the Headquarters
            Control Room and Match Control in the event of an
            emergency.   It was felt that insufficient emphasis
            had been placed on the role of the Football Incident
            Room in such a situation.
The Chairman asked Chief Superintendent McNally
to look at this question on a forcewide basis,
especially in relation to the difference between
the Sheffield grounds and elsewhere.      The subject
would be an agenda item at the next meeting.

Item deferred.

The Chairman briefly described the system under
the old County Council of one Licensing Authority,
who   dealt   principally   with    the   Headquarters
Operations Division in terms of correspondence etc.
As   a result   the Operations    Division kept the
necessary files at Force Headquarters.

Under the new system such papers are still being
forwarded to Headquarters, and having recently dealt
with several such documents, the Chairman found
that some had already been seen by the respective
Commanders, whilst some clearly had not.     In some
cases it was unclear who had seen them. Furthermore,
it was evident that Headquarters Operations were
still maintaining files and sending out copies to
the appropriate Divisions.

Responding to a comment by Chief Superintendent
Broomhead relative to the role of Headquarters,
Chief Superintendent, Operations and Traffic, and
the Safety Certificate, Chief Superintendent McNally
said he had recently discussed this matter with
Assistant Chief Constable, Operations, Mr Davies.
In   his   view  the   way   forward  was   for  all
correspondence relating to football grounds to be
sent to Headquarters Operations and Traffic and
thereafter forwarded to the appropriate Commanders
via Chief Superintendent, Operations and Traffic.
The Commanders would then deal directly with their
own clubs, as is the position now, whilst at the
same time the designated officer at Headquarters
would remain au fait with the current situation.
Ultimately he stated that papers should be filed
at Headquarters.

After a short discussion during which those present
appeared satisfied with the current system of dealing
with their Licensing Authorities, the Chairman stated
that the present method would remain with the added
proviso that Barnsley, Doncaster and Rotherham would
forward their papers for filing to Headquarters
Operations/Traffic

Item discharged.
-j ^ '    Superintendent Greenwood informed members concerning
          the new role    of Mr Brownlow, ex-Chief    Constable
          of this Force and ex-HMI.      He was now acting in
          a consultancy capacity for the Football Association,
          visiting grounds in the North of England, and
          inspecting the same relative to general ground safety
          and   how   the  Taylor   Recommendations  had   been
          implemented.    Mr Brownlow had previously visited
          Leeds United and Doncaster.      Chief Superintendent
          Nesbit reported that Mr Brownlow would be visiting
          Hillsborough on Sunday 28 January 1990 for the FA
          Cup Tie v Everton.

0 .5 .     The Chairman then discussed     the content    of a
           previously circulated letter from the ACPO Working
           Group on CCTV and Public Safety.    In essence* this
           document sought to clarify several points concerning
           CCTV equipment at each of our grounds, in relation
           to requests to the Football Trust for additional
           equipment.

           Chief Inspector Waring informed the meeting that
           he was undertaking to draft a reply to the ACPO
           Working Group on behalf of the Chairman.     In doing
           so he had acquired some of the necessary information,
           but specifically in relation to the full technical
           specification    forCCTV equipment and    details of
           maintenance    contracts,   Chief  Inspector   Waring
           reported that he was unable to locate such data
           in-force.   The Chairman asked Chief Inspector Waring
           to contact each of our clubs in an effort to
           ascertain the necessary details required by the
           ACPO Working Group.

            Item discharged.

DATE OF NEXT MEETING

The Chairman informed the meeting that the date of the next
gathering would be dependent on the content of the Final Taylor
Report. He would inform members accordingly.
            THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION TEAM MEETING
               TO BE HELD AT 2.30 PM - TUESDAY 13 FEBRUARY 1990
                 IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS



                               A   G   E   N   D   A




1.    /APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

2.      MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETING

3.      MATTERS ARISING:

       /(a)         Action by Local Authorities on Recommendation
                    Packages.

      ytw           The Model Operational Order
                    SUPERINTENDENT SIMPSON

                    Deployment and Use of the Dog Section - Paragraph 3.7.3
        /
                    CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT MCNALLY                       >t$.

                    The Role of the Football Incident Room - Paragraph 3.15.3
            /
                    CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT MCNALLY                       \l<Z >

       t^>          Major Crime Contingency Plan
                                                                        !><?
                    DETECTIVE CHIEF INSPECTOR MEEK

                    Football Intelligence   Post Match Briefings/
                    Ground Profiles
                    SUPERINTENDENT BROOKFIELD

                    Ground Safety Certificates             All Ticket Matches
                    SUPERINTENDENT SIMPSON

        THE FINAL TAYLOR REPORT:

     i / < a)       Major Incident Plan                /        -   \ (TWlb^l
                                                            f           "

     y<b>           Standing Instructions on Policing Football Grounds
                    SUPERINTENDENT GREENWOOD

                    Recommendation 8       Maximum Capacities for Terraces -
                    Reduced Figure
                    THE CHAIRMAN


                J   Maximum Notional Rate Through Turnstiles
                    THE CHAIRMAN
              Recommendation 11 - 'Statement of Intent'
              THE CHAIRMAN

(e) j         Recommendation 12 (a) & (b) - Filling and Monitoring
       ■s /   of Terraces
              THE CHAIRMAN

(f)           Recommendation 48 - Arrest Procedures
              THE CHAIRMAN

id )          Recommendation 52 - Training Course for Police
              Commanders
              THE CHAIRMAN

              Communications - Hand Signals
              THE CHAIRMAN

ANY OTHER BUSINESS

DATE AND VENUE OF NEXT MEETING
                                                                                             -U

        ^                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                  Ref:               a c c (o p s )/h m w

        From:   Assistant Chief Constable, Operations            Station/Dept:       Headquarters
        To:     See Below                                        Date:               9,March 1990



                SUBJECT:            MINUTES OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION
                                    TEAM - 13.2.90



                I attach herewith copies of the minutes of the last meeting of the
                Implementation Team held at 2.30 pm on Tuesday 13 February 1990,
                and would draw your attention tothe following matters.

                Item 14.1 - Responsibility of   Divisional Commanders

                This has already been subject of a memorandum by me and it is hoped
                that this paragraph provides additional guidance. It is most important
                that the Safety Committee and the clubs see that we are giving this
                matter attention at the appropriate senior level.

                Item 14.4 - Recommendation 17

                This matter was raised at the Policy Review Committee meeting held
                on 28 February. The Chief Constable has decided that he would wish
                to follow ACPO Guidance. At present this is as follows:

                If clubs have their wish to have the fences removed the police should
                indicate that this will result in additional manpower being drafted
                into the ground to prevent disorder and pitch invasions. This will
                be at the expense of the Clubs.

                To date, no other view has been expressed.

                Recommendation 59

                I would add to the comments in the minutes that annual or bi annual
                meetings with emergency services at divisional level are appropriate
                to discuss matters affecting not simply sports grounds but all areas
                of responsibility and relationships. Where such arrangements are
                not presently in existence then consideration should be given to
                them being established.




                /                                                                   POLICE

                Assistant Chief Constable
                Operations                                          10 MAR 1990

                To   Divisional Commanders                               tr D.HQ.
                     Chief Superintendent Ops & Traffic           SHEFFIELD




Gen/2
           MINUTES OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION
                                TEAM MEETING
                HELD AT 2.30 PM - TUESDAY 13 FEBRUARY 1990
                IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM, POLICE HEADQUARTERS




Present:

M N Davies Esq, LLB, BA, Assistant Chief Constable        (Operations)     -
Chairman
Chief Superintendents T F Broomhead, H G McNally MA
Superintendents Oughton, Sleath, Brookfield, Hale,         Greenwood     and
Marsh
Chief Inspectors Hellewell and Purdy
Detective Chief Inspector Meek
Inspector Dean

11/90         APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

Apologies for absence were received from Chief Superintendent Nesbit,
QPM, Superintendents Bettison and Simpson.

12/90         MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETING

The Minutes of the meeting held on Friday 26 January 1990 which had
previously been circulated were accepted as a true and accurate
record.

13/90         MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

1 3 .1 .      Action by Local Authorities   on Recommendation Packages

               The Chairman reported that he had now read each of the
               packages.   Those Ground Commanders present were then
               asked to summarise the current position in relation
               to the progress of their individual recommendation
               packages.    Whilst progress had been made across the
               county, the attitude of certain Local Authority Advisory
               Groups made for less positive action than was the ideal.
               The Chairman requested that we continue to urge such
               bodies to appropriate action, sooner rather than later.

               Item discharged.

13.2.         The Model Operational Order

               Chief Inspector Hellewell introduced this item explaining
               that the Order had been completed and circulated to
               all Ground Commanders for them to personalise the same
               in respect of their particular grounds.      Repeating Mr
               Hayes' previous comments on the subject, Chief Inspector
Hellewell   reminded those present    a decision had    been
made not    to utilise this style     of Order until    next
season.

A discussion then ensued concerning the philosophy of
Recommendation     60 which    referred  to the emergency
services being given full details before each match
about the event.       The Chairman asked whether the form
 'NOTIFICATION OF SPORTING EVENT AT A DESIGNATED STADIUM'
covered the phrase 'full details'.        In extending this
point he produced a similar document produced by the
Fire Brigade which differed slightly to that compiled
by   the   police.       This  Paper  was distributed     for
consideration by the members present.          In concluding
this topic the Chairman asked Chief Inspector Hellewell
to request Superintendent Simpson to consider the Fire
Brigade form     and    their  apparent  need    for further
information i.e. additional directions and rendezvous
points.    He would be asked to redraft the form and
circulate it to all Ground Commanders.      In the meantime,
the present form would be used, a copy to local Fire
Brigade and Ambulance, with a copy to Operations and
Traffic for onward transmission to the Fire Brigade
Headquarters.       Any suggestions forthcoming should be
directed to Superintendent Simpson, but our watchword
must be simplicity.

Item deferred.

Deployment and Use of the Dog Section

Chief Superintendent McNally circulated a redraft of
Paragraph   3.7.3.  from the Model Operational Order
relative to the above subject.      Its contents were
accepted by all present.

Item discharged.

The Role of the Football Incident Room

As at 13.3. Chief Superintendent McNally also circulated
a redraft of Paragraph 3.15.3. from the Model Operational
Order.   Sub-Paragraph (a) of this document was amended
to read '€-r*&a^‘ec an incident log and Sub-Paragraph (b)
was also amended to read "During the match, monitor
progress, request fire and ambulance services . . .".
The amended paragraphs were accepted by all present,
to be inserted in the Model Operational Order.

Item discharged.
Major Crime Contingency Plan

Introducing this agenda item, Detective Chief Inspector
Meek made reference to his previously circulated paper
and invited comments from members on its viability
forcewide. The ensuing discussion related to the ability
or otherwise of preventing supporters from leaving a
stadium in the event of a major crime being committed,
in addition to the easier movement of fans within grounds
due to decreased capacities.    It was agreed that crowd
safety should be the paramount factor of the match
commander.

In furtherance of his presentation, Detective Chief
Inspector Meek explained to members the provisions of
his 13 recommendations, covering containment of the
crowd, use of video surveillance and subsequent storage
of tapes, a comparison of colour and black and white
recording, the use of still photographs and a polaroid
photograph proforma system for fans leaving the ground.
Finally correct useage of ground public address systems.

In accepting Detective Chief Inspector Meek's Paper,
Mr Davies asked Chief Inspector Hellewell to liaise
with Superintendent Simpson in order to produce a major
crime contingency aide memoire to be included in the
Model Operational Order, for appropriate use within
the force area.

Item discharged.

Football   Intelligence   -   Post   Match   Briefings/Ground
Profiles

Superintendent Brookfield informed the Chairman that
he had previously presented a package on the above
subject to the Implementation Team,     Its implications
had been discussed and deferred to this date on the
basis of the content of Lord Justice Taylor's Final
Report and    the associated Home Office Circular on
Football Intelligence.     The essential criteria under
pinning the Circular would be the installation of a
Football Intelligence Officer, something that currently
this Force did not possess. Without this, Superintendent
Brookfield stated it would not be possible to properly
commence the new system.

After much discussion on the subject the Chairman stated
that   he  needed   to  have   sight  of  Superintendent
Brookfield's previously circulated paper before arriving
at any firm conclusion. Taking into account Chief
Superintendent Broomhead's comment about the need to
consider this report in its entirety and Superintendent
McNally who thought that the Home Office Circular would
be published in a fortnight merely served to reinforce
this statement.    It was further decided to make this
topic an agenda item for the next meeting.

In terms of post match summaries and particularly the
statistical information which is passed on the day of
the match to Headquarters by utilising the Command and
Control   System,   Superintendent   Brookfield circulated
a new document for consideration by members.      The only
point in issue from those present was the line which
read "Number of hours to be charged to the club". Chief
Superintendent Broomhead felt that this should read
"Number of officers to be charged by the club".        The
outcome of the resultant discussion was that the Chairman
requested Chief Superintendent McNally to liaise with
Constable Rosevear, the Headquarters Football Liaison
Officer, in order to decide which was the appropriate
wording applicable to the subsequent charge we make
to the clubs.     Having done    so, Chief Superintendent
McNally would inform Divisional Commanders accordingly.
It was, however, established that the more extensive
post match summary should reach Headquarters Operations
within A days of the match.        This was agreed by all
present.

The    question  of    serial    Sergeants    having  the
responsibility of debriefing Senior Stewards was also
raised by Superintendent Brookfield.     Again after some
debate the Chairman decided that such debriefing would
be a police responsibility and asked that Superintendent
Simpson include the same in the Model Operational Order.

Item deferred.

Ground Safety Certificate - All Ticket Matches

Chief Inspector Hellewell reminded those present that
a   draft  proposed  addition    to  the general   safety
certificate regarding    all   ticket matches had been
circulated at the last meeting.      He briefly described
its contents.    Additionally    he reported that Chief
Superintendent McNally had been asked by the previous
Chairman, Mr Hayes, to make suitable enquiries in other
areas of the country as to the extent to which this
proposal had been adopted. Chief Superintendent McNally
stated that little or no opposition had been forthcoming
in terms of a request for an all ticket fixture, but
none of the Forces he had spoken to had received support
for alternative venues.    Similarly there had been some
dissent relative to alternative days.    Chief Inspector
Hellewell in response to the latter said that he had
met with a similar response from Barnsley.
The Chairman said that he would wish to cease discussion
on this topic, and include it later in the meeting under
the umbrella of the Final Taylor Report.      This would
enable Commanders to have a common strategy with which
to take to their Advisory Groups.

THE FINAL TAYLOR REPORT

The Chairman sought at this juncture to re-emphasise
our responsibility, as a Force, in terms of crowd safety
and disorder, additional to our general policing strategy
at the five football grounds in the county, in the light
of Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report.          He informed
members that he was now the nominated officer in respect
of these matters and that he had written to the Local
Authorities and the clubs in this vein.        The Chairman
added that the Local Authorities and the clubs had also
been informed that in general matters particular to
individual   grounds would be      the   responsibility  of
Divisional Commanders.     To ensure that he was properly
updated the Chairman stated that a member of Headquarters
Operations Division would attend Advisory Group Meetings.
At this stage such meetings in Sheffield would be the
responsibility of Divisional and Match Commanders until
such time as the matters in the Taylor Report were
finalised.    Outside Sheffield the Chairman said that
Match and Sub-Divisional Commanders would attend advisory
meetings,  with Divisional Commanders attending when
the need was seen.     Correspondence would be dealt with
by   Divisional    Commanders   and    resultant   original
correspondence would be returned to Headquarters for
filing, whilst copies of the same would be retained
at Divisions.    He further emphasised the need for us
to give such gatherings the necessary level of response,
given the tenor and importance of Lord Justice Taylor's
Final Report.

Concluding this item Mr Davies stated that if necessary
he would    attend any Advisory Group Meeting     in a
supportive role.

Major Incident Plan

Inspector Dean,   Headquarters Force Operations Room,
informed the meeting that he was currently in the process
of updating individual emergency procedure files for
each ground in consultation with the Divisions concerned.
The Chairman asked that such plans be completed as soon
as possible    and  stressed   the   need  for Divisional
Commanders to continue      an ongoing dialogue with the
emergency services    in particular    the Fire Brigade.
The final point would be an issue for future discussion
with Divisional Commanders.

Standing Instructions on Policing Football Grounds

Superintendent Greenwood introduced this item stating
that he had previously submitted a paper on the subject
the terms of which had been agreed in principle.       A
discussion then ensued concerning the role of the
standing instructions, as against the Operational Order,
were these, Superintendent Greenwood asked, areas of
duplicity?

At its conclusion the Chairman agreed to consider
Superintendent Greenwood's papers and in the light of
his further work on the subject, a decision would
ultimately be made for next season.

The Final Recommendations

The Chairman by way of introduction said that he intended
to cover all the recommendations, offer comment and
guidance where applicable in an effort to assist members
in any subsequent Advisory Group Meeting.

For the sake of brevity it is intended to note only
those recommendations demanding positive action on our
part.

RECOMMENDATION:

I - A          All Seated Accommodation - matter for
                Advisory Groups.

9(b)              Maximum Capacities for Terraces - closing
                   off further access to pens/areas - this
                   is a    matter which should be reflected
                   in the Model Operational Order.

10                As 9(b) - maximum notional rate - In
                   support of possible Fire Brigade reaction
                   to   this    recommendation,  an Advisory
                  Groupdecision may       well be to inform
                   clubs     either to increase   the number
                   of turnstiles or reduce the capacity.

II                Filling and Monitoring Terraces - Written
                  Statement of Intent - the Chairman in
                  accepting      comments       by     Chief
                  Superintendent Broomhead     said that we
                  should send a letter to each club noting
          the   change   of  phrase   from 'written
          agreement'   to   'statement of intent',
          adding that as in previous correspondence
          we did not see this as a contractual
          agreement, rather one made in the spirit
          of the recommendation to provide a way
          forward.     In other words the basic
          filling/monitoring of pens would still
          remain a club responsibility.

12(b)     Filling   and   Monitoring Terraces
          relieves the police of the obligation
          in given circumstances.

13        Gangways - it was the Chairman's view
          that these would be painted yellow,
          and as such this fact could be included
          in our letter entitled 'Statement of
          Intent*.Furthermore it was a subject
          for discussion at Advisory Group level.

1A & 15   Fences and Gates - matters which         can
          be finalised via Advisory Groups.

16        Recognition of Distress etc - The Force
          has already produced a training video
          on this subject in addition to the use
          of still photographs.      At this stage
          there is little more to add.

17        Fences and Gates     - Minimum Width
          Emergency     Evacuation.  The  Chairman
          stated that this was an issue which
          would have to be faced by Advisory
          Groups.    Advice had been sought from
          the Home Office and an early reply was
          anticipated.     Realism should be our
          watchword.

          N.B. This matter will be taken to the
          next PRC in order to discuss the Force
          position on the removal of fences.

20        Fences and Gates - Manning by Police
          Officers    or Stewards.    The Chairman
          stated that ultimately this would form
          part of Force Policy, however, until
          we knew how many gates we had to cover,
          the matter would be deferred.

22 & 23   Crush Barriers - matters for the Advisory
          Group and the Green Guide.
24    Safety Certificates - we need to consider
      the 'shall' and 'may' issues to clarify
      whether it meets our requirements.

25    Safety    Certificates     -    mandatory
     ,requirements - Green Guide Issue.

26   Safety Certificates - Other Provisions
     - A Green Guide issue but we need to
     be       fully      aware   of     our
     posit ion/responsibilities.

27   Safety Certificate - Immediate Review
     - this will automatically take place
     as a result of the Final Taylor Report.

28   Safety Certificate - Designated Sports
     Grounds - Not yet Issued.      This takes
     us to sports stadia as opposed simply
     to football grounds.     In response to
     a question from the Chairman as to the
     number     of   such    stadia,      Chief
     Superintendent  McNally    undertook    to
     obtain this information via Divisional
     personnel.

29   Safety Certificate - Annual Review              -
     a matter for the Advisory Group.

30   Safety    Certificates    -    Monitoring,
     Reviewing etc.     This gives 'teeth' to
     the   recommendation and    the Chairman
     instructed that    Divisional Commanders
     attend such meetings when appropriate.

34   Turnstiles   -  Closure   When  Capacity
     Reached - we need to ensure that clubs
     take positive action when this situation
     occurs and have a    plan to deal with
     it.

35   CCTV   - Crowd     Densities    Outside   the
     Ground.     This is an ongoing matter,
     and    all    members present       reported
     continuous   contact    with    their   clubs
     to effect an efficient monitoring system.
     The   Chairman   expressed    a hope     that
     concerted    action      by     the     Local
     Authorities,      ACPO,     the      Football
     Association and Local Commanders would
     eventually bear fruit in this matter.
     He further stated it should be inserted
     in the Safety Certificate.
Signposting and Tickets - the Chairman
stated we should be in a position to
comment on the clarity of the same,
albeit that they fall within the club's
responsibility.

All Ticket Matches - Chief Inspector
Hellewell in relation to this matter
reminded members of the draft proposal
submitted   by  Superintendent   Simpson
at the last meeting.   After considering
views on the subject the Chairman asked
that it be taken by individual members
to Advisory Groups in an attempt to
have the matter placed in the Safety
Certificate.

Stewards   - Recruitment and Training.
After  some discussion on the latter
it was decided that the responsibility
to train stewards would remain with
the clubs,   however,   if requested we
would assist them, as appropriate.

Operational Order - as stated earlier
this matter is well in hand.

Ticketless Fans - The Chairman said
we should exhibit positive action in
relation to not allowing such fans into
the ground.    Accepting that there were
special   circumstances at Hillsborough
he stated that our policy in future
would be that ticketless fans would
not be permitted access to the ground.

Police Room - Result of CCTV Monitoring
- Counting of Numbers - the Chairman
reflected on resistance by the clubs
to the counting issue, probably resulting
from a financial/tax argument on their
part.     He also asked Superintendent
Sleath to look at the situation at
Hillsborough where the results of some
CCTV pictures are not available for
monitoring in the Police Control Room.
Again the Chairman suggested that these
matters should be included in the Safety
Certificates.

Training  Course  - Police    Commanders
- Basic Strategy - the Chairman reported
that the Police College may at a future
date organise a Carousel Course in this
respect.   In Force he asked that the
Operations   Division  liaise   with  the
Training   Department to facilitate on
the    job   training   for   appropriate
officers.   As soon as possible, details
of proposals should     be brought back
to the meeting.

Police Authorities - Review of Charges
to Clubs - this matter was discussed
at   a  recent   ACPO   Sub-Committee   on
hooliganism and the    Chairman reported
that as a result a letter would shortly
be sent to chief      officers outlining
their strategy.     The Chief Constable
would then be in a position to address
the issue at a Police Authority Meeting.

Radio Communications - Command Channel
   Superintendent  Marsh reported that
with the exception of Doncaster, this
was now a feature at every ground.
Details of the scheme had been included
in APPENDIX 'E* in the Model Operational
Order.

Land   Lines     - Separate    System
Superintendent   Marsh   again    reported
that all clubs within our Force area
had  been   circulated  with a package
outlining   the requirements    of   this
recommendation.

Co-ordination   of   Emergency    Services
- The Chairman said that he would meet
such personnel at county level, but
he   instructed  Divisional   and Ground
Commanders to liaise at a local level
on a regular basis, in order to maintain
effective lines of communication.

Emergency   Services   - Notification
As   stated    previously   the    Chairman
reiterated   our policy   of    forwarding
a copy of the order plus the form headed
’NOTIFICATION OF SPORTING EVENT AT A
DESIGNATED STADIUM'.

Contingency Plans - the Chairman reported
our progress    in terms of rendezvous
points etc    for  football grounds, we
now need to consider other stadia falling
into a similar designated category.
             64 ' 69         First    Aid   Medical   Facilities   and
                             Ambulances   - The Chairman emphasised
                             the need to have a working knowledge
                             of these recommendations and make comment
                             when    necessary   at   Advisory   Group
                             Meetings.

15/90        ANY OTHER BUSINESS

Superintendent Hale reported that during a recent match at Bramall
Lane a problem with the communications system had necessitated the
attendance ofa member    of Headquarters Communications.   However,
such   anofficer was not available.  Superintendent Hale understood
that it was a service supplied on request should the need arise.

Superintendent Marsh agreed that an officer should be available    if
required and promised to make the necessary arrangements.


DATE OF NEXT MEETING

The Chairman told members that they would be informed as to the date
of the next meeting.
                                       SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                        Ref:              TRG/FP/AB
            From:     Chief inspector Purdy                            Station/Dept:
                                                                                          Training
            To:       See Distribution List                             Date.
                                                                                          16 May 1990.


                    SUBJECT:    MINUTES OF THE TAYLOR IMPLEMENTATION TEAM
                                MEETING - 2.30PM - 1 MAY 1990 - CONFERENCE ROOM -
                                POLICE HEADQUARTERS




                          Please find attached a copy of the above Minutes.

                          The next meeting will take      place   on   20   June   1990    in   the
                          Headquarters Conference Room.




m

                          Chief Inspector
                          Training Department



                          DISTRIBUTION LIST:

                          ACC, M N Davies Esq, LLB, MA - (Operations)

                          Chief Superintendent T F Broomhead - 'D' Division
                          Chief Superintendent H G McNally MA - Operations and Traffic
                          Chief Superintendent J Nesbit QPM - 'F' Division

                          Superintendent P Hale - 'D 1 ' Sub-Division -
                          Superintendent G Marsh - HQ Operations
                          Superintendent D Sleath - 'FI' Sub-Division
                          Superintendent G Oughton - 'Cl' Sub-Division-    ,
                          Superintendent R Greenwood - 'A1' Sub-Division //
                          Superintendent R Simpson - 'B1 ' Sub-Divisiony
                          Detective Chief Inspector Meek - 'D' CID




    Gen/2
            MINUTES OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION
                                           TEAM MEETING
                     H E L D AT 2 . 3 0 P M - T U E S D A Y 1 M A Y I 9 9 O
                 IN T H E C O N F E R E N C E ROOM, P O L I C E H E A D Q U A R T E R S




Present:


M N D avies         Esq,     L L B , BA,      Assistant            Chief    Constable        (Operations)
- Chairman
Chief     Superintendents            T   F   Broomhead,        H     G   M c N all y   MA   and J N esb it
QPM
S u p e r i n t e n d e n t s Hale, Simpson, M a r s h and Sleath
C h i e f I n s p e c t o r Purdy-
D e t e cti ve C h i e f I n s p e c t o r Meek
I n s p ecto r A r m itag e

16/90             A P O L O G I E S FOR A B S E N C E


A p o l o g i e s for   absence      were    received        from        Superintendents Greenwood
and Oughton.

17/90             M I N U T E S OF P R E V I O U S M E E T I N G

The M i n u t e s of the m e e t i n g h e l d on T u e s d a y 13 F e b r u a r y 199Q w h i c h
had p r e v i o u s l y been c i r c u l a t e d were a c c e p t e d as a true and accurate
record.

18/90              MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

18. 1.            The M o d e l O p e r a t i o n a l O r d e r

                   S u p e r i n t e n d e n t S i m p s o n i n f o r m e d m e m b e r s that the form
                   h eaded 'N OTIFICATION OF S P O R T I N G E V E N T A T A DE SIG N A T E D
                  STADIUM'             had     bee n      duly        amended       to    cater      for  all
                  eventua lit ies .              However, C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M c N a l l y
                  stated that he had taken the form to both the Fire
                  Brigade and the A m b u l a n c e Service.                            The latter were
                  co mpl e t e l y s a t i s f i e d w i t h it in its prese nt format,
                  but the Fire B r iga de ask ed for chang es to be made
                  in Draft Form 2, at points 8 and 10.                                     A f t e r a brief
                  d i s c u s s i o n on the matter, the C h a i r m a n indi cat ed that
                  w hi lst         we       were     gr ate ful          for     their      i nterest     and
                  p e r t i n e n t enquiry, we were s a t i sf ied w i t h the structure
                  and conten t of the form and Draft Form 2 w o u l d be
                  taken into use at the start of next season.                                        At this
                  point         the C h a i r m a n       r e m i n d e d m e m be rs    that this       form
                  should be f o r w a r d e d to the H e a d q u a r t e r s                    (Operations
                  Room)          who        would       be       responsible           for      appropri ate
                  ci rcul a t i o n to the Fire and A m b u l a n c e Services.

                  Item    drLsetergBTl.
 The Role of the F o o t b a l l Inc iden t Room

In r e l a t i o n to p r e vio us P a r a g r a p h 13.4, w h i c h            dealt
w i t h m a t c h day inc ide nt logs, it was d e c i d e d to                  alter
Sub-Paragraph              (a) of P a r a g r a p h 3 .15-3 in the              Model
O p e r a t i o n a l O r d e r to read 'm o n i t o r an inci den t            l o g 1.
The m i n u t e s were a m en ded accordingly.

The  a m e nded paragraph     was     a c c e p t e d by all                 present
for in ser tion in the M o d e l O p e r a t i o n a l Order.

 Item discharged.

Football       I nte ll i g e n c e   - Post-Match       Summaries        - Charges
to Clubs


As this was an a gend a item it was                       decided       to   discuss
this issue later in the meeting.

Item deferred.

The F ina l T a y l o r R ep ort

C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t B r o o mh ead r e f e r r e d to Par agra ph
14.1.      of the p r e v i o u s m i n u t e s in w h i c h the Chai rman
had st ipul a t e d that D i v i s i o n a l C o m m a n d e r s in She ffield
would      attend all A d v i s o r y Group M e e t i n g s .               In the
light      of     the       Chairman's          recent    e xper i e n c e at such
a m e e t i n g and the n on- sp e c i f i c natu re of m u c h of the
agenda, wou ld he, C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t B r o o m h e a d asked,
be p r e p a r e d to r e v i e w that policy?

In      rep ly      the    Chairman     stated     that      once  the  full
im pli c a t i o n s    of   the    Final   Taylor         Report  had  been
carr ied           out    to    the    sat isf a c t i o n   of   Divisional
C o m m a n d e r s he w o u l d be happy for M a t c h a nd/ or Sub-
Divisional             Commanders      to    attend         Advisory   Group
Meetings.

Item discharged.

The F inal R e c o m m e n d a t i o n s

Recommendation                28     r e f e rred   to o the r     sports    stadia,
as       oppo sed          to    f o o tbal l     grounds,     which       woul d    be
designated                under         the      Act.         F o r c ewid e    C h ief
S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M c N a l l y rep or t e d that there are nine
such        stadia.            The       Chairman     thanked       him    for    this
information.
                 Superintendent             Marsh        highlighted         Recommendation    52
                 w h i c h conside red the p r o v i s i o n of a s pecific training
                 course           for    senior       officers         acting     as  match   day
                 Commanders.              He i n f o r m e d m e m b e r s that Superinte nde nt
                 Ou g h t o n was cur rently on su ch a cours e at the Greater
                 M a n c h e s t e r Police T r a i n i n g School.             O n his return,
                 Su per i n t e n d e n t   Marsh       stated       it    may   be  prud ent  to
                 or gan i s e a S e m ina r on this subject, but in response
                 the meetin g gave no firm i n d i c a t i o n in this direction.

                  It em discharged.

19/90           COMMUNICATIONS         - P E R S O N N E L AT M A T C H E S

C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M c Nal ly i n t r o d u c e d this item a fter having
p r e v i o u s l y c i r c u l a t e d to m e m b e r s a p a p e r on the subject.           The
issue in q u e s t i o n was whet her we s h o u l d have on duty at eac h ground
a ra dio technician,                   capable of d e a l i n g w i t h t e c h n i c a l problems
a r i sing on m a t c h days.

A f t e r a p r o l o n g e d discuss ion the C h a i r m a n s u m m a r i s e d the position
by stati ng there was clea rly a n e e d for t e c h n i c a l expertise to
be a v a i l a b l e for consultation on m a t c h days.            C o n s e q u e n t l y someone
s ho uld be able to provide that service.                      He a s k e d Sup erintendent
Marsh       to      liaise      with   Superintendent          Parker          (Communications
De part m e n t )    in an effort        to indi c a t e     how    th is       could best be
achieved, and report to the next meeting.

In r e l a t i o n to specific radio c o m m u n i c a t i o n s t r a i nin g for match
controllers, and additio nal CCTV t r a i n i n g for a p p r o p r i a t e officers,
it was felt         that there was s u f f i c i e n t k n o w l e d g e and expertise
in force to organise our own t r a i n i n g program me.                        The Chairman
as ked C h i e f S uper i n t e n d e n t M c N a l l y to e v a lu ate this subject.

It em deferred.

20/90           C H A R G E S - MANPO WER C O STS

S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Hale summari sed the p r e s e n t p o s i t i o n by reminding
m e m b e r s of the work und ert a k e n by C h i e f I n s p e c t o r D o n n e l l y and
I n s p e c t o r Jones relating to a series of formu lae des igne d to cater
for' the r e c o v e r y of m a n p o w e r costs from all o ur Force Football
L ea gue Clubs.              In doing so he r e f e r r e d to a l e t t e r d ated 1 February
1990 fro m the Deputy Ch ief C ons tab le, M r Hayes, to the Clerk to
the S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e Police A uth ori ty.          Briefly the le tter reminded
the A u t h o r i t y of their acce pta nce in p r i n c i p l e of the need to
review          in d e t a i l    and if n e c e s s a r y   re-negotiate       the basis for
recovering               the    costs   of  providing          spec ial     police   services.
Additionally,               the   letter offer ed our i n f o r m a t i o n and expertise
gathered            during       the  research.           To   date    Superintendent     Hale
reported, there had been no reply from the Authori ty.
E x t e n d i n g the matter, S u p e r i n t e n d e n t S l e a t h r e p orte d great public
c o n c e r n e x p r e s s e d at S u b - D i v i s i o n a l S u r g e r i e s and Di visi o n a l Review
P a n e l s over the cost of p o l i c i n g f o o t b a l l matches, whils t Chief
S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Broo mhe ad stated that at his reques t the Divisional
R e v i e w P a n e l wrote to the A u t h o r i t y to a s k w h e n they were going
to r e vi ew charges.                He f u r t h e r a d d e d that an a d d i t i o n a l part of
the e q u a t i o n was the i m p e nd ing r e m o v a l of p e r i m e t e r fences and
the a t t e n d a n t m a n p o w e r imp lications.

A d i s c u s s i o n then ensued c o n c e r n i n g the p r a c t i c a l i t i e s of removing
fences         and      stan dar d      or s l i ding scale     charges.          S u p e r i nten den t
S i m p s o n r e m i n d e d m e m b e r s that our charges, fixed by the Police
A ut hor i t y ,      are b as ed e n t i rely on o ur S t a n d i n g Instructions.                   A
copy        of      the   same       was    inspected   by     the  Chairman          and      it was
i m m e d i a t e l y obvious that the true cost of p o l i c i n g fo otball matches
in S outh Yo rks h i r e was not b eing borne by our league clubs.                               Ch ief
Superintendent               B r o o mh ead   said     t h a t the cont rac t       relative        to
m a n p o w e r costs was due for r e n e w a l in A u g u s t and in vi ew of that
t i m e scal e an u rg ent app rai sal was required.

In c o n c l u s i o n the C h a i r m a n st ated he was due to me et Mr Wil kinson
of the Joint Se cre t a r i a t on 8 M a y 1990 w h e n he w o u l d raise the
p r i n c i p l e s invol ved in the matt er.              He a sked m e m ber s to prepare
a s t r a t e g y for p o l ic ing m a t c h e s w i t h o u t fences.      He asked Chie f
Superintendents            Broo mhe ad     and    N e s b i t to mee t  at     the earliest
p o s s i b l e c on ven ienc e to f ormu lat e such a plan.

It em deferred.

21/90             S T A N D I N G I NSTR U C T I O N S FOR T H E P O L I C I N G OF FO OTBALL
                   MATCHES

Due      to the absence      of S u p e r i n t e n d e n t       Gre enwo od,      this     item     was
d e f e r r e d to the next meeting.

22/90             MODEL OPERATIONAL ORDER

S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Simps on r e i t e r a t e d the a m e n d m e n t s he had previously
u n d e r t a k e n in r e l a tion to the M o d e l O p e r a t i o n a l Order.           The subject
of d e b r i e f i n g s tewards was d i s c u s s e d          and S u p e r i n t e n d e n t  Simpson
s u g g e s t e d this could be part of a S e r g e a n t ' s serial sheet rather
than in the m a i n body of the                          Order, but he asked for                guidance
on this matter.

A d i s c u s s i o n took place d u r i n g w h i c h the C h a i r m a n stated that
he     r e q u i r e d a s tandard a p p r o a c h a c c e p t i n g the vari ous methods
of o b t a i n i n g suc h i n f orm atio n at e a c h of our five grounds.            In
c o n c l u s i o n it was deci ded that the M a t c h C o m m a n d e r w oul d debrief
the S a f e t y . O f f i c e r / C h i e f S t e w a r d at the climax of the game, and
that such a s t a t e m e n t of in tent w o u l d be w r i t t e n into the Model
O p e r a t i o n a l Order.          A d d i t i o n a l l y s e ria l sheets w o u l d include a
r e q uest        for an     ongoi ng          l i ais on      with    such p e rso ns and general
stewards, t hro u g h o u t the game.                        Th is was a c c e p t e d by all members
p r e sent

F i n ally in r e s p e c t of the Order,, the C h a i r m a n asked if it would
contain a n y t hin g r e l a t i n g to the a t t i t u d e of police to away fans.
Replying            to    that        point, Superintendent     S i m pso n    read       out an
a p p r o p r i a t e p a r a g r a p h from the O r d e r to the s a t i s f a c t i o n of the
Chairman.

Item discharged.

23/90              FOOTBALL INTELLIGENCE

Superintendent              Marsh         introduced     this      topic     in the  absen ce    of
S u p e r i n t e n d e n t B r o o k f i e l d w h o is c u r r e n t l y at the P o l i c e Staff
College, Bramshill.

Re f e r r i n g    to S u p e r i n t e n d e n t   B r o o k f i e l d ' s p r e v i o u s wor k on this
item, S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M a r s h r e m i n d e d m e m b e r s that he, S upe ri n t e n d e n t
Brookfield,             had    undertaken             a      review         of    national        and      local
ar ran g e m e n t s in the p r o d u c t i o n and c o l l at ion of football related
intelligence/information.                           The       review        had      be en     presented      by
Superintendent              Brookfield            to    the       Conference          in D e c e m b e r   1989,
but final d e c i s i o n s on his r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s had been d e f e r r e d until
the p u b l i c a t i o n of a Hom e O f fice C i r c u l a r on the subject.                                His
repo rt        c o n t ain ed   17     recommendations                  which     had       been a g r e e d in
principle           by    the    former C h a i r man ,             the D epu ty C h i e f Constable,
M r Hayes.

Su p e r i n t e n d e n t M a r s h r e p o r t e d that as the Home Office Ci rcular
had n o w been p u b l i s h e d it was n e c e s s a r y to in tegrate both this
and      the       recommendations            outlined    by Superintendent B roo kfie ld
in his paper.

R e f e r r i n g to the report, S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M a r s h then d e s c r i b e d each
r e c o m m e n d a t i o n w h i c h in turn was the subject of comment by the
C h a i r m a n and C o n f e r e n c e m embers.

RECOMMENDATION           1 - Stills C a m e r a

A p p r o v e d and a l re ady being         implemented         forcewide.

RECOMMENDATION 2 - Video Equipment                        for U n d e r w a t e r S e a r c h Unit

This nee ds to be a part of the S t r a t e g y Do cum ent for the Opera tion s
D i v i s i o n and an a p p r o a c h to be made to the Foo tba ll Trust.
RECOMMENDATION 3 —               Appointment of Force Football Intelligence
                                 Officer

The C h a i r m a n said he was happ y w i t h the present s i t u a t i o n but future
s t r a t e g y s h o u l d provide for the n e c e s s a r y a dd itio nal manp ower.

RECOMMENDATION         4 -      Div isi onal F o o t b a l l I n t e l l i g e n c e O f f i c e r

A s s i s t a n t C h i e f Constable, M r Davies, is in the p r o c e s s of enquiring
into this              r e c o m m e n d a t i o n again in the   light of b u d g e t cutbacks.
Chief          Superintendent                   McNally  to enq uire    into   the    Divisional
r e q u i r e m e n t s and A s s i s t a n t Chi ef Co nst a b l e , M r Jac kso n, to enquire
into the Force requirements.

Item de ferr ed.

RECOMMENDATION         5 -      Div isi onal         Football         Intelligence             Officer
                                 'Spotting'        D utie s

A s s i s t a n t C h i e f Constable,          M r Davies,             said that w her e possible,
a D i v i s i o n a l F o o t b a l l I ntel l i g e n c e O f f i c e r will a t t e n d aw ay fixtures
to act as a 'spotter'.

Item d is cha rged .

RECOMMENDATION          6-        Divisi onal      Football             Intelligence            Officer
                                 A d v anc e Repo rts

S u p e r i n t e n d e n t G r e e n w o o d to incl ude in the         Force Policy.- Document
an i n s t r u c t i o n reg ardi ng the p r e p a r a t i o n of        a c o m p r e h e n s i v e report
in a d va nce of all home fixtures.

Item disch arg ed.

RECOMMENDATION           7-       Division al    Football               Intelligence            Officer
                                 Re port U pdate

This r e c o m m e n d a t i o n to be      in clu ded      in    the     Force      Policy          Document
by S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Greenwood.

Item d i sc har ged .

RECOMMENDATION           8-       Divisio nal      Football             Intelligence            Officer
                                 C C T V Dire ctor

This r e c o m m e n d a t i o n was not a c c e p t e d and it was d e c i d e d                that     the
G r o u n d C o m m a n d e r s should be the d i r e c t o r s of the C C T V team.

Item discharged.
RECOMMENDATION 9 -              Div isi o n a l  Football                I nte ll i g e n c e   Officer
                                - Post M a t c h A n a l y s i s

A c c e p t e d and is a m a t t e r for S u p e r i n t e n d e n t (Operations) and his
staff to m o n i t o r and bring to the a t t e n t i o n of G r o u n d Command ers
with         co-operation   from     the   Divisional               F o o t ball Intelligence
Officers.

Item discharged.

RECOMMENDATION         10 -      Di vis ion al         Football          Int ell i g e n c e   Officer
                                 and      Divisional          Football        Liaison        Officer
                                  P r o d u c t i o n of G r o u n d P r o file

A c c e p t e d and is a m a t t e r for the D i v i s i o n a l F o o t b a l l Intellai gen ce
Officer         as an initial r esp o n s e                    for the         cr eat i o n  of a Gr ound
Profile.         S u p e r i n t e n d e n t G r e e n w o o d to i n c o r p o r a t e into the Standing
Instructions.

Item discharged.

RECOMMENDATION          11 -     P o s t - M a t c h Sum mary

A c c e p t e d and is pre sen tly       in operation.

RECOMMENDATION          12 -     P o s t - M a t c h S u mma ry   - B e h a v i o u r of Home Fans

Accepted.

RECOMMENDATION          13 -     P o s t - M a t c h Summ ary     - Debriefing

This r e c o m m e n d a t i o n was not ed but d i f f i c u l t i e s         were a c k now led ged
wi th its implementation.               A f t e r d i s c u s s i o n it        was a c c ep ted that
the i n s t r u c t i o n s currently c o n t ain ed w i t h i n the             M o d e l Ope rat i o n a l
O r d e r wer e the m o s t exp edi ent w ay of d e a l i n g w i t h            the matter.

Item discharged.

RECOMMENDATION          14 -     Force     Major      I n c ide nt   Room     - M a t c h I n for mati on
                                 Desk

A c c e p t e d and is pre sen tly       in operation.

Item deferred.

RECOMMENDATION          15 -     T r a ini ng   of   Force         and      Divisional          Football
                                 I n t ell igen ce O f f i c e r s

Ch ief      Superintendent        (Operations  and                Traffic)       to     look    at    this
m a t t e r w i t h a v i e w to implementation.

Item deferred.
 RECOMMENDATION        16 -    F o o tbal l      Intelligence/Crowd           S a f ety   Modular
                               Train ing

 Th is form of train ing already takes p lac e w i t h i n the m o d u l a r                    in-
 force p a ck age and will continue as p e r this recom mend ati on.

 It em discharged.


 RECOMMENDATION       17 -     P o r ta ble Audio V i sual              Aid      Equipment         -
                               Underwater Search Unit

Accepted.


In r e l a t i o n to the Footb all I n t e l l i g e n c e Document, A s s i s t a n t Chief
Co nsta ble , M r Davies exp res sed his a p p r e c i a t i o n to Sup eri nten den t
Brookfield         for his d e t ai led a n a l y s i s    and r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s w h ich
have p r o d u c e d a firm basis on w h i c h to d e v e l o p force policy.

24/90            A N Y O T H E R BUSINESS

24.1.            S t a t e m e n t s of Intent


                 Assistant         C hief  C onst abl e,     M r Davies, inf orme d       the
                 m e m b e r s that a m e e t i n g h a d taken place on 26 April
                 1990 b e t w e e n the S e c r e t a r i e s and C h a i r m a n of the 5
                 footb all clubs and the r e s p e c t i v e D i v i s i o n a l Ground
                 Commanders.           He said that the p r i n c i p l e of Statements
                 of      I n t ent  was   agreed.         Although    letters      had been
                 fo rwa rded to the clubs r e g a r d i n g the p r e v i o u s Written
                 Agreements         it was r e q u e s t e d by the Cl ubs that each
                 a g r e eme nt    be   looked    at    and     dealt w i t h    separately.
                 Mr Davies asked that C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t (Operations
                 and Traffi c) enquire into this requirement.

                 Item discharged.

24.2.          R e s e a r c h Document


                The topic within the R e s e a r c h d o c um ent reg ard ing away
                su ppor ter s being     treated     badly  at   f o o tba ll matches
                was   discussed      by   the    members.       Assistant      Chief
                Constab le,   Mr    Davies    sai d   that  supporters      deserved
                to be d ealt w i t h fairly but firmly.

                Item discharged.

24.3.          Foo tb a l l Spect ator s Act       1989


                Th is       item  was   introduced   by       Chief  Superin tend ent
                M c N a l l y w ho in formed the m e m b e r s that this Act was
                now in force and he b r i e f l y o u t l i n e d the implications
  of      Restriction             O rde rs to   South      Yorkshire      Police.
  He said that a court will impose a R e s t r i c t i o n O rder
  on a p e r s o n con vict ed of a s p e c i f i e d offen ce and the
  C l e r k to        the Court will noti fy d i r e c t the Divi sion
  wh ere the          o f f e n d e r resides.    M r M c N a l l y said a Draft
  G e n e r a l O r d e r has been p r o d u c e d and wil l be circulated
  w h e n approved.

  It em discharged.

  Manpower Requirements

  A s s i s t a n t Chi ef Constable, M r Davies then summarised
  the       i m p lic ati ons       of     the   manpower      requirements         for
  m atches.                   He     requested        once     m o r e that     Chief
  Superintendents                 Broomhead       and    Nesbit        look    at   the
  grounds            for      the    Sheffield        Clubs     and       r eport   the
  re q u i r e m e n t s     for    manpower       to   establish          a  policing
  strategy.               W i t h r e f e ren ce to the o t h e r 3 clubs, Mr
  D av ies          requested          that      reports      on        the    mann ing
  r e q u i r e m e n t s be p r o d u c e d for m a t c h e s .categorised into
  low,         medium          and    high      priorities.             T he   manning
  r e q u i r e m e n t s can then be d e t e r m i n e d on a club basis.

and   date    of   the    next     meeting      will    be    c irc ul a t e d   at   a
       TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS - IMPLEMENTATION TEAM MEETING
         TO BE HELD AT 2.30 PM ON WEDNESDAY 20 JUNE 1990
            IN THE LECTURE THEATRE, POLICE HEADQUARTERS




                                   A   G   E    N   D    A




1.   Apologies     for Absence.

2.   M i n utes of P r e v i o u s Meeting.

3.   Matters Arising:

     (a)        Communications:

                 (i)         P e r s o n n e l at Matches       Superintendent Marsh
                 (ii)        Communications Training            Chief Superintendent McNally

     (b)        Charg es     - M a n p o w e r Costs            ACC - Mr Davies

      (c)       Standing I n st ruct ion s for
                P o l i c i n g of Footba ll Matches            Superintendent Greenwood

     (d)        Model O p e r a t i o n a l O r d e r           Superintendent Simpson

      (e)       Football Intelligence:

                 (i)         Divi si o n a l Football
                              Intel lig ence O f f i c e r      Chief Superintendent McNally

                 (ii)        T r a i n i n g of Force and
                              D iv isi o n a l Football
                              I n t e lli genc e Officers       Chief Superintendent McNally

4.   T r a i n i n g of Fo otb all G rou nd Comman ders         Superintendent Marsh

5.   A r r i v a l of Footb all Coaches in              South
      Yorkshire                                                 Superintendent Marsh

6.   Any Other Business

7.   Date and Ven ue of Next M e eti ng




                                 * * * * * * * * * *
                                 SOUTH YO RK S H IR E POLICE
                                                               Ref:            TRG/RMP/JL
    From;      Acting Chief Inspector Purdy                    Station/Dept:   Training
    To:        See Distribution List                           Date:           10 July 1990


            SUBJECT:     MINUTES OF TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION
                         TEAM MEETING



              Please find attached Minutes of the last meeting held at 2.30 pm
              on Wednesday 20 June 1990 in the Lecture Theatre at
              Force Headquarters.
              A time and date for the next meeting will be circulated to you
              in due course.




              Acting Chief Inspector
              Training Department




              DISTRIBUTION LIST:
              Assistant Chief Constable, Operations, Mr Davies
              Chief Superintendent Broomhead, 'D1 Division
              Chief Superintendent Nesbit, 1F 1 Division
              Chief Superintendent McNally, Operations and Traffic
              Superintendent   Greenwood, 'A' Division
              Superintendent   Simpson, *B 1 Division
              Superintendent   Oughton, 'C' Division
              Superintendent   Hale, 1D ‘ Division
              Superintendent   Brookfield, *E * Division
              Superintendent   Sleath, 'F' Division
              Superintendent   Marsh, Operations Division
            / Superintendent   Parker, Computer Development
              Chief Inspector Cooper, 1D ' Division
              Chief Inspector McRobbie, 1F 1 Division
              Chief Inspector Creaser, Computer Development




Gen/2
SOUTH        YORKSHIRE    POLICE                         MINUTE      SHEET


FILE REFERENCE:                                       MINUTE SHEET NO 1

SUBJECT:          TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS   -   IMPLEMENTATION TEAM




Mr Davies, Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)


On   Wednesday 20th    June 1990    a meeting    of the   Taylor
Recommendations Implementation Team took place.     The minutes,
dated 10th July 1990 have recently been circulated.


Item 27.2 refers to Communications matters and raises the
following four points which require comment from this Department:

        1) attendance of communications officers at matches

        2) need for noise reducing radios

        3)   tape recording facilities

        4)   use of a radio ’Command’ channel


I have discussed these points with Commanders at the five
Football League Grounds within the Force. It should be stated at
the outset that their views are personal and, as may be expected,
produce various permutations of the possible options.


Each point is repeated       hereunder with relevant observations from
the Ground Commanders.



1)      COMMUNICATIONS OFFICERS AT MATCHES

        Barnsley      - the facility of a communications
        officer being available at Force Headquarters is of no use;
        however at those particular matches considered in advance
        to be significant, a communnications officer should be
        available at the ground.
Doncaster        - no requirement for communications   officer

Rotherham        - no requirement for communications   officer

Sheffield Utd - telephone advice sufficient, could be
provided by the Headquarters 'match desk1.

Sheffield Wed - realistically what can a
communications man do? - local man should be trained as
to his communications options and which equipment,
switches, cables etc to check.

fin addition to the above I enclose for your information a
report I prepared on 26th February 1990 concerning this
matter (Appendix I), the contents of which I still conside
valid.]




RADIO COMMUNICATIONS 'BACKGROUND' NOISE

Barnsley       - not a major requirement at Barnsley,
noise occurs in Ring Road underpass when fans are
chanting, likewise sometimes within the ground.

Doncaster      - not a problem at Doncaster, previous
experience indicates that any improvements must be
beneficial, earpieces are of benefit.

Rotherham      -noise  cancelling microphones would be
useful in a crowd situation.

Sheffield Utd - any improvement on transmit or receive
facilities would be appreciated.

Sheffield Wed - any improvement on transmit or receive
facilities would be appreciated.




TAPE RECORDING FACILITIES

Barnsley     -    record radio and telephone only.

Doncaster     - difficult to make financial
justification, if any recording it should be confined to
radio and telephone.

Rotherham    -    no requirement for any recording.

Sheffield Utd - there is absolutely no operational reason
for tape recording, the only justification is to provide
evidence to a subsequent enquiry.
     Sheffield Wed - it is an absolute requirement to record
     everything, telephone, radio and conversation within the
     Control Room.



4)    USE OF COMMAND CHANNEL

     Rotherham     - no requirement, firstly use dedicated,
     dual-bayed ground channel, then dual-bayed sub-divisional
     channel and if necessary use Channel 7 (back to back). In
     event of a large match at Rotherham a temporary Command
     Channel may be considered.

      Doncaster    - absolutely no need for a Command Channel
      despite it being a recommendation; if the Force adopts
      the suggestion and agrees that no such channel is required
      this will be acceptable to Doncaster Commander.

      [nb Provision already made for Command Channel at two
      Sheffield grounds & Barnsley].




CONCLUSIONS, FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS


1)    Communications Officers

The   consensus is   that there    is no  requirement for   a
Communications Officer as a matter of routine.     There is a
requirement at 'big' matches - opinion is divided as to where
this officer should be     located, ie at the ground or at
Headquarters.

Towards the end of the 1989/90 football season an arrangement
existed whereby the Superintendent (Operations) had liaison with
the Superintendent (Communications) on a weekly basis to consider
the requirement, if any, for Communications Officers -       this
procedure worked well.

The facility has always existed for Communications staff to be
contacted at home whilst off duty and this will still apply on
those days when there are no Communications Officers on duty.
Not all members of the Department receive the appropriate
telephone allowance. This was examined in 1989 (see Appendix II)
prior to the publication of the Taylor Interim Report and
rejected; in view of the football requirements this should be
reviewed.

Finance - there are no funds available for overtime within the
Communications Section. This work cannot properly be absorbed
without additional staff; the 1989/90 arrangements were managed
by regular overtime from the Football Overtime budget.

Recommendation     -    it is recommended that:

           (i)         a Communications Officer should attend, at the
                       ground, for all B+ (or some other suitable
                       grading mechanism) matches and above.

           (ii)        consideration be given to the employment of an
                       additional radio technician.

           (iii)       a telephone allowance should be paid to those
                       members of the Communications Department likely
                       to be contacted for advice.



2)     Noise Reducing Radios

Very little can be done to permit officers 'on the ground' having
improved audio reception. Earpieces seem to be most appropriate,
a quantity were purchased in 1989 (cost approx twenty pounds
each) and are issued, with radios, for football match purposes.

As far as transmission      from officers 'on the ground' is
concerned, equipment is available which reduces ambient noise
(noise reducing microphones); it is expensive (approx 250 pounds
per radio) and not wholly satisfactory.

Finance - (figures expressed in pounds) a sum of 10K for Crowd
Control Communications was included in the 1990/91 overall
communications budget    submission of 165.9K;     the financial
restrictions have reduced this figure to 40K.          There are
insufficient funds to purchase this equipment this year.

Recommendation - it is recommended that budgetry priovision be
made in the 1991/2 estimates to purchase the required equipment.



3)     Tape Recording

There are conflicting views on the requirement for tape recording
at Football Matches. These range from a requirement to record
everything,   to   recording   nothing, with    an   intermediate
requirement to record just telephone and radio.

Finance - the five year Strategy Plan for the Force has
identified the need for tape recording of radio communications at
Football Grounds (ref 1.42). A cost of 5K has been identified.
This would be for the previously identified requirement of single
track recording equipment. However to record all telephone and
radio communications and conversations within the Control Rooms
would necessitate multi-track equipment of the type used in Force
Operations Room this would be much more expensive.

Recommendation - it     is   recommended that    tape   recording
equipment for radio     communications only be provided; with
consideration of a long term objective to install full recording.



4)     Command Channel

Facilities for a Command    Channel have been made at the    two
Sheffield Clubs and Barnsley.Rotherham and Doncaster do      not
require the facility, the   use of Channel 7 (back to back) is
considered sufficient for a      Command Channel; in respect  of
Doncaster there is a preference for Force policy rather than the
decision being left to the present ground commander.

Finance - temporary facilities could be provided by installing
a base station on each occasion there is a requirement.

Recommendation - it is recommended that policy approval be
given, in respect of the two locations where a Command Channel
does not presently exist, to authorise the use, if appropriate,
of Channel 7 (back to back); this being in leiu of a separate
Command Channel.



Submitted for your information and subsequent consideration by
the Taylor Recommendations Implementation Team, please.


You may wish to consider circulation of this report prior to, and
therefore for discussion at, the next meeting.




Communications & Computer Development
17th July 1990
                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                         REF:
    FROM:   SUPERINTENDENT MARSH                                          OPERATIONS
                                                         STATION/DEPT.:
    TO:     ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE (OPERATIONS)                        27 NOVEMBER 1990
                                                         DATE:

            SUBJECT:
                         TRAINING FOR FOOTBALL GROUND COMMANDERS


            Recommendation 52 of the Final Report of the Inquiry by the Rt Hon Lord
            Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster says:-

            'Consideration should be given to the provision of a specific training
            course for senior officers presently acting as police commanders and
            those in line to do so. Such a course should include training in the
            basic strategy of policing football matches.1

            Operations Division were tasked with looking at this particular item in
            liaison with the Training Department.

            It was established that the Greater Manchester Police had organised a
            number of such courses and Superintendent Oughton attended one of the
            first in order that he could have an input into the South Yorkshire
            discussions.

             For your information a number of other senior officers have since attended
             such a course and it is understood that by the end of the 1 9 9 1 / 9 2
             Football Season all existing Ground Commanders will have attended a
             course at Greater Manchester.

             I am aware■that in addition to these courses you expressed a wish that
             there should be some in-force training for all officers of Chief Inspector
             and above. With this in mind Superintendent Oughton, Chief Inspector
             Purdy and myself submit the following recommendations for consideration:-

             DURATION

            There is always difficulty in getting the same senior officers together
            on two successive days. It is recommended therefore that the course
            is restricted to one day only commencing at 9 .00am and continuing
            perhaps until 7 .00pm.

            FORMAT

            It should take the form of a symposium chaired by either Assistant
            Chief Constable (Operations) or Chief Superintendent, Operations.

            ATTENDANCE

            All officers of Chief Inspector and above to attend. Clearly it will
            be necessary to hold more thfcn one course but it is considered that
            an officer who has attended the national course at GMP should always
            be in attendance.




GEN/2
SYLLABUS

Pre - reading      -        Popplewell,Green Guide and Taylor Reports.


Morning


Discussions on         a) Briefings/debriefings
                       b) Communications
                       c) Match Desk
                       d) Contingency planning/disaster plans
                       e) Crowd Dynamics and density
                       f) Air support
                       g) Progress since Hillsborough


Afternoon


Discussions on         h)  Relationship between club/police/Football
                           league and Football Association. (Club secretary
                           to attend)
                       i) National Football Intelligence Unit
                       j ) Force Intelligence
                       k) CCTV and Still photography.
                           ( a member of the NFIU to be in attendance
                             for the afternoon session)


THEREAFTER


All officers attending the symposium should thereafter attend a
Football League fixture as an observer. It is recommended that
the officers should attend in pairs , places to be allocated by
the Training Department. Whilst at the match the officers should:-

                      i) Attend briefing with Match Commander
                     ii) Visit Control Room
                    iii) Observe police activity at match
                     iv) Debrief.



It   is accepted that it will not be necessary to hold these symposiums
on   a regular basis, indeed it is doubtful whether it would be necessary
to   do so. It would be perhaps pertinent for the Superintendent, Training,
to   monitor the situation and identify when there are sufficient number
of   newly promoted Chief Inspectors and organise a symposium accordingly.
In relation to actual Ground Commanders, it is our agreed perception
that they should act as the 'Trainers' for their successors. Ideally
the successor should attend one of the national courses before taking
up the new post. Thereafter the officer should study and have a full
understanding of the 'Ground Profile' and work alongside his
predecessor on at least two occasions before assuming actual
command himself. Recognising that the latter is not always possible
and that Chief Inspector Deputies are equally qualified then it
is submitted that working with the deputies would suffice.

Once established a Ground Commander may wish to visit one of his
colleagues on match days and have a look at the various problems.


Finally it is recommended that once the Implementation Group is
concluded there should still be meetings between the Ground
Commanders to discuss developments, problems and a general
exchange of information, the meeting being chaired by the Assistant
Chief Constable (Operations). In the past such meetings have been held
twice a year, one in the summer and one midway through the season.
It is submitted that there should always be a pre season meeting
and that a mid season meeting could be held if deemed necessary.


Submitted for consideration




superintendent
                                                SOUTH YO RK S H IR E POLICE
                                                                                Ref:               acc (ops )/hmw

        From:   Assistant Chief Constable,                 Operations         Station/Dept:        Headquarters

        To:     Chief Superintendent Ops &                 Traffic            Date:                22 May 1990




                SUBJECT:             TRAFFIC commissioners guidelines on the arrival of
                                     COACHES AT FOOTBALL MATCHES




                At the last ACPO Sub Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events
                meeting the Traffic Commissioner's Guidelines on the arrival of
                coaches for football matches was discussed.  This requires that
                coaches should not arrive at football grounds more than one hour
                before kick-off. In the light of the Taylor Report every encouragement
                should be given to early arrival to avoid public d i s order.

                Please advise me of the current position in South Yorkshire in relation
                to this position.




                Assistant Chief Constable
                                           .. .




                  Chic-     h J ?:h K h r T h h ) h h f

                  O P i h A ' h Q M S A. TR A ffsC



                                                                                            'TJl
                                                                              «**)^^ JL .
                                                    1,V                 QA

                                                                              Ifky *•!/V
                                                                                            7:       h'



                                                                              /
                 1      ‘


                                                     £ .      L. a / r**

Gen/2
                                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                           Ref:
     From:          S u p e r in t e n d e n t Marsh                                       Station/Dept: Ops
     To:                                                                                   Date:
                    C h ie f S u p e r in t e n d e n t McNally                                               24.5.90


              SUBJECT:                  ARRIVAL OF FOOTBALL COACHES IN SOUTH YORKSHIRE


                    I r e f e r t o t h e a t t a c h e d c o r re s p o n d e n c e from ACC(OPS) i n r e s p e c t o f t h e
                    above.

                    The c u r r g n t p o s i t i o n i n S o u th Y o rk s h ir e i s t h a t t h e F o rc e F o o t b a l l
                    L i a i s o n o f f i c e r , PC 808 R o s e v e a r , w r i t e s t o h i s o p p o s i t e number i n th e
                    f o r c e c o n c e rn e d w ith t h e r e l e v a n t d e t a i l s . The c o r re s p o n d e n c e r e q u e s t s
                    t h a t c o ac h p r o p r i e t o r s be a s k e d t o rendevousa a t a p a r t i c u l a r motorway
                    j u n c t i o n w here t h e y w i l l be met w ith p o l i c e m otor c y c l i s t s . The c o ac h es
                    a r e a s k e d t o a r r i v e a t t h e j u n c t i o n betw een 1 . 30 pm an d 2 . 00 pm and a r e th e n
                    e s c o r t e d d i r e c t t o t h e g ro u n d s . The re n d e v o u z p o i n t s i n S o u th Y o rk sh ire
                    a re :-

                    S h e ffie ld      U n ite d        Ju n c tio n    33 - M1
                    S h e ffie ld      Wednesday        J u n c tio n   36 - M1
                    B a r n s le y                      Ju n c tio n    37 - M1
                    Rotherham          U n ite d        J u n c tio n   3 ^ - M1
                    D o n c a s te r   R overs          J u n c tio n     3 - M18

                    The p r i n c i p l e h a s worked w e ll o v e r t h e y e a r s a n d , due t o t h e e s c o r t sy ste m ,
                    c o a c h e s r a r e l y a r r i v e a t g ro u n d s more th a n one h o u r b e f o r e k i c k o f f .
                    G e n e r a l l y s p e a k in g t h e same p r i n c i p l e i s a p p l i e d when S o u th Y o rk s h ire
                    c o a c h e s go t o away f i x t u r e s , some 90% o f f o o t b a l l g ro u n d s h a v in g
                    re n d e v o u z p o i n t s .




SOUTH YORKS. POUCE

             m    133U

CHIEF SU P E R W 4T I N D E N T
O P E R A ! ONS & TR A FFIC ^




Gen/2
          MINUTES OF THE TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION
        TEAM MEETING HELD AT 2.30 PM ON TUESDAY 27 NOVEMBER 1990
              IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS

PRESENT

M N Davies E sq LLB BA, A s s i s t a n t Chief C ons ta bl e (Operations)              Chairman
Chief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Nesbit
Su p e r i n te nd en ts Hope, Simpson, Oughton, Marsh, Sleath
Chief In sp ec to rs Helliwell, Cooper, Creaser
Inspector T o w ne nd

31/90     Apologies for Absence

          A p o l o gi es for absen ce w e r e r e c e i e v e d on behalf of Chief
          Su pe ri n t e n d e n t McNally, S up er i n t e n d e n t s Brookfield, Greenwood,
          Hale and Parker.

32/90     Minutes of the Previous Meeting

          The m i nu te s of the pre vio us m e e t i n g he ld on 20 June 1990
          wer e a c c e p t e d as a true and a c c ur at e r ec or d of that meeting.

33/90     Matters Arising

33.1      Final R e c o m m e n d a t i o n No 28 - (Previous It em 27.1/90)

          Su pe r i n t e n d e n t M a r s h said that of the stadia w i t h i n South
          Y o r k s hi re on ly the 5 football league grounds, Don V a l l e y
          S t a d i u m and Owle rt on S t a d i u m fall w i t h i n the cri te ri a for
          de si g n a t i o n a nd these either had or we re in the process
          of b eing issued w i t h s afety certificates.

          Item discharged.

33.2      Communications      - Pe rs on ne l at M a tc he s    (Previous Items 19/90
           and 27.2/90)

          Chief Inspector Crea se r i nt rod u c e d this it em and ref er re d
          to his report of 17 Jul y 1990 (copy a t t a ch ed at A p p e n d i x
          A ) . He had a d d r e s s e d 4 issues in his re port of

          1    A t t e n d a n c e of co mm un i c a t i o n s of ficers at matc he s

               It was d e t e r m i n e d that the pres en t s ys te m was fu nctioning
               s a t i s fa ct or il y and s hould c ontinue p e nd in g a r e vi ew
               of the impl ic ati on s of i n st ru ct in g c ivilian officers
               to a ttend football matches.            Action:     Chief Inspector
               Creaser to es ta b l i s h the s taffing imp li cations for civilians
               at tending football matches.

          2    Nee d for Noise R e d u c i n g R e d u c i n g Radio s

               It was su gg es te d that the use of noise ca nc el l i n g microp ho ne s
            m a y be b en ef ic ial and m o n e y for their p urchase was to
            be included in next year's budget.

       3   Tape R e c o r d i n g Facili tie s

           It was app ar en t that each of the G r o u n d C ommanders had
           d i f f e ri ng ideas on tape r e c o r d i n g facili ti es for their
           grounds.        In v i e w of this, the a l t e r n a t i v e s av ailable
           were either no facilities at all or the same facilities
           for all clubs.           The C h a ir ma n r eq ue s t e d wh at the cost
           w o u l d be for the se cond option.             A c t i o n : Chief Inspector
           Creaser to enq ui re wh at the cost w o u l d be to provide
           tape facil it ie s for all clubs.

       4   Use of C o m man d C hannels

           Mr C r ea ser r e p o r t e d that B a r n s l e y and the two Sh ef fi el d
           Clubs p r e s e n t l y had a com ma nd channel but Doncaster and
           R o t h e r h a m did not.    To prov id e a channel for their use
           w o u l d require a p o l i c y dec is io n to be taken.        The Chairman
           acc ep te d this r e c o m m e n d a t i o n and will prog re ss the d ecision
           on policy.

           Item d e f e r r e d p e n d i n g c om pl et io n of actions by Chief
           Inspector Creaser.

33.3       S t a nd in g Inst ru ct io ns for P ol ic i n g of Football Match es
           - (Previous Items 20/90 27.4/90)

           De fe r r e d p e n d i n g outcome of Inquest.

33.4       Foo tb al l   I n t ell ig en ce - (Previous Items      23/90,    27.6/90)

           The C h a ir ma n said that p r e s e n t l y there w e r e officers
           at div is ion s who were a l l o c a t e d the task of being football
           int el li gen ce off ice rs for their p ar ti cu la r football ground.
           Mr Davies a sked the que st io n if there was a need for
           a Force Foo tb al l Inte ll ig en ce Officer.         Each grou nd commander
           stated that they were sa ti s f i e d wit h the present arrangements,
           valuable i n t el li ge nce was comi ng to light and each divisi on al
           football i n t el li gen ce offic er is r e g u l a r l y in contact
           with the Nati ona l Football I n t el li ge nc e Unit.

           The r e c o m m e n d a t i o n for a Ser ge an t Force Football I nte lligence
           Officer h ad been inc lu ded in the re port by Su pe ri nt en de nt
           B r oo kf i e l d but fil li ng the post w as d e f e r r e d due to the
           lack of finance.               As the pres en t i n t e ll ig en ce s ystem
           was o p e r at in g e f f i c i e n t l y at di vi si o n a l level the C hairman
           stated this post was no longer required.

           Item discharged.
33.5    T r a i n i n g of F ootball G r o u n d Co mm an d e r s   (Previous Item
        28/90)

        Su pe ri n t e n d e n t M a r s h i n f or me d those pre se nt that by the
        end of the 1991/92 fo otball season all e x i s t i n g g round
        commanders wi ll have a t t e n d e d the cour se at Grat er Manchester.
        Mr M a r s h al so e x p l a i n e d that an In F orce t r a i ni ng sy mp os iu m
        had been d e v e l o p e d for all off ic er s of Chief Inspector
        rank and above.              The pr op os al s for this additio na l tra ini ng
        are inc lu de d in Mr M a r s h ' s report d a t e d 27 No vember 1990
        wh ic h is a t t ac hed at A p p e n d i x B and it is i ntended that
        the a rr an g e m e n t s for the symposiums will be co nt rol le d
        by the Force T r a i ni ng Department.

        The Chai rma n a c c e pt ed the r eport and r e q u e st ed that Chief
        Inspector Pu rd y co mm en ce a t r a in in g programme.

        Item discharged.

34/90   CCTV at Sports Ground

        Chief Inspector Creas er r e p o rt ed that the ques ti on of
        CCTV video tape r e t e n t i o n had been co ns id e r e d by Su pe ri nt en de nt
        Parker.     He had r e c o m m e n d e d that vi de o tapes be reta in ed
        for just 3 month s and that a central pool of tapes can
        then be c r ea te d from those tapes r e l e a s e d by the reduc ed
        r e te ntion period.

        S u p e r in te nd en t Simps on said that A C P O Gu id e l i n e s r ec om me nd ed
        retention for 12 m on th s or until the same fixture the
        fol lowing year.          The m at te r was d i s c u s s e d and the Chai rm an
        d e f er re d a deci si on to the next m e e t i n g to a l l o w the
        ACPO Gu id e l i n e s to be consulted.

        Item deferred.

35/90   Charges for Football Matches

        The Cha irm an info rm ed those p r e s en t that Mr Fox, the
        Pr esident of the Footb al l League, had r e f e rr ed in a letter
        to the Home Secretary, Mr W a d d i n g t o n QC MP of the Police
        A u th ori ty 's intention to recover i n c r ea se d football charges.
        The letter stated that some of the smaller clubs could
        not a fford the i n c r e as ed charges.     Mr Davies said that
        the Police A u t h o r i t y had n o w taken one step back and
        de fe rr ed the deci si on to recover full econo mic al costs
        over the nex t 5 years.

        Mr Simpson r e f e rr ed to a test im oni al m atc h th at was to
        be playe d at Barnsley.            He said that Mr Spinks had stated
        that the C l u b r e q u i r e d p o l i ci ng at no cost and should
        the police ask for too high a charge then the club w ou ld
        pub li sh the amount in the press.               This issue and the
        fact that B a r ns ley had not signed their statement of
intent was cause for conc er n and r e q u i r e d further consideration.
The Cha ir ma n said that he w o u l d disc us s the m a t t e r with
the Chief C o n s ta bl e a nd r ep or t later on the appr op ri at e
a c ti on to be taken.

Item discharged.

Any Other Business

P h o t o g r a p h i n g Persons E j e c t e d from Foot ba ll Matches

The above subject was r a is ed by Su pe ri n t e n d e n t Simpson.
He said that PACE did not give a u t h o r i t y for photog ra ph s
to be taken.        The m a t t e r was d i s c u s s e d and an incident
q u ot ed wh er e a p h o t o g r a p h of a p e rs on e j e c t e d as sis te d
in the d e t e c ti on of a crime.           P h o to gr ap hs w e r e also
of value to the di vis i o n a l football i n te ll ig en ce officer.

The Chai rma n st ated that p h ot og ra ph s           should continue
to be taken.

Item discharged.

Change of Meeting Title

The Chai rma n said that u si ng the title 'Taylor Re co mm e n d a t i o n
I m pl em en ta ti on Te am M e e t i n g 1 no longer r e p r e s e n t e d the
intentions of the meeting.                 He s u g g e st ed that a more
me an in gf ul title w o u l d be 'Football M a t c h C o m m a nd er Meeting'.
M e mb er s a g r e e d the m e e t i n g should continue to be held
and Mr Davies said that the next C on fe r e n c e w o u l d be
co nvened towards the end of this football season when
the fr eq u e n c y for future meet in gs wil l be determined.

Overtime

The Chairman r ai se d the aspect of ov er ti me costs and
the rais in g of m a n p o w e r for football matches.                   He said
there was a n e e d to r e s ea rc h the w h o l e subject of overtime
a nd make r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s for r e d u c i n g the amo un ts claimed.
Mr Davies r e q u e s t e d S up er i n t e n d e n t M a r s h to r e v i e w overtime
and report back with r eco m m e n d a t i o n s for r e d u c i n g the
ov ertime costs across the Force.

Mr Davies further r e q u e s t e d that S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M arsh
r e vi ew the subject of p a ck ed lunches for o fficers w o r k in g
football matches.

A c t i o n : Su pe r i n t e n d e n t M a r s h to r e v i e w o vertime costs
and pa cked lunches for football matches.

Time, Venue and Date of next meeting

The next m e e t i n g of the new ly titl ed Fo otball M a t c h G round
Comma nd er s M e e t i n g will be held at 2.30 pm on Thursday-
23 M a y 1991 in the C o n f e r e n c e R o o m at Police Headquarters.

The m e e t i n g c l o se d at 4.00 pm.
                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                       Ref:                   ACC (OPS )/HMF

From:   PS Milner,     A SO                                                            Station/Dept:          He ad quarters

To      See B e lo w                                                                   Date:                  10 Janua ry 1991




        SUBJECT:        T A YL OR R E C O M M E N D A T I O N S   I MP LE M E N T A T I O N T E A M M E E T IN G




        Please find       at ta c h e d    the     m i nu te s     of    the     last      Im pl eme nt at io n    Team
        meeting.

        The next m e e t i n g of this C o n f e r e n c e will be                       held at 2.30 pm on
        T hursday 23 May 1991 and its title has been                                     changed to Football
        Match G r o u n d C om ma nd ers meeting.




        ASU


         To    Chief Su pe ri n t e n d e n t s B r o o m h e a d & M c Na ll y
               S u pe ri n t e n d e n t s Greenwood, Simpson, Oughton, Hale, Brookfield,
               Sleath, Marsh and Parker
               Chief Inspectors Cooper, McRobbie, Crea se r and Purdy
