1.r
                                                                     4U-V


      IAN SHAW, 44 YEARS (          ) CHIEF INSPECTOR

      OPERATIONS & TRAFFIC DIVISION (TRAFFIC NORTH)



      DUTIES RELATING TO THE F.A. CUP SEMI-FINAL AT HILLSBOROUGH

      ON SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989



      0800 hrs    On duty at the Road Traffic Office,

                  Main Street, Rotherham.



      0810        10/1 Call sign GH V 2 .   Using Ford Granada

                 patrol car Reg. No. E 202 CHK.       Travelled to

                 Woodall Post (Ml).



      0830       Woodall Post - Briefed all car patrol

                 personnel involved on routes in the northern

                  sector (primary routes for Liverpool fans)



      0915       Resumed patrol from Woodall.



      10 0 0     Woolley Edge Services (Ml - West Yorkshire)

                 Liaised with Service area manager, Mr,

                 regarding the provision of a substantial meal

                 for approximately 16 Police personnel to be

                 taken at 1515 hours.




      Chi
                       .
                                                      &0K 444




            Also liaised with West Yorkshire Police regarding

            their Public Order cover for Woolley Edge.

            Spoke with Inspector Bunting (West Yorkshire

            R.T.) who informed me that the bulk of their

            manpower had been deployed on the M62 at Hartshead

            but there was a response capability for Woolley

            Edge (from Wakefield) if required.



            I then informed MB11 and MA21 to extend their

            patrol area to include Woolley Services to provide

            increased Police presence to prevent possible

             trouble by Liverpool supporters



1115 hrs     Resumed from Woolley.     Supervision of primary

             routes for Liverpool supporters Ml, A616,

             A616 (T) and A61.   Traffic flow at this stage

             moderate - no reported problems in the northern

             sector.



             I travelled south to J.33 (Catcliffe) and

             met with GHX1 (Supt. Brougham) and GHVl

             (Chief Insp. Lax) to advise them that routes

             for Liverpool fans were coping adequately and,

             if they wished, the use of J.35 (Thorpe Hesley)

            ^? ould be used by Nottingham Forest supporters



unierinsp


                             -   2 -
to relieve pressure on Junction 33 and 34



Travelled Ml north to Junction 36 (Tankersley)

and A61 towards Sheffield.     Met with Inspector*

Athorn i/c P.S.U.   (Serial No. not known) who

was carrying out random checking of coaches

and mini buses etc (Liverpool Supporters)

for alcohol.   The checks were being conducted

in a lay-by on the A61 at Tankersley but because

of the random nature of the checks, this was

not causing any undue delay to the traffic

flow.   I asked Inspector Athorn to continue

to ensure that his operation did not adversely

affect the flow of traffic..



I noted that a small amount of alcohol (mainly

beer c a n s ) had already been discovered.*



Whilst at this location I noticed that several

coaches carrying Liverpool Supporters were

displaying stickers in the windscreen with the

words   'Nottingham Forest'.    One driver I spoke

to was unsure of the reason for this other than

it had been placed there by the Operator when

 iesignating particular vehicles for a particular
           journey. Believing this may cause confusion when

           trying to ensure segregation of fans, I informed

           Operations and patrols were instructed to stop

           and ask coach drivers to remove them.



1300 hrs   Junction of A61 and A616 (T) at High Green
to
1330 hrs   Traffic carrying Liverpool fans inbound

           appeared to be at its heaviest.     Diversion

           implemented to relieve congestion inbound

           on the A61 by re-directing Liverpool traffic

           back along the A616 (T) Stocksbridge by-pass

           to leave at Deepcar - thereby joining the old

           A616 to travel into Hillsborough.     This diversion

           only being necessary for a short period of time

           until traffic on the A61 subsided.



1400 hrs   Inbound Liverpool traffic reduced to a trickle.

           Very quiet on all routes - no reported problems.



1430 hrs   Woolley Edge Services.   No Liverpool supporters

           seen travelling south on Ml at this time.



1430 hrs   Woolley Edge - Instructed MBll to take early




                         -   4 -
    1 4 4 5 hrs     Conferred by radio with GBI1 (Inspector

                     Brown)

                     Q.   "Do you know of any problems which could

                          affect our earlier decision to meal the

                          majority of our personnel at 1515 hrs?"



                     A.   No - in fact it is so quiet we could meal

                          now."



                     I replied - "No - we will stick with our

                     original intention to meal after kick-off

                     at 1515 h r s ."



    1500 hrs        Tankersley(J 3 6 ) with MB21.   Very quiet -

                     normal traffic only.



    1506 hrs        Dodworth Ml north bound (on route to Woolley

                     for meal).     Heard over radio the first

                     indications of the problems at Hillsborough.

                     First heard calls for dog patrols,    then

                     ambulances, followed shortly by'Operation

                     Support' - all mobiles directed to Hillsborough.



    1525 hrs        Arrived Leppings Lane.     Directed two traffic

                     mobiles to each end of Leppings Lane to

                  ^ > c l o s e off access to all but essential emergency


V
traffic.     I was not exactly aware at this stage,

what had occurred but from information gleaned

believed that a barrier had failed causing a

number of crush injuries.



Chief Inspector McRobbie who had just left

the ground at the Leppings Lane end, asked

for urgent transport to F D.H.Q. at Hammerton

Road which I completed, then returned to

Lepp in gs Lane.



Leppings Lane.     A large number of supporters

emerging from the ground into Leppings Lane.

Many appeared dazed and shocked but a large

number were displaying verbal hostility towards

myself and the other Police Officers in the

vicinit y.



I continued for short while to try and clear

the road by using the vehicles Public Address

System and asked WH1 (Inspector Cooper) to

assist the best he could.      I then instructed

M C I 2 (P.C. 1906/1217) to continue the P.A.

 duty I had begun but to be aware of the

 hostility being shown.
Approx     Attended at the Road Traffic Office, Clay Wheels
1600 hrs
           Lane and met GHX1 (Supt. Brougham) and was

           instructed to remain there to assist in the

           deployment of Traffic personnel onto various

           routes.   The match had been abandoned and traffic

           was leaving Sheffield.



           Separate telephone and radio logs were kept

           at Claywheels Lane regarding deployment and

           other actions taken.



           By the early evening we were receiving Divisional        1

           Personnelwho had been performing duty inside the

           ground and were congregating at Claywheels Lane

           prior to returning to their Divisions.     Our actions

           at this stage were concentrated on providing

           reception facilities     (hot drinks, refreshments,

           quiet seated areas and counselling if required)

           for these officers - many of whom appeared shocked

           and traumatised.



           Latterly transport arrangements were made and officers

           were returned to their respective Divisions to be

           stood down.
.V                                                       ({(pfP




     2030 hrs   Returned to 'C' D.H.Q.   (R.T. Office)



     2130 hrs   Stood down - retired from duty.
