                  HILLSBOROUGH

       OUTLINE OF PROSPECTIVE ACTION - FAMILIES


                        INDEX




CATEGORY 1   :       JUDICIAL REVIEW OF HOME SECRETARY’S
                      DECISION TO TAKE NO FURTHER ACTION.

CATEGORY 2   :       PRIVATE PROSECUTION

CATEGORY 3   :       REFERENCE TO

                          EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS,
                          STRASBOURG

                          EU RO PEA N COU RT   OF   JU STIC E,
                          LUXEMBOURG
             JUDICIAL REVIEW OF HOME SECRETARY’S DECISION
                      TO TAKE NO FURTHER ACTION.



On 18th February 1998, the Home Secretary, Mr Jack Straw, published the report of the
Hillsborough Scrutiny carried out by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

On that day in Parliament Mr Straw outlined the findings of the Scrutiny, the main
conclusions being

       The conclusions of the Taylor Report are still valid, and therefore there is no basis
       for a further public inquiry.

       There is no basis for a renewed application to quash the verdict of the Inquest.

       There is no material which is new to the DPP or the disciplinary authority which
       might cause them to reconsider the decisions they have already taken (i.e. not to
       prosecute, not to discipline).

       None of the evidence which the Scrutiny was asked to consider added anything
       significant to the evidence available the Lord Taylor’s Inquiry on the Inquest.

The Home Secretary announced that the government accepted the recommendations.

Accordingly, in strict terms, this arguably constitutes a "decision" in the context of public
law and is therefore amenable to Judicial Review. The relevant aspects in consideration of
this course of action follows:-

A Decision:
A review will only relate to the process by means of which the decision was taken, it will
not relate to the decision itself. It would seem self evident that the Home Secretary has taken
account of all relevant circumstances given the considerable body of review, and the fact that
he had appointed the Scrutiny himself. It would seem unarguable that the Government’s
acceptance of the Report’s recommendations is in the circumstances entirely reasonable.

Time Limits:
A challenge would have to be commenced by initially making an application for leave before
a Judge of the High Court. This is required to be made "promptly and in any event within
3 months from the date when the grounds for the application first arose" i.e., from 18th
February 1998.

                                                         Supreme Court Rules Order 53 Rule 4

Process:
The application for leave is normally made ex parte (on the written application of one party)
and the matter is allowed to proceed if the Court is satisfied that there is a case fit for further
investigation at a full hearing. It must be doubtful whether even at this first hurdle that
standard could be met in this context.

If leave to apply is given the matter proceeds as an action between the applicant families, and
presumably the Home Secretary (whose decision it is which is being challenged). In so far
as the rights of any individual police officers are concerned, presumably they would clearly
be "a proper person to be heard" and be able to take part in the proceedings.

The hearing is by way of Affidavit evidence submitted on behalf of all relevant parties and
then argued by Counsel before a Judge of the High Court. It cannot be emphasised too much
that Judicial Review is concerned with consideration of the decision making process itself,
not the merits of the decision.

As the Home Secretary’s decision is clearly one of discretion, and based entirely upon the
findings of the Scrutiny which he himself had appointed, there seems little or no opportunity
to argue with any force that the decision was unreasonable.

It seems clear that an attack of the Home Secretary’s adoption of the Stuart-Smith Scrutiny
report, resulting in no formal action being taken by way of prosecution or discipline against
any police officers and no new inquiry or inquest being called, would not be an appropriate
challenge and it is hard to see that the families would receive advice to spend money on this
process. This form of review, not surprisingly, has not received any publicity since the
Home Secretary’s announcement and it would appear unlikely that this action will be
pursued.
                                PRIVATE PROSECUTION


The following outline is given on the basis of a number of assumptions.

The most likely form of any private prosecution, given the public statements made by the
families, is that of manslaughter against Ex-Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

Without reviewing the evidence of PC Bichard (now PS Bichard) in detail, it would not seem
likely that the considerable expense and effort that is required for a private prosecution would
be directed towards him, but rather towards the most senior officer on duty. In any event the
procedural comments regarding the private prosecution for manslaughter generally stand for
lesser offences, (although consideration needs to be given to variations for non-indictable
offences).

Private prosecution is an extremely unusual and potentially expensive procedure which could
not be commenced without very serious consideration of all relevant factors.

It should be understood that a private prosecution for manslaughter does not require any prior
consent by a law officer such as the Attorney General or the DPP. Accordingly, the
instigation of this process is entirely a matter for the families and, one would expect, this
will largely depend upon the force of the legal advice obtained and the resources available.
The enthusiasm for such action seems self evident, but this procedure has apparently been
under consideration for almost two years, if not since the original decision not to prosecute
was taken. One might therefore query whether the public statements made by the families
truly reflects their real intent. The most recent publicity (see Guardian 2.3.98) suggests
consideration of action being pursued against Sheffield Wednesday F.C. The article casts
doubt on the families bringing private prosecution on the basis that there seems "little
likelihood of these making much progress as a public prosecution was dropped at the time
on the independent advice of two Counsel that there was insufficient evidence."

1.     Right to Commence a Private Prosecution

       The right of private prosecution of any criminal proceedings exists except where the
       Director of Public Prosecution is under a duty to take over the conduct of the
       proceedings.
                                             Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 Section 6(1)

       The Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 sets out the duties and powers of the DPP.

       Section 3(2)(b) makes it a duty of the DPP to institute and have the conduct of
       criminal proceedings in any case where it appears to him that -

       (i)            the importance or difficulty of the case makes it appropriate that the
                       proceedings should be instituted by him;
                       or
       (ii)           it is otherwise appropriate for proceedings to be instituted by him.
Where the DPP decides not prosecute in such circumstances, it is clearly open to a
member of the public to institute proceedings. This was made clear by a decision of
the High Court in Judicial Review proceedings arising out of the Marchioness
disaster, when the husband of one of the victims brought a private prosecution for
manslaughter against the owners of the Marchioness and 4 of its employees.
Notwithstanding a decision by the DPP not to prosecute, the High Court held that
private prosecutions were not precluded (nb: the families brought a private
prosecution for corporate manslaughter which was ultimately unsuccessful).

                       R v Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate & Another. Ex Parte
                         South Coast Shipping Co.Ltd & Others T19931 All ER 219

Commencement of a Private Prosecution

Laving of Information:
A member of the public can lay an Information before a Justice of the Peace, that any
person has or is suspected of having committed an offence. Factors relevant to
geographical jurisdiction include where the offence was suspected to have been
committed, where the person charged resides. In this case it would seem appropriate
to lay an Information before the relevant Sheffield Justice.

                                               Magistrates Court Act 1980 Section 1

Form & Issue Made
The application is normally made, ex parte, before a Justice in the statutory form.
This is likely to be made before a Stipendiary Magistrate in a closed Court application
(as in the Stephen Lawrence case).

If an application is made for a Warrant of Arrest to be issued then the Information
must be in writing and substantiated on oath. This is only appropriate for indictable
offences and not where the Summons would be as effective, except when the charge
is of a serious nature (nb: warrants were issued in Lawrence, the charge being
murder). The issue of a Warrant might be requested in the case of a prosecution of
Mr Duckenfield.

The Justice must apply his mind to the Information and go through the judicial
exercise of deciding whether or not a Summons ought to be issued.

                                      Magistrates Court (Forms) Rules 1981 Part IX
The Justice will be concerned to establish:

(a)    that the Information discloses an offence known to law (self-evident).
(b)    that he has territorial jurisdiction to act, (likely to be Sheffield - see above)
(c)    that the date of the alleged offence is within any limitation period, (no
        limitation for manslaughter as an indictable offence), and
(d)    that any necessary consents have been obtained (No consent is required for
        manslaughter)

When considering an application for the issue of a Summons by a private prosecution
the Justice is required to have regard to all the relevant circumstances of the case,
including whether the DPP can, and may, take over the case.

                  R v Tower Bridge Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrates. Ex Parte
                                                   Chaudhrv f 19941 1 All ER 44.

The Magistrate has the power to hear a potential defendant but the defendant has no
right to be heard.

The decision to issue a Summons in response to Information laid is amenable to
Judicial Review, by a person interested (such as any police officer affected), and
therefore the process can be challenged initially at this point on a procedural ground.
Given the principle that the Justice merely has to be satisfied that there is a "proper
case to issue process", provided there is sufficient detail on the Information, it may
not be advisable to pursue review at this stage on a technicality. The substantial
nature of the charges are not likely to be argued in this context (see for example the
approach in R v Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate & Another. Ex Parte South Coast
Shipping Company Limited & Others \ 19931 1 All ER 219).

Delay & Publicity
These aspects are particularly relevant in the Hillsborough context, but the decision
in the Marchioness review does not support a strong case to resist proceedings on
these bases.

Service
The Summons so issued is then to be served within a reasonable time before the
hearing, and can either be delivered personally, by leaving it at the defendant’s usual
abode, or by posting to his last known or usual place of abode.

                                               Magistrates Court Rules 1981 Rule 99

Subject to proper service, and in the event that the issue of the Summons is not
reviewed, the defendant will attend at the appointed hearing date. A Magistrates
Court may adjourn any hearing, and for an indictable offence will usually remand the
accused in custody or on bail.
3.   Appearance in Response to Summons/Committal

     Manslaughter is an offence by reason of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861
     Section 5 . As an indictable offence, a trial must be in the Crown Court and,
     accordingly, examining Justices before whom the accused attends have a right to
     inquire, having considered the evidence and any statement of the accused, as to
     whether there is sufficient evidence to put the accused on trial bv jury. This requires
     that a prima facie, or an arguable case is made out against him. (NB: Any function
     of two Justices can be exercised by a Stipendiary Magistrate alone.)

     Two types of committal are available :-

     Paper Committal:              Where in effect there is no consideration of the contents
     of statements and the case is committed in a virtually administrative fashion. Written
     statements on behalf of the prosecution are only available if the defence does not
     object.

     Old Style Committal:         This involves the hearing of evidence written down and
     signed by the witnesses.

     In the event that Committal Proceedings are reached, consideration would need to be
     given to the appropriate form of hearing.

     Given the history of this matter, and the breadth of evidence, it is most likely that an
     Old Style Committal would take place (such as with Stephen Lawrence, over 4
     weeks). Where the examining Justices refuse to commit for trial, an application can
     be made by the families to a Judge of the High Court for consent to prefer a Bill of
     Indictment.

                 Administration o f Justice (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1933 Section 2

     This of course is not the usual means of bringing a defendant to trial on indictment.
     The potential defendant would have no right to be heard or make representations to
     the High Court, but in exceptional circumstances the Judge may request submissions
     on his behalf. The direction of the High Court Judge for the preferment of such
     course of action should be granted only if a good reason exists to depart from the
     normal procedure, and only where the interests of justice runs and administrative
     convenience require it.
                                             Practice Direction (1991) 92CR APP. R146

     The technical avenue is open therefore for the families to make an application to the
     High Court even if a case is thrown out at committal proceedings (and to appeal to
     the Court of Appeal should the High Court refuse). One would doubt that this course
     of action is recommended. The chances of the High Court invoking the procedure
     would seem very slim - it would be hard to see on what basis there should be a
     departure from the normal procedure or that the interests of justice would be served
     by that process.


                                            7
Bail
When the defendant attends the Magistrates Court initially to answer to the original
Summons, he will be required to be remanded either in custody or on Bail. There
is a fundamental right to Bail, and given the circumstances of this case, it would seem
likely that Bail would be granted notwithstanding the seriousness of the offence.
                                                           Bail Act 1976 C Schedule 1
Place of Trial
In the event the accused is committed for trial, the Justices are required to specify the
place of trial having regard to the convenience of the defence, the prosecution and
other witnesses, the exposition of the trial and the directions of the Lord Chief
Justice.
                                                                   T19951 2 All ER 900

The most convenient location is likely to be the closest location to the events in
question where a High Court Judge sits. That is Sheffield.

DPPs Power of Intervention

Right to intervene and discontinue.

The DPP may take over any private prosecution at any time, even if it relates to a
matter in which he has previously decided not to prosecute.
                                    Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 Section 6(2)

                                                                    R v Bow Street
It is clear that in such circumstances the DPP may then decide either to:-
         proceed with the prosecution
         discontinue the prosecution

                                      Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 Section 23(3)

        decline to offer evidence
        withdraw the case

(NB: For indictable matters the Attorney-General may stay proceedings by entering
a NOLLE PROSEQUI. This is generally relevant only to cases where the Defendant
cannot plead or for reasons of incapacity cannot stand trial. It is unlikely to be
relevant in the present circumstances).
The opportunity for discontinuance exists in the preliminary stages of the proceedings
that is, up until committal for trial.

Judicial Review of DPP
On balance it may seem likely that the DPP would intervene to take over and
discontinue the conduct of any private prosecution commenced, say for manslaughter,
given the previous decision not to prosecute, and the fact that the recent Scrutiny has
tended to confirm that decision (although not expressly doing so). However, the
present DPP is on record as defending the CPS principle of not intervening in private
prosecutions (see transcript The Times 15.9.95).

The passage of time, now 9 years since the events in question, is relevant in this
context. The fact that there has been so much media coverage of the events is also
relevant.   These factors may result in the DPP considering intervention and
discontinuance of the prosecution.

In the event that the DPP takes such action, whether by formal discontinuance, or
offering no evidence, any such decision would arguably be amenable to Judicial
Review in the High Court. There is a clear authority for review of an initial decision
of the DPP not to prosecute and it is logical to apply the same principles to a
subsequent decision not to proceed once having taken over a private prosecution.
Any such review effectively focuses on the process of any DPP decision rather than
the merits of it.

                                      See R -v- DPP Ex P. C 119951 1C APP. R136

In consideration of the reasonableness of the D PP’s decision, reference must be made
to all relevant factors in taking that decision. The power to take over a private
prosecution and offer no evidence is to be exercised rarely, and only in exceptional
cases such as where the public interest requires.
                                            Turner v DPP (1979) 68 CR. APP. R.70

The parties to the review would be the applicant families and the DPP as the First
Respondent, with the accused having sufficient interest to be heard and represented.
(See pages 1 + 2 for procedural points on Judicial Review).

The Court would decide the issue on Affidavit evidence and, accordingly, the DPP
would be required to swear on oath as to the matters leading up to the final decision
not to prosecute. This is bound to encompass the original considerations leading to
the 1990 decision not to prosecute, as well as relevant events since that time. The
application of the Code of Crown Prosecutors, (revised 1994) in this decision will be
relevant. The Code provides for two basic tests

(i)    Evidential

       This is an objective test to establish as to "whether there is enough to evidence
       to provide a realistic prospect of conviction against each defendant on each
       charge". That is where "a Jury....properly directed in accordance with the
       law, is more likely than not to convict the defendant of the charge alleged".
         This is a very high standard (for instance, higher than that required for a
       committal).

       If it is not so satisfied then a prosecution cannot proceed. If the test is
       satisfied the DPP then must go on to consider the second test:-

(ii)   Public Interest Test
This is a balancing of a number of factors for and against prosecution.

Judicial Review of a DPP decision not to prosecute means that the application
of the Code, and its role in the D PP’s decision, would have to be examined
closely. This effectively means that both the evidence and the public interest
considerations would need to be canvassed at length. Given the unusual
history arising from Hillsborough, and the number of hearings when evidence
has been taken, one would expect that the applicant would try to show that
there is, firstly, sufficient material to satisfy the evidential test, and, reference
would be made to the findings of Lord Justice Taylor. With regard to the
Public Interest Test, the applicants are bound to say that manslaughter is of
course a serious charge, and as the offence was allegedly committed by
someone in authority, it is entirely appropriate that a prosecution should take
place in terms of justice being seen to be done.

In considering how such a hearing might proceed, and the likely outcome, it
is crucially important to keep in mind the fact that it is the process being
inquired into. The main grounds for Judicial Review are:

        want of or excessive jurisdiction: there can be no question that the
        DPP has jurisdiction in this case.
        where there is an error of law in the face of the record: this relates to
        more technical aspects and does not seem applicable here.
        failure to comply with the rules of natural justice: this generally relates
        to the opportunity to be heard, and a fair hearing and would not seem
        relevant here.
        the Wednesburv principle: where it is alleged that no such a body
        properly directing itself on the law and acting reasonably could have
        reached the decision that the DPP did.

It would seem that the only basis for an application for Judicial Review would
be the Wednesbury unreasonableness principle, and it is likely that this
question would be considered by reference to the weight of evidence and from
the applicant’s point of view, heavily relying upon Lord Justice Taylor’s
conclusions.

It is interesting to observe that the families did not choose to challenge the
original decision in 1990, and one can anticipate that legal advice given to the
families will highlight the difficulty in meeting this criteria. In advance of
seeing the evidence of the DPP however, we need to be cautious about
forming a view as to the likelihood of a successful Judicial Review
application. The process itself would at least avail the families of the
opportunity to get behind the D PP’s original decision, and any subsequent
decision in the event that she takes over the proceedings and discontinues
them. Such review is likely to be lengthy, involving considerable paperwork
and on the basis of the present information not likely to succeed assuming the
DPP follows proper procedures and applies the Code fairly, and the decision
       is not perverse.


       This view however would need to be considered once Affidavit evidence is
       finalised. It is of course important to remember that if any successful
       challenge is made by the families, against such a DPP decision, it is likely
       that the High Court would merely refer the matter back to the DPP to follow
       the proper process. The High Court will not direct the DPP as to what
       decisions she should take, but merely require her to reconsider the matter in
       accordance with proper principles. This by no means guarantees that a
       prosecution would follow and in fact the opposite seems likely. The end
       result for the family may be that they have more information as to the
       decisions taken but, in the end, the result is that they are unable to change
       them.

Crown Court Trial

On the assumption that a private prosecution is instigated, and not discontinued for
any of the reasons referred to above, the trial of Mr Duckenfield would be most
likely to take place in Sheffield at the Crown Court.

In the context of Hillsborough, the question to be decided would be whether Mr
Duckenfield was grossly negligent in the conduct of his duty on the day of the match.


The law relating to this concept was recently reviewed in two decisions, firstly before
the Court of Appeal and secondly, before the House of Lords.

                             R v Holloway. R v Adomako, R v Prentice & Sullman
                                                      f 19931 4 Med Ed LR 303

                                                     R v Adomako T19941 All ER 79

In simple terms the constituent parts required for a conviction of involuntary
manslaughter are:

       Existence of a duty; self-evident

       Breach of that duty; likely

       Whether such a breach "caused" the death of the victim; a matter of
       considerable debate considering the various causes.         It needs to be
       remembered that what is required is that the particular breach of duty was a
       substantial cause, not the substantial cause.

       Whether such a breach could be characterised as gross negligence, depending
       on the seriousness of the breach in all the circumstances in which the
       defendant was placed; this is where the real burden of any prosecution lies in
       this context.


The Court of Appeal held that proof of any of the following states of mind in the
defendant would properly lead a jury to make a finding of gross negligence:

(a)    Indifference to an obvious risk of injury to health;

(b)    Actual foresight of the risk coupled with the determination nevertheless to run
       the risk;

(c)    An appreciation of the risk coupled with an intention to avoid it but also
       coupled with such a high degree of negligence in the attempt to avoid the risk
       that the Jury considers conviction justified.

(d)    Intentional failure to avert a serious risk which went beyond "mere
        inadvertence" in respect of an obvious and important matter which the
        defendant’s duty demanded.

It is clear that excuses or mitigating circumstances are relevant in considering whether
the necessary higher degree of gross negligence had been established. This seems
particularly relevant in the circumstances of Hillsborough. It is clearly acknowledged
that the gross negligence test is an extremely high standard to meet particularly as the
jury would have be to sure, that is, find the case proved beyond reasonable doubt.
Assuming that similar evidence to that heard by the Taylor inquiry would be led at
the criminal trial, the finding of L.J. Taylor most relevant is:

       "It should have been clear in the control room where there was a view
       of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to be
       closed. If orders had been given to that effect when Gate C was open
       all of the fans could have been directed to the empty areas of the
       wings and this disaster could still have been avoided. Failure to give
       that order was a blunder of the first magnitude".

                                                              Interim Report Para 231

The aspects of Mr Duckenfield’s behaviour which might attract a charge can be split
into two likely strands:

1.     The decision to open the gates and the crowding in the pens, and

2.     The response to the crowding, the public disorder perception as against the
       need for rescue.


In the context of the gate opening and overcrowding in the pens, therefore, the
language of Lord Justice Taylor might well be argued to be consistent with the
criminal standard of gross negligence. This is certainly what the families seem to
believe. Lord Justice Taylor of course was not concerned with considerations of
criminal or civil liability but his findings were clear, the language forceful. The issue
of the response to the overcrowding is perhaps more complicated in terms of
information available, ideal response times, and the involvement of other parties.
Lord Taylor’s comments on this aspect, in terms of the police involvement, appear
more observational than explicitly critical. The argument for this strand to be
considered criminal behaviour is clearly of less force than that relating to the gate
opening issue.

It is self evident from the decisions that have been taken so far i.e by the DPP, who
has considered the evidence in detail in terms of a criminal prosecution, that a
prosecution is not likely to succeed. The present comments are made however
without detailed consideration of all the evidence that might be led at a criminal trial
but there is no reason in the light of the recent material and Scrutiny to consider that
a private prosecution of Mr Duckenfield would succeed. Private prosecutions are
extremely unusual, and the circumstances of Hillsborough, being as complex as they
are, tend to make proof of the criminal standard particularly difficult. Whilst,
therefore, we think that the families might be successful in instigating a private
prosecution, in other words showing that there is an arguable case, we think it
unlikely that such prosecution would succeed and therefore that Mr Duckenfield be
convicted on a charge of gross negligence/manslaughter.

Sentence
There is a wide discretion for the sentence to be handed down for such a conviction
and the range of sentences can vary from life imprisonment to a suspended prison
sentence. A life sentence is to be imposed where public protection is required.

Because of the particular nature of the circumstances leading to any charge regarding
police duties, in the unlikely event of a conviction, it would not seem that any proper
objective could be achieved by a prison sentence. There is clearly no element of
deterrence and the considerable personal anguish experienced by the police officers
involved in Hillsborough from any point of view may be considered sufficient
punishment to this date. Certainly these points could be argued very forcefully in
mitigation on behalf of Mr Duckenfield. Considerations of rehabilitation would also
be irrelevant. In the circumstances a suspended sentence would hopefully be the
outcome.

Costs

The Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 makes provision for the payment of costs from
Central Funds in prescribed circumstances for defendants and prosecutors.

The Defendant is generally entitled where (such as might be relevant in this case):-

(a)     The information is not proceeded with.
(b)    The case is not committed for trial.
(c)    A person tried on indictment is acquitted.
(d)    The Court of Appeal allows appeal against conviction.



Costs ordered are those reasonably sufficient to compensate the defendant for any
expenses reasonably incurred by him.

                                       Prosecution O f Offences Act 1985 Section 16

In the context of the families’ economic resources, it needs to be borne in mind that
the Act also provides for the Court to order costs in proceedings for indictable
offences, (on a similar basis to Defendants), to a prosecutor other than the CPS.
Such an order would be made retrospectively.

                                        Prosecution of Offences Act 1980 Section 17

Appeal

Even in the event of a criminal conviction, an appeal may be made to the Court of
Appeal.

This may be made:-

(a)    on a question of law alone,
(b)    with leave of the Court of Appeal, where there are questions of fact or mixed
        fact and law, and any other ground which the Court of Appeal think is
       justified.

Application can be made to the Judge of the trial court for a certificate that the case
is fit for appeal, which obviates the need for application for leave to the Court of
Appeal. Although it is difficult to predict how matters could progress to this point,
it is highly likely that a conviction would be appealed against, after due consideration
of all the evidence and the summary on the basis that it would be unexpected, and on
any view of the material presently available, not justified.

In passing it should be noted that there is no provision for an appeal by the
prosecution against acquittal. As such this would bring the families to the end of the
road of the judicial process, be it civil or criminal, in the UK.
                               REFERENCE TO EUROPE

L      E uropean C ourt of H um an Rights. Strasbourg

Reference to the European Court Of Human Rights (ECHR) arises out of The European
Convention On Human Rights which has been ratified by the United Kingdom as a member
of the Council of Europe. It is important to note that matters relating to the convention
relate to person-government issues, and not interpersonal issues within a member state.

The Convention lists 18 articles, and a series of protocols which can give rise to complaint,
considered initially by the European Commission of Human Rights which is the first port of
call for all complaints. This is done by way of Petition.

The arguably relevant articles in this case might be:

Article 6:      This lays down minimum rules for fair civil and criminal hearings.

Article 13:     This requires that there be an effective domestic remedy for any Convention
                violation.

Prelim inary C riteria to Com plaint Procedures

(a)    People
(b)    Violation
(c)    Exhaustion of Domestic Remedies
(d)    Time
(e)    Basic admissibility

(a)    People

       Complaints may be made by any person, non-government organisation or group of
       individuals.
                                                                          Article 25

(b)    Violation

       The applicant must claim to be a victim of a violation. In so far as the families of
       the Hillsborough victims are concerned, spouses and other relatives of the victims
       who died may be considered indirect victims and able to make their own complaints.
                                                                                 Article 25

(c)    Exhaustion of Domestic Remedies

       It is a pre-requisite that the Commission may only deal with matters after all domestic
       remedies have been exhausted.
       A clear question to ask is, even if the Hillsborough families could establish any right
       of redress within this jurisdiction, whether they have exhausted all proper remedies
       under the U.K. legislation. This relates to effective remedies, but as at February
       1998 it is clear that potential action lies in regard to Hillsborough and it would not
       seem appropriate for the families to look to Europe at this stage without forming the
       view that the United Kingdom provides no effective remedies. Whether Judicial
       Review in the U.K. amounts to an effective remedy in any particular situation is a
       matter of argument, but there are several European authorities which support the view
       that it does.

(d)    Time Limits

       The Commission may only consider matters within 6 months from the date upon
       which a final decision was taken.
                                                                         Article 26

       A question arises as to what decision has been taken that might lead to referral to the
       European Court of Human Rights. Time may run from the decision of the Home
       Secretary on 18th February 1998 to take no further action, on the basis that there are
       no further effective remedies lying in the UK. If the families wish to pursue other
       remedies the six months will run from the time when these remedies are exhausted.

(e)    Basic Admissibility

       The Commission is responsible for considering all complaints, in the light of the
       previously stated criteria, and additionally the petition must be compatible under the
       convention provisions, properly founded and not an abuse of the right to petition.
                                                                                   Article 27

Once matters are referred to the Commission, they are considered on a preliminary basis,
and if the pre-requisites (time, domestic remedy, etc) are considered satisfied, the
Commission will ask for the Government’s observation. This highlights the fact that
reference to the ECHR is in fact a complaint against government activity or inaction and is
not to be considered a personal action. In this context it could not be pursued as an attack
on South Yorkshire Police or its officers at the time of the Hillsborough Disaster.

Once the Government’s observations on any particular complaint are obtained, they are sent
to the applicant for comment. Committees of Commissioners sit to decide whether cases
ought to proceed and consider the merits. A Final Report is produced, and cases may be
referred to the Court, within 3 months, on the referral by the Commission, or the relevant
States concerned. The individual cannot refer the matter.

The historical evidence is that procedures before the ECHR are very slow, with consideration
by the Commission taking 2-3 years, and a further 1-2 years before matters get to Court.
This particular European remedy does not appear specifically relevant to the circumstances
of Hillsborough or the complaints which have been made publicly by the families, given that
it would seem difficult to argue that "proper civil and criminal hearings" (Article 6) did not


                                             16
take place. In this context the families have not been the victim, in any sense, or violated.
They have not been subjected to unfair procedures (compare to Bolger case recently referred
to ECHR).

Further, (in relation to Article 13) compensation payments have been made and several
inquiries have been conducted. The argument might be put (as a reference merely requires
a claim, rather than proof) that the Government’s actions, in so far as no prosecution has
been mounted, can be considered ineffective. This argument depends upon acceptance of the
principle that victims of "crimes" have the right to insist upon alleged perpetrators being
prosecuted. Such a right does not exist in the UK, and this appears to be a fundamental
barrier to referring a case successfully to the ECHR.

Accordingly whilst petitioning the European Commission for Human Rights remains a
technical option it is not likely to prove attractive to the families for the following reasons

1.     Difficulty in establishing jurisdiction.
2.     The Respondent can only be the Government - not individuals perceived to be
       responsible.
3.     Costs - these can be awarded to successful applicants only.
4.     The length of time for Commission consideration and resolutions of any complaint.

2.     The Court of Justice of the European Communities (ECJ)

This Court is a creature of European Community treaties and its jurisdiction is defined by
those treaties. Its duty is to ensure observance of European Community Law. It is the basic
forum for deciding disputes between member States.

Accordingly, most cases brought before the Court of Justice are instituted by member States
or community institutions although private parties are able to commence actions.

The European Community has proclaimed its respect for fundamental Human Rights,
however, the Community is not subject to the jurisdiction of the European Commission on
Human Rights.

Humans Rights aspects have arisen in cases before the Court of Justice such as in relation
to breaches of community rights i.e. in regard to sex discrimination.

The ECJ is not a Court of Human Rights and is a Court applying community law as such,
and unless there is an alleged breach of that law, it will not have jurisdiction. European law
is generally concerned with economic and trade matters. Our initial consideration of the
ambit of the law relating to the European economic community does not suggest any potential
ground for invoking the jurisdiction of the ECJ.

In the circumstances we do not propose to refer to the procedures of the ECJ because of the
minimal likelihood of relevance to the course of action to be followed by the families. Any
potential reference to "Europe" arising out of Hillsborough is likely to be focused on the
Europan Court of Human Rights.
                            HILLSBOROUGH

                         REFERENCE BUNDLE

                                  INDEX




Case Law

1.1    R v Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate and another, ex parte, South Coast
       Shipping Co Ltd and others

1.2.   R v Director of Public Prosecutions, ex parte C.

1.3    R v Adomako

1.4    R v Holloway - R v Adomako - R v Prentice & Sullman

1.5    R v Tower Bridge Magistrates ex parte P. Chaudry.

Printout of Press Article From "The Times" re Stephen Lawrence By Mills
*3] 1 All ER
                                         QBP DC                        R y Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate                                             219
igs used and
                       a
 ed to its use
                                a R v Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate and
r this places                     another, ex parte South Coast Shippinq Co
The purpose
ire but the                                     Ltd and others
it cannot be                         QUEEN S BENCH DIVISION
>ntinuously t)                 jj    LLOYD LJ A N D W A T E R H O U S E J
■lling house                         9   ,   10,   13 APRIL I992                                                                           ■"             '
  garden are

                                                                                                  f Pu b Uc Pro^ n s - institution o f
nd use and

'ima facie a
                              Z ^ e e d L l T ~ P r Z 7 dingS ~ ^
                              take o v e rc o n d u c t d L                 » ? ~ C°rim ina
                                                                                         /    °
                                                                                            l proceedings to which D ire c to r’s d u ty to
                            C \\tZ r d e c lio n n fn                                   - E r e c t o r deciding not to institute proceedings -
e 1989 Act. °
er, starting                                                       r            p r e d a d a s V riva te p m i 0 n      - » " * * * * o f O ff ic e s
 uttings. It
 . however,                         Where the Director o f Public Prosecutions could have instituted proceedings
 ner would                          against a person under s 3(2)(bf o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act L T o n the
s n^norial
er ^B nce
he mfcl no                          T ^          ngS’   y ° ther Person may institute a private prosecution in resoect o f
gistered as                                    me matter, since on the true construction o f ss 3(2)(i>) and 6 ( z f o f the iqfiq

 he p u b l i c
; sto rm o f       e
 r a b le . He
 u n fen ced ,
   s o u th e rn
 J ild in g o f                    m a y th e n discontinue t h e m u n d e r s                     2 %   o f thp Toftc A/-r ***            *j
 i n g to h is                  inSUffid e„ t or if the proceedings

onclusion
d enjoyed
  w hich I
>uildings,                      N o te s
 from the g
lout held

nissioner                  ' 1                     s   i F              S          H               S         S       S        i s           :     ;
 mentary
lafljsn is
 i^ P a s I h               C ases referred to in j u d g m e n t s
ed.                                                            C A ^ H0US£S Ltd V Wednesbury CorP 0 9 4 7 ] 2 All ER 680,

                           ^        VT    [ f 4] 2 A11 ER 401’ ^ 9 6 4 ] AC 1254, [1964] 2 WLR i , 45 HL
                           D P P v Humphrys [ 1976] 2 All ER 4 9 7 , [ 1977 ] AC 1, [ ,9 7 6 ] 2 WLR 857 h L
                           R vHorseferry Road Magistrates’ Court, ex p Stephenson (1989) Times, 25 January,
arris ter. /

                           R W L R s t i ! D C S’ “ P Badhan [ I " I] 2 A11 ER §54’ [I9 9 I] 2 QB                                  78   . [ 1 9 9 .] 2

                           a        Section 3, so fa r as m a te ria l, is set o u t a t p 221 f<r post
                           b        Section 6 is set o u t a t p 2 2 . j t o p 222 a, p ost
    220                             All England Law Reports                [1993] 1 All ER
                                                                                                                 QBD DC           I
   Cases also cite d or referred to in sk ele to n a rg u m en ts
   Hue Metal Industries Ltd v Dilley [ . 969] 3 All ER 4 3 7 , C, 97o] AC 827, PC                                due to start o
  Cluef Constable o f West Midlands Police v Gillard [1985] 3 All ER 634, [1986] AC                              application.
     442.* HL.                                                                                                     I take each
  Luke v IRC [1963] 1 All ER 655, [1963] AC 557, HL.
  Metropolitan Police Comr v Curran [1976] 1 All ER 162, [1976] 1 WLR 87 HL
                                                                                                                Locus standi
  R v Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate, ex p Cherry (1990) 91 Cr App R 28 3’, DC. -
                                                                                                                    On 26 Apr
  R v'Chief Constable o f the Merseyside Police, ex p Calveley [1986] 1 All ER 257, [1986I I
     QB 424, CA.                                                                                                Henderson, tl
                                                                                                                s 32 o f the M
  R i’ Crown Court at Derby, ex p Brooks (198 5) 80 Cr App R 164, DC.
                                                                                                                also announc<
  R v Cuthbertson [1980] 2 All ER 401, [1981] AC 470, HL.
                                                                                                                    On 30 Oc
  R v Stafford Justices, ex p Customs and Excise Comrs [1991] 2 All ER 20 1 r i 9 9 i l 2
    QB 3 3 9 , DC.                                                                L ^ J                         challenge the
                                                                                                                failed. On 3 1
                                                                                                       c        reach a verdic
  A p p lic a tio n fo r ju d ic ia l r e v ie w
                                                                                                               a verdict, wh«
  South Coast Shipping Co Ltd, Robert Henry Samuel, Peter Malcolm Butcher
                                                                                                                   In those cii
  Frederick Brian Darnell and George Edward Greenwood (the defendants) applied’
                                                                                                               there is no roc
  with the leave o f PopplewellJ given on 19 December 1991, for judicial review by                             It m ight hav<
 way o f (!) an order o f certiorari to quash the decisions o f the first respondent, Sir H                    But here the
 David Hopkin, the Chief Stipendiary Magistrate at Bow Street Magistrates’ Court                               decided not t
 on 12 November 1991 in which he ruled that the second respondent, Ivor Glogg’
                                                                                                               have intendec
   ad locus to bring a private prosecution for manslaughter against the defendants
                                                                                                               the Director 1
 and on 21 November 1991 m which he ruled that the charges o f manslaughter
                                                                                                               and importan
 did not amount to an abuse o f the process o f the court, (ii) an order o f prohibition
                                                                                                                   I see the foi
 to prevent the magistrates’ court from inquiring into the charges and (iii) an order e
                                                                                                               as to exclude
 ot mandamus requiring the magistrates’ court to stay the proceedings. The                                     But the quest
                                W3S j° ined aS third resP°ndent to the application                             sections o f th<
 under RSC Ord 53, r 9. The facts are set out in the judgm ent o f Lloyd LJ.
                                                                                                               o f the Directo
                                                                                                                        ‘It shal
 ^ d e fe n d a n t s ^ ^   M ‘Chad W °°d (instructed by Hil1 Taylor Dickinson) for the
                                                                                                                     the Crim
 ^ G lo g g K/[anSfid d     and Sally Bradle>’ (instructed by Christian Fisher cr Co) for Mr                         proceedir
                                                                                                                     force (wl
 R Mun Jones QC (instructed by the Crown Prosecution Service, Headquarters) for the                                 institute ;
   Director o f Public Prosecutions.                                                                                appears t<
 The first respondent did not appear.                                                                               appropris
                                                                                                   9                appropria
                                                                                                           9
 LL? Y D LJ' TheS? Proceedings arise out o f a collision on the River Thames on                                     conduct c
 20 August 1989 when the Bowbelle, a dredger owned and operated by South                                            (whether
 Coast Shipping Co Ltd, ran down a pleasure boat, the Marchioness. The                                              the condi
 Marchioness sank and 51 people lost their lives. A m ong them was Mrs Ruth                                         the Obsce
Hadden. On 17 July 1991 her husband, Mr Ivor Glogg, brought a private h                                           It will be n<
prosecution against the owners o f the Bowbelle and four o f the company’s                                     over the cond
employees. I shall refer to them all as ‘the defendants’. They arc charged with                                for the Directi
manslaughter On 12 Novem ber 1991 there was an application 16 stay th e5                                       him to be app
prosecution. It came before Sir David Hopkin, the C hief Stipendiary Magistrate                                case. The difl
at Bow Street Magistrates’ Court.
                                                                                                               crucial import
   There were two grounds for the application. The first was that Mr Glogg is not              J               Section 6 prov
entitled to bring a private prosecution; he has no locus standi. The second ground
was that the prosecunon is an abuse o f the process o f the court. Sir David Hopkin                                  ‘(1) Su
decided both points in favour o f Mr Glogg. The defendants now apply for an                                        person frc
order o f certiorari to quash his decision. The committal proceedings which were                                   proceedir)
                                                                                                                   proceedir)
 All ER
                     QBD DC             R V Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate (Lloyd LJ)                                                       221


86] AC          .    apUpli'c,” " ° " 6 J" Uary ' " 2 haV' been adJ °“m ' d “                                                                o f th i,
                          I take each o f the two points in turn.

IL.
                     Locus standi
)C.
[1986] b

               •          f     i       i       l       g                i        i       p             S           S              S
991   ]2


tcher,              » verdicr, whereupon                                                                          a8a‘" “ “          “
plied,
:w by
                    Rnr                  rv                                      Director had brought no proceedings at all

10gg.
iants
jhter
ition
>rder e
 The
 tion


 the
           f           t h e 'c r i m i n a l ' j u s t i c e A c t ^ r 0 ^ ^ 01'' SU}5J’e c t t0 a n >' P r o v i s io n s c o n ta i n e d in
 Mr

the
                                            u             {       ) e l r n P o n a n ce o r d i f f ic u l ty o f t h e case m a k e s it


 on
ith                   ^        S         ^          S         S              S        S           s E           B         S         S
'he
 t
 m
iti                   i s           i i S                     a          E                S        E            S          11?           3
y’s            over die                                              ^             (d) £ach Pr0vide for the S e c t o r to take
th
he             for the Director to i n s t i t u t i n g ofh^kTnds                        o f' By T         ^    ’ t 3(2)(b) pr° VideS
 te            c a t Thfe d S r° Priate’ h,aVing regard t0 th£ im P                               ° «   a n f t h e d f f ic u k y o f t h e

ot /           M               £ i s s ; a a 2 s B ,s = ;
id
 n
 n
 e
                    proceedings does not apply.                                               7         6 ° Ver the conduct o f
  222                         All England Law Reports                 [1993] 1 All ER                    QB

          (2) Where criminal proceedings are instituted in circumstances in which                        Ma
        the Director is not under a duty to take over their conduct, he may                 i       a          I
        nevertheless do so at any stage.’                                                              lim
     The effect o f s 6 (i) is to preclude a person from bringing a private prosecution                Bui
  in cases covered by s 3(2)(a), (c) and (d) but not in the residuary category o f case^              Act
  covered by s 3(2)(b). So far as s 3(2)(b) cases are concerned, there is nothing to                  SI ;
  preclude a private prosecution.                                                          ^          cast
     Mr Hill submits that s 6 m ust be read subject to an implied limitation so as to               b hav
  preclude more than one prosecution in any one case whether against the same                         unc
  defendant or another defendant. I can see no basis for reading in any such                          was
  limitation, especially when one has regard to s 6(2).                                               Ma:
     Section 6(2) is clearly intended to cover s 3(2)(b) cases, ie cases where the                        E
  Director has a duty to institute proceedings as distinct from his duty to take over C             „ sorr
                                                                                                    c . ,
  their conduct. Section 6(2) therefore contemplates that the Director may take                       it d'
 over the conduct o f proceedings instituted by a private prosecutor which he                         both
 m ight otherwise have instituted himself. Having taken over the conduct o f those                    inq
 proceedings, he may then discontinue them under s 23 o f the 1985 Act if the                         pro
 evidence is insufficient, or if the proceedings would be contrary to the public                      defi
 interest, or to avoid duplication, or for any other good reason. If it is too late to ^            d if f
 discontinue, he may offer no evidence or the Attorney General can enter a nolle                      pro
 prosequi.                                                                                            cou
    So      read, ss 3(2) and 6 make a coherent and consistent framework in which the                 is tr
 right o f the private citizen to bring a prosecution is preserved but subject always                 at 1
 to the Director s right to intervene at any stage. It provides a useful and effective                AC
 safeguard against ‘improper inaction’ by the prosecuting authority (I quote from 6                 e LJi
 the Report o f the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure (Cmnd 8092 (1981)),                           78 £
 p 161, para 7.50 under Sir Cyril Philips).                                                             said
    In the course o f the hearing, it occurred to us that the Director might him self
be affected by the result o f this application and ought therefore to have been
given the opportunity to be heard. Mr Alun Jones QC has appeared this morning f
on behalf o f the Director and addressed us in opposition to Mr Hill’s application.
We gave leave for him to be joined under the provisions o f RSC Ord 53, r 9. We
are grateful for Mr Jones’s attendance. We do not however think it necessary to                            N
give separate consideration to his arguments, which echo in every respect those                         (19!
advanced by Mr Mansfield.                                                                               was
    On 2 August 1991 the Director indicated that he did not intend to intervene at 9                    blac
that stage o f the proceedings. But it will be open to him to reconsider that                           pre:
decision if the prosecution goes ahead.                                                                 mai
    For the above reasons, which are substantially those given more shortly by Sir                       A
David Hopkin, I would reject Mr H ill’s first ground o f attack on Sir David’s                    of t
decision.                                                                                         ove:
                                                                                         h      h wh<
                                                                                                  dec]
Abuse o f process                                                    ■
                                                                                                        GlO,
   I now turn to the second ground o f application. Under this head, Mr Hill                            pub
advances three main arguments. The first goes to Mr Glogg’s motive. It is said                             I
that he is manipulating or misusing the prosecution because what he really wants                        atte
is a full scale public inquiry. Deprived o f the opportunity afforded by a public       J       j       by 1
inquiry, he is now using the prosecution as a platform to ventilate his grievances.                     wrc
   Mr Hill’s second argument is that the delay in launching the prosecution has                         pro:
been so prolonged that a fair trial is no longer possible.                                                 F
   Mr Hill’s third argument is that the publicity generated by Mr Glogg's solicitors                    loci
has been so great that any jury is likely to be prejudiced against the defendants.                      or 1
Again, I will take each o f those three points in turn.                                                 proi
 1 All ER
                      QBD DC              R v Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate (Lloyd LJ)
in which           Manipulation or misuse o f the prosecution process
 he may
                 a    1 do not doubt that Mr Glogg wanted a full scale public inquiry instead o f the
                   limited investigation carried out in private by the Marine Accident S ^ t i o n
>secution
 o f cases           A r r 9U88Ua ? d ^ h e \ T WhPrOCea Ure'lntr0dUCed by S 33 ° f the M^ chant Shipping
                     SI 1989/1172 T h U               ! Shipping (Accident Investigation) Regulations 1989,
thing to                   1    * ^ , f regulations came into force only a fortnight before the
                     casualty. No doubt the m em bers o f the so-called Marchioness Action Group w ho
i s o as to          , / l0St; e‘atIVeS in th| disaster als° wanted a public inquiry I Z            well
he same              understand their anxiety, frustration and sense o f grievance when a public inauirv
ny such
                           cnioness Action C
                                           Group h 3dh
                                                 but hethat  Mr Gl°gg W
                                                        is represented by3Sthe
                                                                            n0tsame
                                                                                himsdf3
                                                                                    firm member      of the
                                                                                         o f solicitors
lere the
                                     en f0ll0W fr0m Mr G1°gg'S desire fo" a public inquiry that he had
ake over
                 ° it d o e s V ^ th e sta r^ M r rT m ? tlV£ ln *aui?ching the prosecution? I do not think
lay take
                                                 ? gg S St3te ° f m ind may wel1 have been that he wanted
hich he                     public inquiry and a prosecution for manslaughter. The fact that a public
o f those          inquiry has been ruled             does not mean that his m otive in f n S L i n . the
't if the          prosecution should now be regarded as improper. If there is evidence that a
  public            efendant has been guilty o f an offence, then a desire to see him prosecuted and

'a^He
                d I f r       g" y'               iS "OI “ im P ~ P ' r          especially where the
                   prosecutor is one o f the bereaved. Even if Mr Glogg’s motives were mixed the
                   court should be slow to halt a prosecution unless the conduct o f the prosecu’tion
iich the           is truly oppressive (see Connelly v DPP [1964] 2 All ER 401 at 409, [1964] AC r" s4
 always
                  AC i°ar          1           and ° PP V HumVhry s [1976] 2 All ER 497 at 527 [1977]
fFective        e LI in R v T r l T j f Salmon)- The law was correctly stated on this point by Mann
 e from *         78 «      Telford Justices, ex p Badhan [1991] 2 All ER 854 at 862-863 [199^1 2 OB
 i98i)),          78 at 90. Dealing w lth the power o f the justices to prevent an ab u seo f process M

lim self
e been                     ‘They have no power to refuse to embark on an inquiry because they think
orning /                 that a prosecution should not have been brought because it is, for exam pk
cation.                  ™      m i? ,ed: petty or animated by hostility. It is for this reason that die
                         powers o f the justices are said to be ‘‘very strictly confined” . . .’
 9 - We
sary to             Mr Hill referred us to R v Horseferry Road Magistrates’ Court, ex p Stephenson
  those          ( 989) Times, 25 January. But that was a very different case on its L t s T h e r e
                   as no evidence at all which could possibly have grounded a prosecution for
ene at 9       g blackmail; it was a mere device to embarrass the im pending conference In the
r that           present case it has not been argued that there is no evidence to supno t he
                 manslaughter charge, although Mr Hill has made no admission to that effect
by Sir
                 o f dip    natlVe f ne 0 fa urSUment under this head was as follows. In the course
)a^J’s           o f the summ er o f ,9 9 . the Director was pressing Mr Glogg’s solicitors to hand
                 over any fresh material available to Mr Glogg so that he could make up h ?m ind
                 d tT d °r        ? t3ke r r th£ C° nduCt o       prosecution
                 declined to hand over the evidence until after the committal. It isf id I t Mr
r Hill           Glogg s purpose was to bring to bear on the Director such intense pressure o f
's said          publicity that he would be unable to take overand discontinue
wants          ;   I do nat accept that it would necessarily be wrong for a private p rosecto r to
public        I b v f n Pt t0f  K,a e     Dlrector from taking over the conduct o f the prosecution
jnces.        J by force o f publicity. I suspect he is made o f sterner stuff. But, eveETflt were
 n has          m-o°sefi’irU              001            W ^        t h e P r o s e c u to r 's p u r p o s e h e r e i n b r i n g i n g t h e
                p r o s e c u tio n w a s o p p r e s s iv e o r i m p r o p e r .

citors             Finally it is said that, if I am right in thinking that Mr Glogg had a sufficient
iants.          ir T n in t^ n d e d Y 1118 ^           that         "e because therfis an unforeseen
                or unintended lacuna in the 1985 Act. Mr Hill contends that it is an abuse o f
                process to take advantage o f that lacuna. It is sufficient to say that I do not agree.
   224                          All England Law Reports                  [1993] 1 All ER           QBD I
   Delay
     Mi                                                                                           impres
     Mr Hill argues that the delay since the date o f the casualty, or at least since 27
   October                                                                                     a publici
     rtober 1989 when Mr Glogg’s solicitors indicated in a letter that-'they ha<f
                                                                                                 summi
   enough evidence in their possession to prove wilful misconduct on the part o f the
                                                                                                 quite 1
   owners o f the Bowbelle, was such as to cause serious prejudice to the defendants.
                                                                                                 jury, h'
      The questions to be asked in these cases, where delay is relied on as an abuse o f
                                                                                                 or beca
   process o f the court, are, first, whether the delay on the part o f the prosecution is
                                                                                                 Sir Da'
   unjustifiable and, secondly, whether, if so, the prejudice to the defendant is such         b has fall
   that a fair trial can no longer be held. I would answer both those questions in
                                                                                                 (see
   favour of Mr Glogg. It was entirely reasonable for him to wait as he did until after
                                                                                                 [1948]
   the completion o f the second trial o f Captain Henderson before serving his
  summonses on the defendants on 31 July 1991. There has been little, if any, delay
                                                                                                   W AT]
  since then. There are, it is true, cases in which it has been held that what is called
   mere delay may suffice. But these cases should be regarded as highly exceptional
                                                                                               C Applied
     Nor has there been, in m y view, any substantial prejudice to the defendants.
  No specific prejudice is alleged. This is not a case where prejudice should be
  interred since the trial will not depend on eye-witness accounts o f fast-moving
  events. It is the mens rea o f the company which will be mainly in issue. It is
  t erefore to be expected that the trial will depend largely on documents. But, in
                                                                                               d
  so tar as it will depend on the m em ory o f witnesses, the defendants will have had
  every reason to have these events very m uch in m ind since the day o f the casualty,
    am not persuaded that a fair trial in this case is no longer possible.
                                                                                                   HOUSE (
 Publicity
                                                                                                   LORD G 1
     I f "r ^  Wkh th’S 3 uestion even more shortly without, I hope, doing injustice ,        e    11 n o v
 to Mr Hill s very careful argum ent on behalf o f the defendants. That argument
 was that there has been so m uch adverse publicity in the past in this case and                 Crimina
 there is likely to be so m uch further adverse publicity in the future that the jury            doeumei
 is bound to be prejudiced against the defendants. I do not agree. Sir David Hopkin             give evic
 was taken through the publicity page by page and paragraph by paragraph. What                   how till
 he had to say was this:                                                              f       f familiar
         ‘It is quite clear, by anyone’s standard, that this incident was o f the greatest      properl
      public interest and concern and it appears to me, reading the publicity as it             proved
      has been put before me, that the reporting was mainly restricted to those                 s 69(1)0
      matters which were matters o f public interest and concern. It is my view
      that the main subject o f publicity were the Ministry o f Transport for their              The apj
      laxity in licensing unsuitable vessels and their refusal to m ount a public                goods f
      inquiry. Another subject was the question o f compensation. Yet another was                o f food,
     the general question o f corporate liability, which was dealt with in a general             which :
     way and emphasised the difficulties involved. The final target was the                     bought
     Director o f Public Prosecutions when he threatened to intervene in the                    returni.
     private prosecution. Then, o f course, followed his withdrawal from that                 h o f her <
     stance which also attracted publicity. Only on a very few occasions was it                 At her
     even specifically suggested that this company, or any o f its directors, would             employ
     be prosecuted for manslaughter.’                                                           for the
                                                                                                and exa
  That was a view which Sir David Hopkin was entitled to take. It is a view with                code fo:
which I agree, although I do not pretend to have the same familiarity with the               j costing
publicity material as he had.
                                                                                                found
   Mr Hill s case, as it turned out in reply, does not depend on showing that Mr                operate
  o g g s solicitors were personally responsible for generating the publicity or that           compui
they were party to a concerted campaign. It is right to say, however, that the                  evidenc
material which Mr Mansfield put before us this morning gives m e the opposite                   objects
93] 1 All ER
                                 QBDJ3C__f^v Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate (Lloyd LJ)

least since 2 7
 iat they had               3   p u tiid                              s cc o,,d             their best ,o » ° id
 ie part o f the                summonses had S               erved W h X f . h         P '* " "                once ,h e
 defendants,
                               quite unable to hold               ,1 , * ” t i T      , ” ;         “ T " or not, I am
s an abuse o f                 jury, however carefully directed is likdv m h p T J ^0SS1^ le 0 1 1 the g round that a
                               or because there is even a risk that rhp            ""u'u        against these defendants
rosecution is
idant is such               t Sir David Hopkin reached the                      W° S be S°                         view,
questions in                b has fallen far short o f show ing thfr w T T          ■ 1 6 I *0 ™ 5 before h im ’ Mr H i l 1
id until after                (see Associated Provincial Picture Houses L td l U W ' T        r ^ Wednesbur>' grounds
  serving his                 [ ■ 9 4 8 ] , KB 2 2 3 ). , w ould t h e ^ d'                                * A” ER 6 8 ° ’
if any, delay
 hat is called                  W A T E R H O U S E J. I agree and there is nothing that I can usefully add.
exceptional,
                             Application dismissed.
 defendants.
■ should be
 ast-moving                                                                                    Dilys Tausz     Barrister.
  issu ^ It is
n t s ^ k t , in
 11         had
 ie casualty.
                                                               R v Shepherd
                             HOU SE O F LORDS

g injustice
                        .                             E„ » r ; »t   8 o s k ,il' l o “ ™    « > « ■>
argument
s case and
it the jury             (fo c ra i                               c 3 Utr              - M n w M i t y - Statement in
 d Hopkin               give evidence - Till rolls - fill rolls l i n k e d “   funCtlZmJ ° f computer - Who may
ph. What
                     , how tills operated, what                                                        deteaive ^ ^
                     f familiar with c p ^ a ^ a f ^ Z e f t ^ J ' T T ' 3 I                   ^ ~ Wfarter P * ” *
 e greatest            properly at material time - Whether fact that m ^ ^                  comPuter was operating
 icity as it           p r o W w ith o u t calling computer
‘ to those         ■   5 69(i)(b),Sch 3,p a r a 8(d).             P           ^       C n m m l Evidence A« 19&4,
 m y view
  for their ,
  a public          "                                                                               * b T car were
3 ther was

a general                   S M           S              of^ f„ t : datc,k Ld
  't f ^ t h e          bought the items I t T L n c h o f Z Z            ^ appeIIant St3ted that she had
eW th e                 returning to her c a r h e L T h a d sn£                St° 7 that ^      and that on
 om that ^          h o f her own; she said that she             ?       ^ tranf ferred the items to a bag
is was it              At her trial the principal evidence for t h / r ^ 1*       demed stealing the goods,
s, would               employed at th e b ran ch sto re w h o S S . T T T F ™ by 3 St° re detecdve
                       for the day in question from ^he dlls w hich           i f 1™       ed a11 the till rolls
                      and examined all o f them t h a r h , I t             C hlVked C° 3 Central computer,
iw with
                    . code for the clothing found in the apneflant’/ r a 06 °H        o f the unique product
vith the j
                   I costing £ 1 2 - 5 7 and nor was then* n! f        f       "° ^        ° fan item o ffoo d
                      found in the car. In the course o f h e r T VI pnces ma^chlng the items o f food
hat Mr
                      operated, what the central computer did that               J tdescnbe<* ^ow the tills
or that
hat the
pposite              objected to the admission
             136
                                                                                                     [1995] 1 C r.A pp .R.



        A                       R. v. DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
                                PROSECUTIONS, ex parte C.
              Q u e e n 's Bench (D ivisional C ourt ) (Lord Justice Kennedy
                        and Mr Justice Scott Baker): February 15,18,1994
    B       PROCEDURE
              P rosecution of O ffences
                   Drasioii n o t to p ro s e c u te — G u id e lin e s to be f o l lo w e d b y p ro s e c u to r.
                P ' o s e ^ o " o f O ffe n c e s A c t 1 9 8 5 (c. 2 3 ) , s. 1 0 - C o d e f o r C r o w n P ro s e c u to rs
                (CPS Annual Report 1992-93), para. 8(1)(6).

    Q        By section 10 of the Prosecution of Offences A ct 1985:

                   (1)     The Director [of Public Prosecutions] shall issue a Code for Crown
                them CU            glVmg gUldance ° n § eneral principles to be applied by

             By section 12(1) of the Sexual Offences Act 1956:


    D         « w i A a n t n t a a " 3 P6rS° n '°                           bUg8CTy With an0ther Person

            The Divisional Court has power to review a decision of the Director of

         exercised°Se           10nS         *° Pr° “ CU'e bl“ ^               P° Wer iS             t0 * «          y
           The applicant T.C., had alleged that she h a d been a victim of
        non-consensual buggery com m itted by h e r hu sb an d F.C., a police
        sergeant, w hom she h ad m arried on M ay 27,1992. O n Novem ber 5 1992
        she com plained to the police th at he h a d b u g gered her repeatedly and
        w ithout h er consent d u ring the five m o n th s of their cohabitation. She was
        exam ined by a police surgeon w ho fou n d dam age consistent with repeated
                   fr     0VCT 3 prolon8ed Period. W hen th e allegations m ade by
        the ‘’ r    ,‘Vere P,U' t0 R C h e chose n 0 ‘ to reply. O n December 1,1992,
:       df. ■ Ke SLIi , T ' e          t0 the Crown Prosecution Service so that a"
        D e c e X r T i^ fh               * >Whether " n ° ' ‘° Prosecute- By letter dated
        not to prosecute                appIlCant Was lnfo™ e d that the D.P.P. h ad decided

          H eld, allowing the application, that the decision of the D P P was
        unreasonable m that it failed to have regard to a material consideration
        The prosecutor had not followed the Code issued pursuant to section 10 of
        he Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. Although buggery w i Z l l consent
             T r « / ’S         Llg8er>' were both offences contrary to section 12 of the
    S t“ °case
    instant f eonly
               ^ t hthe7form
                         ^ ^     WCalleged
                             er was Tein reaH
                                            byt>the
                                                -S6para‘e offe“ There i"
                                                    com plainant         th
                                                                       were
tw o possible lines of defence. First the accused m ight deny ever having had
intercourse per anum. This possibility h a d n ot been considered. Instead it      ^
had been assum ed th at his line of defence w o uld be to adm it buggery but
to assert that it w as consensual. In those circumstances, the prosecutor
erred in that he failed in accordance w ith p arag ra p h 4 of the Code to "have
regard to any lines of defence w hich w ere plainly open t o ... the accused."
Thus, the decision w ou ld be set aside an d rem itted to the D.P.P. for further
consideration.
    R. v. Courtie (1984) 78 Cr.App.R. 292, [1984] A.C. 463 applied.                B
    Metropolitan Police Commissioner , ex p. Blackburn [1968] 2 Q.B. 118,136,
Selvarajan v. Race Relations Board [1975] 1 W.L.R. 1686,1697, General Council
o f the Bar, ex p. Percival [1991] 1 Q.B. 212,234 Chief Constable of Kent County
Constabulary, ex p. L. [1993] 1 All E.R. 756, 768g, and Inland Revenue
Commissioner, ex p. Mead [1993] 1 All E.R. 772 considered.
    [For s. 10 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, see Archbold (1993)
paras. 1-296,297. For s. 12 of the Sexual Offences Act 1956, see, ibid. (1994)     C
para. 20-91.]

  A pplication for judicial review.
  This w as an application by T.C. to rem ove into the Divisional Court and
quash the decision of the Crow n Prosecution Service made on or about
December 9, 1992, refusing to prosecute the applicant's husband, F.C., a
police sergeant, and the decision of Decem ber 23, 1992 refusing to release        D
m aterial evidence for the p urpose of a private prosecution.
  The facts appear in the ju dg m ent of K ennedy, L.J.
  The application w as argu ed on F ebruary 15, 1994.

  Michael Supperstone, Q.C. and A m ir Sultan for the applicant, T.C.
  Mark Dennis for the Director of Public Prosecutions, the first respondent.
  Michael Egan for F.C., the second respondent.                                    E

                                                              Cur. adv. vult.


  February 18, 1994. KENNEDY L.J. read the judgm ent of the Court:


1. General                                                                         F

  This is an application for judicial review of a decision of the Director of
Public Prosecutions n ot to prosecute the applicant's husband, Police
Sergeant C, for the offence of buggery. H e is the second respondent in these
proceedings.


2. The Facts                                                                       G

  The facts are to som e extent no t in dispute. On April 10, 1992 the
applicant came to the U nited K ingdom from Pakistan and on M ay 27,1992
 138                                                           [1995] 1 C r.A pp .R.

  she m arried the second respondent. It w as an arran g ed marriage. On
  N ovem ber 5,1992 she com plained to the police that he h a d buggered her
  repeatedly and w itho u t her consent d u rin g the five m onths of their
  cohabitation. She also said that in about June 1992 he h ad obtained a
 p o rnographic video w hich he used to stim ulate sexual activity. On
 N ovem ber 6, 1992 she w as exam ined by Dr H ouston, an experienced
 fem ale police surgeon, an d on N ovem ber 13,1992 she w as re-examined by
 D r Barker, another experienced fem ale police surgeon. She w as observed
 to be an Asian lady of slight build w ith a poor co m m and of English. Dr
 H o u sto n noted scratches on her rig h t u p p er arm an d the backs of both
 h an d s consistent w ith fingernail scratches less than a week old.
 Exam ination of thp private parts disclosed on each occasion damage
 consistent w ith repeated anal penetration over a p ro lo n g ed period. To both
 doctors the applicant m ade it clear that the anal penetration took place
 w ith o u t her consent b u t she was n o t wholly consistent as to its frequencv.
 She told Dr H ouston it happ en ed three or four tim es a w eek but to Dr
 Barker she said it h app en ed at least weekly. To b oth doctors she m ade one
 com plaint of other violence, telling Dr H ouston that on about November 3,
 1992 w hen she refused to have intercourse her h u sb a n d h a d dragged her
 d o w n the stairs, scratching her w ith his nails, then he h a d grabbed her bv
 the back of the neck and throw n her on the settee.
    W hen the allegations m ade by the applicant w ere p u t to the second
 respo nd en t he chose no t to reply, b u t w h en the police visited the
 m atrim onial hom e they found the p o rnographic video. O n November 24,
 1992 the police subm itted the file to the C row n Prosecution Service so that a
 decision could be m ade w hether or no t to prosecute.

3. The Crown Prosecution Service Decision (Part I)

    W hat h appened then is clear from an affidavit sw orn by Mr Naunton,
 the H ead of the Police Com plaints Division at the C row n Prosecution
 Service. The evidence was review ed an d discussed by responsible
m em bers of staff, an d on December 1, 1992 it w as considered by Mr
N au n to n w ho sought to apply to it the relevant principles from the Code
for C row n Prosecutors w hich w as issued p u rs u a n t to section 10 of the
Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 as a public declaration of the principles
u p o n w hich the C row n Prosecution Service exercises its functions. The
C ode indicates that w h en considering w hether to institute proceedings
prosecutors should have regard first to the evidential sufficiency criteria
and, if they are satisfied, to the public interest criteria. For p resent purposes
the evidential sufficiency criteria can be said to be sum m arised in the
question: is there a realistic prospect of a conviction, bearing in m ind the
evidence available and those lines of defence w hich are plainly open to, or
have been indicated by the accused? The public interest criteria are a
variety of considerations w hich m ay m ake it in ap p ro p riate to prosecute
even though there is a realistic prospect of conviction. The interests of the
p.R.   Q.B.D.                                         R. v. D.P.P. (Kennedy L.J.)     139

 On    victim are an im p o rtan t factor, so is the likely penalty. Paragraph 8(1) of the
 her   Code states:                                                                          A
leir
            "W hen the circum stances of an offence are n o t particularly serious,
i a
            an d a court w o u ld be likely to im pose a p u rely nom inal penalty,
On
            C row n Prosecutors should carefully consider w hether the public
 ed
            interest w o uld be better served by a prosecution or some other form of
 by
            disposal such as, w here appropriate, a caution. This applies
 ed
            particularly w here the offence is triable on indictm ent when Crown
 Dr                                                                                          B
            Prosecutors should also w eigh the likely p en alty w ith the likely length
 th
 d.         and costs of proceedings."
5e       In relation to sexual offence's p arag rap h 8(6) of the Code reads:
ch
            "(a) W henever tw o or m ore persons have participated in the offence in
            circum stances rendering both or all liable to prosecution, the Crown
)r          Prosecutor should take into account each perso n 's age, the relative            C
e           ages of the participants and w hether or n o t there was any element of
3,
            seduction or corruption w hen deciding w hether, and if so in respect of
r           w hom , proceedings should be instituted.
7
            (b) Sexual assaults u p o n children sh o u ld always be regarded
            seriously, as should offences against adults, such as rape, which
            am ou n t to gross personal violation. In such cases, where the Crown
            Prosecutor is satisfied as to the sufficiency of the evidence, there will        D
            seldom be any d o u b t that prosecution will be in the public interest."

       4. The Law of Buggery
          Before I come to the actual decision m ad e by M r N aunton it is necessary
       to say som ething about the offence of buggery, an d about the attitude to be
       adopted by this C ourt w hen asked to review a decision of the Crown
       Prosecution Service not to prosecute.
          If an ad u lt m ale has anal intercourse w ith an ad u lt female that is an
       offence contrary to section 12(1) of the Sexual Offences Act, 1956. Unlike
       the situation w hen buggery is com m itted by ad u lt males on each other, it is
       no defence that the w om an consented or that the act was committed in
       private, and indeed if she does consent she becomes an accomplice.
       H ow ever if the offence is com m itted in private by an adult m an on an adult
       w om an w ho consents the m atter is unlikely norm ally to come to the notice
       of the criminal law, and if it does, p ro v id ed th at there is no element of
       corruption or seduction, the penalty will prob ab ly be relatively modest
       (see, for example, Bush (1989) 11 Cr.App.R.(S.) 295 w here the sentence, as
       varied by the C ourt of Appeal, w as three m o n th s' imprisonment).

       5. The Power of Review
          It has been com m on ground before us in the light of the authorities that
       this Court does have pow er to review a decision of the Director of Public
 140                                                             [1995] 1 C r .A pp .R.

 Prosecutions not to prosecute, b u t the authorities also show that the pow er
 is one to be sparingly exercised. As recently as 1975 Lawton L.J. said in
 Selvarajnn v. Race Relations Board [1975] 1 W.L.R. 1686 at 1697:

       "As far as I know, the courts h ave never interfered w ith the exercise of
       the Director's discretion: b u t it does no t follow that thev could not do
       so if he refused or failed to perform his public duties or acted corruptly
       or unfairly."

    Then in General Council o f the Bar, ex p. Percival [1991] 1 Q.B. 212 w here the
 applicant sought to review the Council's decision not to prefer a m ore
 serious charge W atkins L.J. confirm ed the existence of this Court's pow er
 to review the existehce of discretion by a prosecuting authority. H e said at
 p. 234:

       "W e do not think it right that strictly defined limits should be set to the
       judicial review of a bo d y w hich can broadly be described as a
       prosecuting authority. Each case m u st be considered w ith due regard
       to the powers, functions an d procedures of the body concerned and
       the m anner in w hich it has dealt (or n o t dealt) w ith the particular
       complaint or application. This com plaint should not, we think, fail
       because the applicant is u nable to dem onstrate that it was not dealt
       w ith at all or excluded by the adoption of an illegitimate prior policy.
       It falls to be decided, in ou r view, on the substantive issues of
       irrationality a n d /o r p ro ced u ra l irregularity, w ith due regard to the
       nature of the discretion involved."

   In Chief Constable of Kent County Constabulary, exp. L. [1993] 1 All E.R. 756
this C ourt was concerned w ith decisions m ad e by the C row n Prosecution
Service in relation to the prosecution of juveniles, and W atkins L.J.
suggested at p. 768E that a "rigorous ap proach" w ould be adopted to
attem pts to obtain judicial review of a decision m ade by the police or the
C row n Prosecution Service. At p. 768G he said:

     "It seems to m e that a decision to discontinue proceedings by the CPS
     can be equated w ith a decision by the police not to prosecute and is,
     therefore, open to judicial review only u p o n the restricted basis
     available to someone, assum ing he has locus standi, seeking to
     challenge a decision by the police."

  That restricted basis w as indicated by the Court of Appeal in
Metropolitan Police Commissioner, ex p. Blackburn [1968] 2 Q.B. 118, 136 in
w hich Lord Denning M.R. said of the Commissioner:

    "He can also m ake policy decisions and give effect to them, as, for
    instance, was often done w h en prosecutions were n ot brought for
    attem pted suicide; b u t there are som e policy decisions w ith which, I
    think, the courts in a case can, if necessary, interfere. Suppose a chief
Q.B.D.                                        R. v. D.P.P. (Kennedy L.J.)     141

     constable w ere to issue a directive to his m en that no person should be
     prosecuted for stealing an y goods less than £100 in value. I should             A
     have thought th at the co u rt could counterm and it. He w ould be failing
     in his duty to enforce the law."

   Salmon L.J. said of the latter type of situation that it w ould be a clear
breach of duty. It w o u ld be so im proper th at it could not am ount to an
exercise of the discretion. W e w ere also referred to the decision of the Court
of A ppeal in Raymond v. Attorney-General (1982) 75 Cr.App.R. 34, [1982]              g
Q.B. 839, a decision of N o la n }., as he then w as, on an application for leave,
reported only as Director of Public Prosecutions, ex p. Langlands-Pearse [1991]
C.O.D. 92, an d the decision of this C ourt in Inland Revenue Commissioner , ex
p. Mead [1993] 1 All E.R. 772.'From all of those decisions it seems to me that
in the context of the p resen t case this court can be persuaded to act if and
only if it is dem o nstrated to u s that the Director of Public Prosecutions
acting through the C ro w n Prosecution Service arrived at the decision not           q
to prosecute:
    (1) because of som e u n law fu l policy (such as the hypothetical decision
    in Blackburn n o t to prosecute w here the value of goods stolen was
    below £100); or
    (2) because the Director of Public Prosecutions failed to act in
    accordance w ith her o w n settled policy as set out in the Code; or              q
    (3) because the decision w as perverse. It w as a decision at w hich no
    reasonable prosecutor could have arrived.
  M r Supperstone so u gh t to satisfy us u n d er all three heads bu t he did not
suggest anything like im p ro p er m otive or b a d faith.

6. The Crown Prosecution Service Decision (Part II)                                   £

  Having identified w h a t w e have to look for I return to the evidence as to
w h at caused Mr N au n to n to decide as he did. It is to be found in
paragraphs 5, 6, 7 an d 8 of his affidavit, w hich read:

     " 5 .1 w as satisfied th at the evidential sufficiency criteria set out in the
     Code w ere satisfied in respect of the offence of buggery allegedly
     com m itted by C on his wife.                                                    F
     6. In considering the public interest criteria I had regard to:
     (a) paragraph 7 of the Code, an d in particular the w ords there
     attributed to Lord Shawcross.
     (b) paragraph 8(vi) of the Code. In the light of the w ording of that
     paragraph I considered the evidence on the issue of consent. In view of
     all the circumstances, an d in particular the absence of any
     corroboration of the com plainant's account on this issue and her
     failure to m ake a com plaint over a long period, I reached the
     conclusion that the evidence of lack of consent w ould not have been
     strong enough to offer a realistic prospect of a conviction had the
                                                                   [1995] 1 C r.A pp.R-
    142
          offence required proof of lack of consent. I therefore considered that
          p aragrap h 8(vi)(b) of the C ode did n o t apply.
A         7. I also had regard to the fact that, by virtu e of the Sexual Offences
          Acts 1967, buggery in private b etw een m ales aged over 21 is not an
          offence, unless proved to be non-consensual. Because of this
          provision, I also considered w h eth er a p rosecution w as required for
          buo-o-ery of the alleged offender's wife in private, w here both parties
          w ere over 21, and w here the evidence of lack of consent would not
B         have been sufficient to offer a realistic p ro sp ect of a conviction had the
          person buggered been male.
           8. Approaching the case on the basis that the alleged buggery cou ^
          n ot have been proved to have taken place w ith o u t the complainant's
           consent, I concluded that in all the circum stances the complainant's
           o-rievance could be m ore ap prop riately d ealt w ith in the matrimonial
           court, and that the public interest d id n o t require the institution of
C         criminal proceedings. I w as also aw are th at the police w ould consider
           w hether disciplinary proceedings w ere ap propriate.

    7. The Applicant's Submissions
        M r Supperstone subm its that there is evidence in those paragraphs of
    the adoption of an unlaw ful policy, nam ely a policy not to prosecute where
    buo-o-erv betw een adults of different sexes m ay have taken place w ith
D   consent. Secondly, Mr Supperstone subm its th at M r N aunton does not
    seem to have acted in accordance w ith the policy as set out m the Code. The
    applicant complained that she w as the victim of non-consensual buggery
    an d that there was no evidence suggesting she gave her consent. So w hen
    in p arag rap h 5 Mr N aun to n says he w as satisfied that the evidentia
    sufficiency criteria were satisfied in respect of the offence of buggery
    allegedly committed it w ould seem to follow th at M r N aunton considered
    that°there was a realistic prospect of a conviction of buggery without
    consent. If so, the public interest criteria w o u ld be likely to militate in
    f a v o u r of rather than against a decision to prosecute.             .   . .    .
        But it seems clear from p arag raph s 6, 7 a n d 8 of the affidavit that in
    reality despite w hat he says in p arag ra p h 5, M r N a u n to n was not satisfied
     of the evidential criteria in relation to the .offence alleged. He was only
     satisfied of the evidential criteria in relation, to som ething different, nam ely
     consensual buggery, an offence no t a l l e g e d , s o , the, approach was to some
     extent distorted and not in line w ith the Code. Lest it b e thought that am
     m istaken in referring to consensual bu g g ery a s ,som ething different it
     should be remem bered that in R. v. C o u r t ie (1984) 78 Cr.App.R. 292, 1984]
     A.C. 463 the House of Lords recom m ended th at lack of consent be alleged
     in the particulars of the count in the indictm ent, w ith consensual buggery,
     if appropriate, being alleged as an alternative in a separate count.
     A lthough the circumstances w ere different in th at case because that case
     w as concerned with buggery betw een m ales, the principle, as it seems to
     me, still applies.
Q.B.D.                                         R. v. D.P.P. (Kennedy L.J.)      143

   M r Supperstone's third subm ission is th at in so far as Mr Naunton was
n ot satisfied that the evidential sufficiency criteria w ere met in relation to
buggery w ithout consent his decision w as perverse because it failed to
have regard to the ap p aren t credibility of the com plainant, to the medical
evidence and to the discovery of the p orn o g rap h ic video. It also had regard
to an irrelevant factor, nam ely the lapse of tim e before the complaint was
m ade. Mr Supperstone subm its th at it is hard ly surprising that the
applicant w aited for five m onth s before she com plained. She was newly
m arried and in a strange country, u n ab le to speak m uch English, with few
people to turn to, and possibly feeling som e concern about her status as an
im m igrant. All of those m atters w o u ld h av e been obvious to Mr N aunton
h ad he thought about them w ith o u t reference to any affidavit which came
into existence after he h ad m ad e his decision.


8. The Respondent's Submissions
   For the Director of Public Prosecutions M r D ennis invited us to focus on
the lack of corroboration in respect of the offence alleged, namely buggery
w ithout consent. He subm itted, in m y view rightly, that the medical
evidence and the discovery of the p o rn o g rap h ic video give little indication
as to w hether anal intercourse took place w ith or without consent,
although Dr H ouston d id observe a pain ful red sector of the anus and red
splits in the anal skinfolds. She w as also unable to test the tone of the
internal ring of muscles because of the p ain p ro du ced by spasm and the
patient becoming distressed. N o d o u b t because of the process of healing
those injuries were less ap p aren t w h e n Dr Barker examined, but for my
p art I do find it a little difficult, albeit n o t im possible, to envisage a wom an
agreeing to acts of buggery w hich p ro d u ced such painful results.
  °As Mr Dennis points out, M r N a u n to n could n o t regard the injuries to
 the arm and hands as significant because the applicant herself was
 inconsistent as to how they w ere caused an d M r Dennis submits that there
were features indicating that in fact this lady d id consent to buggery. She
w as at the material time nearly 30 years of age. W hen, according to her, the
 first act of anal intercourse took place she w as in her sister s home and so
 her sister w ould have been nearby. T hat is ap p aren t from the affidavit of
 the applicant sw orn on M arch 9, 1993 b u t w hether it was known to Mr
 N aun ton in December 1992 I do n o t kno w because we do not have before
 us any statem ent w hich the applicant m ad e or m ay have made prior to that
 date. Mr Dennis also points to the lapse of tim e before a complaint was
 m ade.                                                                     , .
   Mr Dennis, supp orted by M r Egan for the second respondent, submits
 that having decided that non-consensual b ug g ery could not be proved Mr
 N au nto n was entitled to consider w h eth er or no t to prosecute at all and to
 wei°-h in the balance the penalty likely to be im posed, the devastating
 effect on the accused of such a prosecution an d the fact that in law the
 com plainant w ould be an accomplice. M r Egan rem inded us of w hat was
    144                                                         [1995] 1 C r.A pp .R.

    said by Lord Brightman in R. v. Hillingdon London Borough Council ex p.
    Puhlofer [1986] A.C. 484 an d by Lord Lowry in R. v. Secretary of State for the
    Home Department , ex p. Brind [1991] 1 A.C. 696 about the need for courts to
    exercise restraint w hen discretion has been vested in others, and Mr Egan
    points out w ith force that som e of the m atters now relied upon by Mr
    Supperstone w ere not before Mr N au n to n in late 1992, or are matters which
    could not be relied u p o n in a crim inal trial.


B   9. Conclusion
     In m y judgm ent this is one of those rare cases w here the Director of
  Public Prosecution's decision is sho w n to be flaw ed because Mr N aunton
  on behalf1of the Director of Public Prosecutions did not approach the
  question which he had to decide in accordance w ith the settled policy of
  the Director of Public Prosecutions as set out in the Code. Although
C buggery w ithout consent an d consensual b u gg ery are both offences
  contrary to the 1956 Act they are in reality separate offences and here only
  the former was alleged, b u t the prosecutor's approach was, as it seems to
  me, to some extent clouded by the latter. Initially at least, as it seems to me,
  he should have disregarded it. He wrould then have had to bring his mind
  fully to bear on the question of w hether the evidential sufficiency criteria
  w ere satisfied in relation to the m ore serious offence. In other words, he
D w ould have had to ask him self if there w as a realistic prospect of a
  conviction. He w ould have had to look at the evidence available and
  consider those lines of defence plainly open to the accused. The accused
  had, up to that time, chosen to rem ain silent b u t there w^ere, as it seems to
  me, looking at the m atter from M r N au n to n 's standpoint, two possible
  lines of defence. First, the accused m ight deny ever having had intercourse
E per anum. That was a possibility which, so far as I can see, was not
  considered at all bv M r N aunton, an d of course if he had considered it the
  question of corroboration w ould have been easily satisfied. Instead he
  assum ed that the second resp on dent's line of defence w ould be to admit
  buggery b ut to assert that it w as consensual. In those circumstances it
  seems to me that M r N au n to n erred in that he failed in accordance with
  p arag rap h 4 of the Code to "have regard to any lines of defence which are
F plainly open t o ... the accused." W hat conclusion Mr N au n ton w ould have
  reached if he had had regard to b oth of the lines of defence to which I have
  referred instead of to just one of them , as well as to the fact that the second
  respondent had not as yet indicated w hat his line of defence m ight be, is
  not a m atter which in m y judgm en t should be speculated upon in this
  court. The decision is one for the Director of Public Prosecutions not for this
  court. Accordingly, unless there are com pelling reasons to do otherwise, I
G w ould set aside the decision an d rem it the m atter to the Director of Public
  Prosecutions for consideration in the light of the ju dgm ent of this Court,
  a n d of course in the light of all that has h ap p en ed since the original
  decision was made. It follows of course from w hat I have said that I need
Q.B.D.                                       R. v. D.P.P. (Kennedy L.J.)     145

n o t deal w ith M r Supperstone's subm ission that the decision under
challenge was the result of the application of an u nlaw ful policy, although I
am far from satisfied about that, b u t he is entitled to say that the decision
w as unreasonable in th at it failed to have regard to a material
consideration. Prim arily how ever I base m y decision on w hat seems to
have been a patent failure to act in accordance w ith the settled policy as set
out in the Code.

10. The Decision Letter
  The decision not to prosecute having been taken, the applicant was
inform ed by a letter dated Decem ber 9,1992 w hich w e have read. To say as
M r N au n to n does that "p erhaps the letter could have b een m ore helpful" is
an understatem ent, an d it is som e relief to m e to know that the standard
letters and explanatory note are being revised, b u t frankly it seems to me
that this applicant, w ith her poor com m and of English, should have been
told of the decision either directly or th ro ug h an interpreter in w ords that
she could understand.


 11. Oppression
    O n behalf of the second respondent M r Egan subm its that even if the
 decision was flawed w e should let it stand in justice to the second
 respondent because he w as told in D ecem ber 1992 that he w ould not be
 prosecuted and did not learn of this application until July 1993. Shortly
 before the decision w as taken it seems that som e m em ber of the applicant s
 family m ade an approach to the press, an d the applicant, having shared a
 roof w ith the second respondent for som e considerable time after she
 com plained to the police, has resisted his petition for divorce without
 cross-petitioning, all of w hich it is subm itted should weigh against
 reopening the decision w hether or not to prosecute. But m my judgment
 those m atters are of com paratively little w eight at this stage w hen the
 applicant could still if she w anted com m ence a private prosecution and has
 show n some indication of doing so. W ere she to do so the Director of Public
 Prosecutions m ight or m ight not feel constrained to take it over and offer
 no evidence, bu t for present purposes the im p o rtan t m atter is that the
 second respondent cannot claim to have been m isled into thinking that he
 w as free of all jeopardy. I say noth ing as to w hether if the second
 respondent is show n to have m ade adm issions after December 9 , 199_ in
  the belief that he w as no longer in dang er of being prosecuted by the
  Director of Public Prosecutions those adm issions w ould be admissible if
  such a prosecution w ere now to be launched. T hat m ay be a m atter for the
  Director of Public Prosecutions to consider w h en the m atter is returned to
  her, because in m y judgm ent the order n o w m u st be for the decision under
  challenge to be set aside, and for the m atter to be rem itted to the Director o
  Public Prosecutions for further consideration.
 146                                                            [1995] 1 C r .A pp .R.

    SCO TT BAKER J.: I agree. Section 12 of the Sexual Offences Act 1956
 provides that it is an offence for a person to com m it buggery with another
 person or w ith an animal. W here the offence is com m itted w ith a w om an
 the m axim um sentence is life im prisonm ent. In the case of buggery w ith a
 male subsequent legislation has created several different levels of offence
 and m axim um penalty d ep en d in g on the circum stances (see R. v. Courtie
 (1984) 78 Cr.App.R. 292, [1984] A.C. 463). W here the buggery is committed
w ith a w om an the m axim um penalty rem ains life im prisonm ent
 regardless of circumstances. In practice, how ever, there are two very
different offences w ithin section 12(1) d ep e n d in g upon w hether the
offence took place, w ith or w ith o u t the consent of the woman.
   In m y judgm ent, following R. v. Courtie the prosecutor should, if he
decides to proceed, m ake it clear w hether he is charging buggery w ithout
consent or buggery w ith consent. It m ay of course be appropriate to allege
offences in the alternative. I susp ect the difficulties in the present case m ay
in p art have arisen because M r N a u n to n did no t sufficiently distinguish in
his m ind that there are in practice tw o different offences w ithin section 12.

                                                           Application allowed.

  Solicitors: D avid Shine & K harbanda, Southall, for the applicant. Crown
Prosecution Service, London for the D.P.P., first respondent. R u s s e l l , Jones
& W alker for F.C., the second respondent.
s All ER             HL        Schmidt v Federal Government of Germany (Lord Slynn)                             79

■ennett v
                a    V ° RD SLJ NN OF HADLEY. My Lords, I agree that this appeal should be
use was
                                     reasons given by m y noble and learned friend Lord Jauncev
ones in              ofTullichettle.                                                          3
detected
 iad no
                  LORD LLOYD OF BERWICK. My Lords. I have had the advantage o f
                  reading in draft the speech prepared by m y noble and learned friend, Lord
                b Jauncey o f Tulhchettle. I agree with it and for the reasons he gives I too
                  w ould dismiss this appeal.                                                ~

                    Appeal dismissed.


                                                                                         Celia Fox     Barrister.




                                                           R v Adomako
                    H O U S E O F LORDS

s, the              LO R D MACKAY O F C LA SH FE R N LC, LO R D K E ITH O F KINKEL, L O R D G O F F O F CHIEVELEY,
 ional              L O R D B R O W N E -W IL K IN SO N A N D L O R D W O O L F
ously               10, 11 MAY, 30 JU N E 1994
                a
 their
i the
  law             Criminal law - Manslaughter - Recklessness or gross negligence - Involuntary
                  manslaughter by breach o f duty - Ingredients o f offence - Anaesthetist failing to
                  notice ventilator tube to patient disconnected - Patient dying - Anaesthetist charged
                e with manslaughter - Proper test o f involuntary manslaughter by breach of
                  professional duty o f care - Whether test gross negligence or recklessness - State of
                  mind o f defendant from which ju ry could find gross negligence.

                   The defendant was the anaesthetist during an eye operation o n a patient In
                   the course o f the operation the tube from the ventilator supplying oxygen
                ■ to the patient becam e disconnected. The defendant failed to notice the
                   disconnection for so m e six m inutes before the patient suffered a cardiac
                   arrest, from w hich he subsequently died. The defendant was charged with
                  manslaughter. At his trial it w as conceded on behalf o f the defendant that
                  he had been negligent and m edical evidence was called by the Crow n that
                  the defendant had sh o w n a gross dereliction o f care. T he jud ge directed the
                  jury that the test to be applied w as w hether the defendant had been guilty
                  o f gross negligence. T he defendant was convicted. H e appealed to the
                  Court o f Appeal on the ground that the judge had w rongly directed the jury
                  by applying the test o f gross n egligen ce for manslaughter. T he Court o f
                  Appeal, applying the test that the ingredients o f involuntary m anslaughter
                    y breach o f duty w hich need ed to be proved by the Crow n w ere ( 1 ) the
                  existence o f the duty (2 ) a breach o f the duty causing death and (3 ) gross
                 negligence w hich the jury considered justified a criminal conviction
                 dism issed the appeal on the ground that the jury had been directed
                 according to the proper test and the evidence justified a verdict o f guilty
                 T he defendant appealed to the H o u se o f Lords                                '




            *
       80
                                           All England Law Reports
                                                                                                            [1994] 3 All ER                   HL

       breach o f duty                                                                                                   by                   Lord Williams oj
       w as in breach o f a duty o f care t o w a r d th                                   f°u nd , that the defendant                          Partners) for tl
       o f duty caused the death o f the victim a H                                                d'ed ’ tIlat tIle breach                   Ann Cum ow QC
      as to be characterised as gross                  "                           j    1,     reac}l o f duty was such                         Servicc. Headq
      the defendant's breach o f duty am ounted ^                                          refore a c n m e - W hether
      the seriousness o f the breach o f dutv r          °                                   n eS^Sen ce depended on                          Their Lordships :
     circumstances in w hich he w l l r e T T ^ ^ ^ defendant in a 1 1 * *                                                               b
     having regard to the risk o f death invnl ^      u * ° ccurred and whether,
                                                                                                                                             30 June 1994. Tb
     w as so bad in all the circumstances aTIo a ’ ^     “ S * " * ° f the defendant
     criminal act or om ission. A lthough it w a ^ ° Um “ the Jur7 ' s Judgm en t to a
                                                                                                                                                 LO RD MACKAY
    w ord 'reckless' in its                             “ 3 * * j ud« e to         the
                                                                                                                                                with the leave o f
    circumstances o f the particular case as inH f        u°      aPProPriate in the                                                       c an order o f the C
    defendant’s conduct had to deviate from th t- f ” 8       CXtent t 0 w hich the                                               1
                                                                                                                                                CJ, H enry, and B
    w as n ot obligatory for the j u d g e s o t          o                          *
                                                                                                                                                appellant’s appeal
    proper in cases o f gross negligence to      ? * e jury and it w ould not be
    on the w ord 'reckless’. On the facts rhP detailed         elaborate directions                                                                The conviction
                                                                                                                                                at the Mayday H
    been properly directed and ^herefo^e his a n o e a f “                                                    “ “ had                          during the latter
    h t o p 8 7 c g h , p 8 8 g h z n d p 8 9 d to j , p ost?                                       dismissed (see p 8 6 £
                                                                                                                                         d patient.
       R v Seymour [1983]       2       All ER 1058 overruled                                                                                     T he operation
       K v Lawrence [1981]          1   All ER 974 n o t follow ed                                                                             five nurses and a
       D ecision o f the Court o f Appeal [1993]                           4   All ER   9 3 5   affirmed.                                      T he patient was j
                                                                                                                                               was inserted to ei
   N o te s                                                                                                                             g start o f the operat
   For killing by recklessness or gross n egligen ce s e e l l f i m i i , > r                                                                departm ent assists
   edn reissue) paras 445-447, and for cases nn r L      k         Hahbury ^ w (4th                                                           was a changeover
   reissue) 95-98, 5937-5965.                         subject, see 14(2) Digest (2 nd                                                         take Dr Said’s plac
                                                                                                                                             to deal w ith anoth
   C ases referred to in o p in io n s                                                                                        f              was called to atten
                                                                                                                                        f        At approximate]
                 1 1 9 3 7 1 2 A" BR 552- 1,937>A c                                    rc-                                                   tube con n ection . ’
  Kong Cheuk Kwan    v R (1985) 82 Cr App R i 8 PC                                                                                           cardiac arrest at 1 ]
  R v Bateman (1925) 19 Cr App R 8 CCA                                                                                                       or rem edy the d isc
  av              [1981],   M           BR974     [’   m   z   ]   A   £
                                                                                                                                                 The appellant £
  R v S ^ r [ , , S31 2 M E R , 058i [19M ] 2 A (; ^                                       J     ^ «   524 H l            g            jr alarm sou nd ed or
      X™ . * . * « „            tl9 7 7 ,   2   A„ E R 341i [1977) QB j5 4 i [i9 77 j                       2   w HL. ^                     b lood pressure. Fi
                                                                                                                                            have elapsed betw
                                                                                                                                            W h en this alarm
 R Z W        U M ^ c ”          ' “ P ^               119871 2                 E R 129' t'SS SJ QB 467, (1987)                             checking the equip
                                                                                                                                           pulse. But at no st;
 R v Williamson (1807) 3 C & P 635, 172 ER 579, N P.                                                                      h                the endotracheal
                                                                                                                                           discovered until aft.
 A ppeal
                                                                                                                                               For the prosecut
                                                                                                                                          n egligen ce in failing
{ L o r d ^ a y ^ o ^ ^ f ^ o s f t H t ^ C ^ H 8 3 1 1 1 8 1 ^ decision o f the Court o f Appeal                                         a d isconnection hac
[1994] QBy 302) d             e l S           ^         S                ^          4 M ER9“ - '                                      J particular the prose
conviction on 26 January 1990 at the C en traf                              n appeal aSainst his                                          various stages d uri
a      a jury o f manslaughter for w h k h hp                               C° Urt bef° re                                                either occurred or
im prisonm ent suspended for 1 2 m onths                         T h e fSCntenced to 6 m on th s’                                         m oving, the dials
judgm ent o f the Lord Mackay LC.                                                            S 3rC Set out 111 the                        operating, the disco
                                                                                                                                         ventilator was noi
94] 3 All ER                        HL
                                                           R v A dom ako (Lord M ackay LC)                                81
'sla u g h te r by
ie d e fe n d a n t
it th e b re a c h
Jty w as su ch
e. W h e th e r
                                    M"sX H«Sf,i™irftThe'c“l.(inStr““dbythe
ie p en d e d o n
                                    Their Lordships took tim e for consideration.
;n t in all th e              b
id w h e th e r ,
e d e fe n d a n t                 30 June 1994. T he fo llo w in g opinions w ere delivered.
i g m e n t to a
   to use th e
Jria te in th e
1 w h ich th e
d o f care, it
>uld n o t be                      appellant s appeal against con viction for m anslaughter was dismissed,
 * d irection s
  s case h a d                     at the M ayday"ho spi t a1,° c r o y d cm o n ^ J m ^ i w     °                     ° Ut
  d (see p 86
                          - p S ,he htKr                             "         P        a       s       s    e     s
                                     The operation was carried ou t by tw o surgeons supported by a team n f
                                  The i r        3   f rC SiSten ^ “ ^ “ ia co m m en ced at about 9 45 a m
                                  The patient was paralysed by injection o f a drug and an endotracheal t X
                                  7 Z o fZ       t0 CnablV hC P atlem t 0 brCathe ^ mechanical means             it" L
                          e        tart o f the operation the anaesthetist w as D r Said a rerisn-ar A n n
                                  department assistant was also present to help h im ’ At fb o u t 1 0 ^ ) °       l      g
 Laws (4th
digest (2nd

                          ,
                                  mbAe ^ r „ ” S o „ atd T he 05 T   V                               « the endotracheal




-IL.
■, H L.
VLR 169,                      have elapsed b etw ee^ the T               ^ lta p p ea rs that som e 4 * m inutes w ould
                              When
 77, ^H987]
       9




~A ppeal ;
ER 935, ]             j       S             S            | | g             S           | i      £           S
iinst his
A llio ttJ
n o n th s '
  in th e
                              =       s     ~ - r s s s
   82                           All England Law Reports
                                                   __________[1994] 3 A IIER                           HL

   Z f r ^ T l Yf hlr ,     Furthjer the Prosecution alle8 ed that the appellant had                   ma
   durincr rh         a       understand the c o r r e a significance o f the fact that           3    of
   pressure h a / Z ^ p e d ' P , ” “ t ‘ PU'Se ha<i           “ d ' h5 P a,iem 'S bl° 0,i            dux
                                                                                                      wh
   H        ? P! T w itn f ss? S ave 'Vkfcnce for the prosecution. Professor Payne                    pro
           ,   he standard o f ca re as ‘abysm al’ while Professor Adams stated                       inji
   that in his view a com p eten t anaesthetist should have recognised the signs
   o f disconnection w ithin 15 seconds and that the appellant's c o n d fc t                    b      d et'
   am ounted to a gross dereliction o f care’.                                                         inv<
                                                                                                       jur)
    On b eh alf o f the appellant it was conceded at his trial that h e had been
                                                                                                       a se
  negligent. T h e issue w as therefore w heth er his conduct was criminal
                                                                                                       imp
  Monl! T * W!tnCSS C3lled ° n ^ h a l f o f the appellant at his trial w as Dr                        and
  Monks. His evidence conceded that the appellant ought to have n oticed the                     C elec
  disconnection. But in his v iew there w ere factors w hich m itigated this
                                                                                                       Ado
  Failure H e considered that another independent problem either occurred or
                                                                                                       exce
  could have occurred before or at the sam e time as the disconnection w hich
                                                                                                       w as
      r cted the appellant s attention and activities. This problem w o u ld in                       AC
  his v ie w have caused the patient's b lood pressure to drop and m ay either
                                                                                                 rt circi
  have been a reaction to the drug being used to paralyse the patient or '
                                                                                                      driv
  alternatively m ay have been caused by an ocular cardiac reflex.
                                                                                                     jury
      nC aPPellant h im self said in evidence that w h en the alarm sou nd ed on                      974,
  die Dinam ap m achine his first thought w as that the m achine itself w as not                      to Cl
 l n ?g r ° Pu y '             ing Carried OUt checks on the machine he then                         the i
 admi r        <5     Patient had suffered an ocular cardiac reflex for w hich he            1
                                                                                                 *       In
  dmmistered atropine in tw o successive doses.            Further attempts to
                                                                                                     Lore
 administer atropine by intravenous drip and to check the patient’s blood                            char;
 pressure follow ed until the cardiac arrest occurred. It had never occurred to
                                                                                                     appli
 hun that a d isconnection had taken place. H e stated in evidence tha after
                                                                                                     to in
 things w en t w ro n g I think I did panic a bit’.
                                                                                                    that
 hacTconceded H° ^        appellant’s actions during this period Professor Payne             1      man:
 H m self the , f f rn nK Cr° SS, CXamination that g>ven that Dr A dom ako misled                   basis
 rhic    ,    eff° f s h * m ade w ere n ot unreasonable’. The period to w hich                     invol
 on the A” 06 r'          r   ° bviOUsly the Period after the alarm had sounded                     thou;
     the D m am ap m achine w hich was as I have said apparently so m e 4i                         negli
 m inutes after the d isconnection occurred                                     g
                                                                                                   mans
T h ^ r i ^ T co n ^icted the a p p d h n t o f m sinskughter by a majority o f 1 1 to 1           dowr
The Court o f Appeal, Criminal D ivision dismissed the appellant’s appeal                          cases
against conviction but certified that a point o f law o f general public                           provi
importance w as in volved in the decision to dismiss the appeal,Nam ely P                               Lils
         In cases o f m anslaughter by criminal negligence n ot involving driving ^                revie'
                                                                                                   opinii
       i "     1™ * “ bre“ h ° f '      “ « a sufficient direction to t h f j u ^ t o
       adopt the gross n egligen ce test set ou t by the Court o f Appeal in the

    DPpT[ i I s7]
               TA2 All
                   auTER ^                     19 C r APP R 8 and A
                                                                                                         n
                              n o f
                         552, [1937] AC (1925)
                                        576 w ithou t reference to thendrewso v
                                                                       test   f                          d
    recklessness as defined in R v Lawrence [1981] 1 All ER 974, [1982] AC 510 j                        T
    or as adapted to the circumstances o f the case?’
                                                                                                        tl
                                                                                                        ir
[1994]6 O B S 3 0 2 ° )f| the C ° T ° f Appf al iS rePon:ed at [1993] 4 All ER 935,                     tc
1.1994] QB 302 along w ith a num ber o f other cases involving similar
questions o f law. T he Court o f Appeal held that except in cases o f m otor                           a
                                                                                                        d
4] 3 All ER           HL                     R v Adom ako (Lord M ackay LC)                               83
pellant had
                    ? manslaughter the ingredients w hich had to be proved to establish an offence
e fact that     3
                        o f involuntary m anslaughter by breach o f duty w ere the existence o f the
^nt’s blood
                        duty, a breach o f the duty w hich had caused death and gross negligence
                        which the jury considered to justify a criminal conviction; the jury m ight
 ssor Payne            properly find gross n egligence on p r o o f o f indifference to an obvious risk o f
ams stated             injury to health or o f actual foresight o f the risk coupled either w ith a
i the signs         , determination nevertheless to run it or w ith an intention to avoid it but
 s conduct             involving such a high degree o f negligence in the attem pted avoidance as the
                       jury considered justified conviction or o f inattention or failure to advert to
  had been             a serious risk g o in g b eyond m ere inadvertence in respect o f an obvious and
nai.                   important m atter w h ich the defendant’s duty dem anded he should address;
 al w as Dr            and that, in the circum stances, the appeals o f the tw o junior doctors and the
loticed the c          electrician w o u ld be allow ed and the appeal o f the anaesthetist, nam ely Dr
 gated this            Adom ako, w o u ld be dismissed. The reason that the Court o f Appeal
ccurred or             excepted the cases o f m o to r m anslaughter and their form ulation o f the law
 ion w hich            was the decision o f this H ou se in R v Seymour [1983] 2 All ER 1058, [1983] 2
  w ould in            AC 493 in w hich it w as held that w here m anslaughter w as charged and the
 lay either (j         circumstances w er e that the victim w as killed as a result o f the reckless
□aatient
   tie n t or          driving o f the defendant o n a public highw ay, the trial jud ge should give the
                      jury the direction w h ich had been suggested in R v Lawrence [1981] 1 All ER
  mcrea on
undFd    <            974, [1982] AC 510 b ut that it w as appropriate also to p oint ou t that in order
 f w as not           to constitute the offence o f m anslaughter the risk o f death being caused by
   he then            the m anner o f the defendant’s driving m ust be very high.
w hich he                  In o p en ing his very co gen t argum ent for the appellant before your
empts to              Lordships, counsel subm itted that the law in this area should have the
:t’s blood            characteristics o f clarity, certainty, intellectual coherence and general
curred to             applicability and acceptability. For these reasons he said the law applying
 hat ‘after           to involuntary m anslaughter generally should involve a universal test and
                      that test should be the test already applied in this H ou se to m o tor
or Payne              manslaughter. H e criticised the concept o f gross negligence w h ich was the
:o misled             basis o f the ju d g m e n t o f the Court o f Appeal subm itting that its form ulation
to w hich             involved circularity, the jury b eing told in effect to con vict o f a crime if they
 sounded              thought a crime had b een com m itted and that accordingly using gross
 som e 4i            negligence as the conceptual basis for the crime o f involuntary
                     m anslaughter w as unsatisfactory and the court should apply the law laid
 f 1 1 to 1 .        dow n in R v Seymour [1983] 2 All ER 1058, [1983] 2 AC 4 9 3 generally to all
 s appeal            cases o f involuntary m anslaughter or at least use this as the basis for
il public            providing general applicability and acceptability.
iy:                      Like the Court o f Appeal you r Lordships w ere treated to a considerable




  *
                     review o f authority. I begin w ith R v Bateman (1925) 19 Cr App R 8 and the
       ng '          opinion o f Lord H ew art CJ, w here he said (at 1 0 - 1 2 );
       to
il in the                   In expounding the law to juries on the trial o f indictm ents for
ndrews v                 m anslaughter by negligence, jud ges have often referred to the
e test o f .             distinction b etw e e n civil and criminal liability for death by negligence.
 AC 510 J                The law o f criminal liability for negligence is con ven iently explained in
                         that w ay. If A. has caused the death o f B. by alleged negligence, then,
                         in order to establish civil liability, the plaintiff m ust prove (in addition
ER 935,
                         to pecuniary loss caused by the death) that A. o w e d a duty to B. to take
 similar
                         care, that that duty w as n ot discharged, and that the default caused the
f m otor
                         death o f B. T o con vict A. o f manslaughter, the prosecution m ust prove
 84                         All England Law Reports                  [1994)3 All ER             HL

       the three things above m entioned and m u st satisfy the jury, in addition
       that A. s n egligence am ounted to a crime. In the civil action, if it is
       proved that A. fell short o f the standard o f reasonable care required by
       law it matters n ot h o w far he fell short o f that standard. The extent o f
       his liability depends n ot on the degree o f negligence, but on the am ou n t
      o f dam age done. In a criminal Court, o n the contrary, the am oun t arid
        egree o f n egligen ce are the determ ining question. There m ust be m en s
      rea ... In explaining to juries the test w h ich they should apply to
      determ ine w h eth er the negligence, in the particular case, am ounted or
      did n o t am ou n t to a crime, judges have used m any epithets, such as
        culpable,     criminal, “gross,” "wicked," “clear," “complete." But
      w h a tever epithet be used and w h eth er an epithet b e used or not, in
      order to establish criminal liability the facts m ust be such that in the
      opinion o f the jury, the negligence o f the accused w e n t beyond a m ere
      W r i T i°f CO™pe? satlorn b etw een subjects and sh ow ed such disregard
       o the life and safety o f others as to am oun t to a crime against the State                Next
      and conduct deserving p un ish m en t/
                                                                                                a case <
                                                                                                speech
After dealing w ith a num ber o f authorities Lord H ew art CJ w en t on (at      1 2   -   (
                                                                                                Lord A


        The law as laid d o w n in these cases m ay be thus summarised: If a
      person holds h im self out as possessing special skill and know ledge and
      he is consulted as possessing such skill and k now ledge, by or on b eh a lf ,
      u n i Pr T m '        OWCS 3 dUty t 0 the Patient       U*e d“ e caution in ‘
      undertaking the treatment.           If he accepts the responsibility and
         dertakes the treatm ent and the patient submits to his direction and
      treatm ent accordingly, he o w es a duty to the patient to use diligence
      care     o w led g e, skill and caution in administering the treatment. N o
      contractual relation is necessary, nor is it necessary that the service be *
                                                                                                     ma
   tT /n n l  A             Jt * f° r the jud ge to direct the JUI7 what standard
   to apply and for the jury to say w h eth er that standard has been reached
   The jury should n o t exact the highest, or a very high, standard nor
   should they be co n ten t w ith a very lo w standard. The law requires a fair
   he                       nStu   ^ ° f C3re 3nd co m Petence. This standard m u st a
   be reached m a ll the matters above m en tion ed . If the patient’s death has
   been caused by the defendant’s indolence or carelessness, it w ill n ot
   a V a i l , t 0 sh o w that he had sufficient know ledge; nor w ill it avail to prove

   that he w as diligent in attendance, if the patient has b een killed b y his
   gross ignorance and unskilfblness. N o farther observation need be
   m ade w ith regard to cases w here the death is alleged to have b een h
   caused by indolence or carelessness.                   As regards cases w here
  in com petence is alleged, it is on ly necessary to say that the unqualified
  riiar T ' ^ cannot claim to be m easured by any lo w er standard than
  ir k lJ              1S. apphed    ,a qualified m an. As regards cases o f alleged
    ecklessness juries are likely to distinguish b etw e en the qualified and j
   he unqualified man. There m ay be recklessness in undertaking the
  treatm ent and recklessness in the con d uct o f it.              It is, no doubt
  conceivable that a qualified m an m ay b e held liable for recklessly
  undertaking a case w h ich he knew, or should have k now n, to be beyond
  his pow ers, or for m aking his patient the subject o f reckless experiment.
                                                                                                  ign<




                                                                                 v
3 All ER             HL                      R v A d o m ako (Lord M ackay LC)                              85

iddition,                  Such cases are likely to be rare. In the case o f the quack, where the
   if it is   a           treatment has been proved to be in co m p eten t and to have caused the
uired by                   patient's death, juries are n o t likely to hesitate in finding liability on the
•xtent o f                 ground that the defendant undertook, and continued to treat, a case
 am ount                   involving the gravest risk to his patient, w h e n he knew he was not
 unt and                   com petent to deal w ith it, or w ou ld have k now n if he had paid any
be m ens      Ij          proper regard to the life and safety o f his patient. T he foregoing
 pply to                   observations deal w ith civil liability. T o support an indictment for
inted or                   manslaughter the p rosecu tion m ust prove the matters necessary to
 such as                   establish civil liability (except pecuniary loss), and, in addition, m ust
     But,                  satisfy the jury that the n egligen ce or in com p eten ce o f the accused w en t
  not, in                  beyond a m ere m atter o f com p en sation and sh o w ed such disregard for
:, in the     C           the life and safety o f others as to am oun t to a crim e against the State and
  a m ere                  conduct deserving p un ish m en t.’
isregard
he State                Next I turn to Andrews v DPP [1937] 2 All ER 552, [1937] AC 576 w hich w as
                     a case o f m anslaughter through the dangerous driving o f a m o to r car. In a
                   , speech w ith w h ich all the other m em bers o f this H ou se w h o sat agreed,
                     Lord Atkin said ([1937] 2 All ER 552 at 554-555, [1937] AC 576 at 581-582):
 I f                          ‘... o f all crimes m anslaughter appears to afford m ost difficulties o f
 ed: If a                  definition, for it concerns hom icide in so m any and so varying
ige and                    conditions. From the early days, w h e n any h om icid e involved penalty,
i b eh alf    g           the law has gradually ev o lv ed “through successive differentiations and
 tion in                   integrations" until it recognises m urder o n the on e hand, based mainly,
 ty and                    though not exclusively, o n an intention to kill, and m anslaughter on the
 o n and                   other hand, based mainly, thou gh n o t exclusively, on the absence o f
 igence,                   intention to kill, but w ith the presence o f an elem en t o f "unlawfulness”
 it. N o                   w hich is the elusive factor. In the present case it is necessary to consider
 vice be      f           manslaughter only from the point o f v ie w o f an unintentional killing
  andard                   caused by negligence, i.e., the om ission o f a duty to take care. I do not
 ;ached.                   propose to discuss the d evelopm en t o f this branch o f the subject as
 ~d, nor                   treated in the successive treatises o f Coke, H ale, Foster and East, and in
 :s a fair                 the judgm ents o f the courts to be found either in directions to juries by
 d m ust      g           individual judges, or in the m ore considered pronouncem ents o f the
 ath has                   b ody o f jud ges w hich preceded the formal Court o f Crow n Cases
/ill not                   Reserved. Expressions w ill be found w h ich indicate that to cause death
3 prove                   b y any lack o f due care w ill am oun t to manslaughter; but, as manners
  by his                   softened and the law b ecam e m ore hum ane, a narrower criterion
;e^ b e       ^           appeared. After all, m anslaughter is a felony, and w as capital, and m en
                          shrank from attaching the serious co n seq u en ces o f a conviction for
 w here                    felony to results produced b y m ere inadvertence. The stricter v ie w
lalified                  becam e apparent in prosecutions o f m edical m en, or m en w h o
d than                    professed m edical or surgical skill, for m anslaughter by reason o f
illeged                   negligence. As an instance I w ill cite R ,v. Williamson ((1807) 3 C 8C P
:d and j      J           635, 172 ER 579) w here a m an w h o practised as an accoucheur, o w in g
n g the                   to a mistake in his observation o f the actual sym ptom s, inflicted o n a
doubt,                    patient terrible injuries from w h ich she died, l o r d e l l e n b o r o u g h said:
klessly                   "To substantiate that charge [o f m anslaughter] the prisoner m ust have
 eyond                    been guilty o f criminal m isconduct, arising either from the grossest
im ent.                   ignorance or the m o st criminal inattention." T he w ord "criminal” in
 86                            All England Law Reports                    [1994] 3 All ER                    HL

       any attempt to define a crim e is perhaps not the m ost helpful, but it is                           w h eth er that
       plain that l o r d e l l e n b o r o u g h m eant to indicate to the jury a high degree       3   a  therefore as £
       o f negligence. So at a m u ch later date in R v. Bateman ((1925) 19 Cr App                          duty co m m it
       R 8 ) a charge o f m anslaughter w as m ade against a qualified m edical                             defendant w;
       practitioner in similar circum stances to those o f Williamson’s case.’                              w h eth er the
 Lord Atkin then refers to the ju d g m en t o f Lord H ewart CJ from w hich I                              proper standa
 have already quoted and g o es on ([1937] 2 All ER 552 at 556, [1937] AC 576 b t                        £ a risk o f deatl
 at 583):                                                                                                       It is true th
                                                                                                            in this b ra n d
           Here, again, I th in k ,. w ith respect, the expressions used are not,                           a test o f ho
        indeed they probably w ere n o t intended to be, a precise definition o f the                       characterised
        crime. I do n ot m y se lf find the connotations o f mens rea helpful in                            attem pt to sp
        distinguishing b etw e en degrees o f negligence, nor do the ideas o f crime             c       c a spurious pr
        and punishm ent in them selves carry a jury m uch further in deciding                               question, is
       whether, in a particular case, the degree o f negligence show n is a crime,                          con d uct o f tl
       and deserves punishm ent. But the substance o f the judgm ent is m ost                               in their judgr
       valuable, and, in m y opinion, is correct. In practice, it has generally
                                                                                                                M y Lords
       been adopted by jud ges in charging juries in all cases o f manslaughter                  ^
                                                                                                         d crim e o f in\
       by negligence, w h eth er in driving vehicles or otherwise. The principle
                                                                                                            stated by co'
       to be observed is that cases o f m anslaughter in driving m otor cars are
                                                                                                            definition w t
       but instances o f a general rule applicable to all charges o f homicide by
                                                                                                            practicable a
       negligence. Simple lack o f care such as will constitute civil liability is
                                                                                                            jury's deterrr
       not enough. For purposes o f the criminal law there are degrees o f
       negligence, and a very high degree o f negligence is required to be                       e              M y Lords :
       proved before the felo n y is established. Probably o f all the epithets that                        [1983] 2 AC
       can be applied "reckless" m o st nearly covers the case. It is difficult to                          provisions oi
      visualise a case o f death caused by "reckless" driving, in the connotation                           Act 1991. It
       o f that term in ordinary speech, w h ich w ou ld n ot justify a conviction                           result becorr
       for manslaughter, but it is probably n ot all-embracing, for "reckless”                   f          excep tion to
      suggests an indifference to risk, w hereas the accused may have                                     f exception, in
      appreciated the risk, and intended to avoid it, and yet show n in the                                 in Kong Che
      m eans adopted to avoid the risk, such a high degree o f negligence as                                 unnecessary
      w ould justify a conviction. If the principle o f Bateman’s case ((1925) 19                           vessels and t!
      Cr App R 8 ) is observed, it w ill appear that the law o f manslaughter has                               I consider
      n ot changed by the introduction o f m o to r vehicles on the road. D eath                 9       g in cases o f
      caused by their n egligen t driving, th ou gh unhappily m uch m ore                                   ordinary cor
      frequent, is to be treated in law as death caused by any other form o f                               m y m ind, w:
      negligence, and juries should be directed accordingly.’                                               341, [1977] q
                                                                                                             [1988] QB 4f
   In m y opinion the law as stated in these tw o authorities is satisfactory as ,
                                                                                                          ,     In m y opi:
providing a proper basis for describing the crime o f involuntary
                                                                                                            g iv e the de
manslaughter. Since the decision in Andrews v DPP [1937] 2 All ER 552,
                                                                                                             'reckless' as;
[1937] AC 576 w as a decision o f you r Lordships’ H ouse, it remains the m ost
                                                                                                            T h e decisioi
authoritative statem ent o f the present la w w hich I have been able to find
                                                                                                            w ith w h ich
and although its relationship to R v Seymour [1983] 2 All ER 1058/[1983] 2 AC
                                                                                                            in this cas
493 is a m atter to w hich I shall have to return, it is a decision w hich has n o t j
                                                                                                          j manslaught<
been departed from. O n this basis in m y op inion the ordinary principles o f
                                                                                                            rather rigid
the la w o f negligence apply to ascertain w h eth er or not the defendant has
                                                                                                            circum stanc
b een in breach o f a duty o f care towards the victim w h o has died. If such
                                                                                                            so various
breach o f duty is established the next question is w hether that breach o f
                                                                                                            directions,
duty caused the death o f the victim. If so, the jury m ust go on to consider
                                                                                                            the basis in ’
Ml ER
                 HL                           R v A d om ako (Lord M ackay LC)                           87
it it is
iegree      a    ™ ber that breach o f duty should be characterised as gross negligence and
rA p p           therefore as a crime. This will depend on the seriousness o f the breach o f
 'dical          duty com m itted by the defendant in all the circumstances in w hich the
                 defendant was placed w h e n it occurred. The jury w ill have to consider
                 w hether the extent to w hich the defendant’s conduct departed from the
lich I           proper standard o f care incum bent upon him, involving as it m ust have done"
" 576      b     a risk o f death to the patient, w as such that it should be judged criminal.
                    It is true that to a certain extent this involves an elem en t o f circularity, but
  not,           in this branch o f the la w I do n ot b elieve that is fatal to its being correct as
 f the           a test o f h o w far con d uct m u st depart from accepted standards to be
al in            characterised as criminal. This is necessarily a question o f degree and an
rime            attempt to specify that degree m ore closely is I think likely to achieve only
ding            a spurious precision. T h e essence o f the matter, w hich is suprem ely a jury
  m e,          question, is whether, having regard to the risk o f death involved the
nost            conduct o f the defendant w as so bad in all the circumstances as to am ount
                in their ju d g m en t to a criminal act or om ission.
ralL
htel               My Lords the v ie w w h ich I have stated o f the correct basis in law for the
 iple      d crime o f involuntary m anslaughter accords I consider w ith the criteria
  are            stated by counsel although I have n ot reached the degree o f precision in
  by            definition w hich he required, but in m y opinion it has been reached so far as
y is            practicable and w ith a result w h ich leaves the m atter properly stated for a
   of           jury s determination.
  be       3 r , n ^ L° rf ‘n m y 7 CW the law as stated in R v Seymour [1983] 2 All ER 1058
hat           [1983] 2 AC 493 should no lo n g er apply since the underlying statutory
  to         provisions on w hich it rested have n o w been repealed by the Road Traffic
 on             ct 1991. It m ay be that cases o f involuntary m o to r m anslaughter will as a
 on          result b ecom e rare but I consider it unsatisfactory that there should be any
5S”          exception to the generality o f the statem ent w hich I have m ade, since such
ve           exception, in m y view , gives rise to unnecessary com plexity. For example
 le          in Kong C h eu kK w an v R (1985) 82 Cr App R 18, it w o u ld give rise to
 as          unnecessary differences b etw e en the law applicable to those navigating
19           vessels and the lookouts o n the vessels.
as              I consider it perfectly appropriate that the w ord 'reckless’ should be used
th Q       , in cases o f involuntary m anslaughter, but as Lord Atkin put it 'in the
~e           ordinary connotation o f that w o r d ’. Examples in w hich this w as done to
Df           m y mind, w ith com plete accuracy are R v Stone, R v Dobinson [ 1 9 7 7 ] 2 All ER
               ri4 o a « n % ?     3 5 4   3nd R V WeSt London Cor°ner, e x p Gray [1987] 2 All ER 129
               [1988J C^)i3 467.                                                                         ’
s
                In m y opinion it is quite unnecessary in the context o f gross negligence to
y
             give the detailed directions w ith regard to the m eaning o f the word
t             reckless associated w ith R v Lawrence [1981] 1 All E R ;974, [1982] AC 510.
i            The decision o f the Court o f Appeal, Criminal D ivision in the other cases
            w ith w hich they w ere concerned at the sam e tim e as they heard the appeal
            in this case indicates that the circumstances in w h ich involuntary
            manslaughter has to be considered m ay m ake the so m ew h a t elaborate and
            rather rigid directions inappropriate. I entirely agree w ith the v iew that the
            circumstances to w hich a charge o f involuntary m anslaughter m ay apply are
            so various that it is u nw ise to attem pt to categorise or detail specimen
            directions. For m y part I w o u ld n o t w ish to g o b eyond the description o f
            tne basis in law w hich I have already given.
   88
                                 All England Law Reports                 [1994] 3 All ER                                HL

  . I S                                        >r ™ d judge         the present case was                                I have r e a d
                                                                                                      a
  manner which was r e a d i l / c o m p r e h e n S e “ v‘ the T u ^ Z             * *                           a case as did the
  was cnricised in respect o f the inclusion „ f thc f „ l l o w " „ ? p , s » g e ® "P                             m ore elaborate
                                                                                                                    expressions us
                                                                                                                    th ey w ere use(
                                                                     humbie m” ° f                                 lead to am big
                                                                                                               fo ju d ges in setti:
                                                                                                                   cases o f this .
                                                                                                                   suprem e test
                                                                                                                   com prehensibl
                                                                                                                   a jury and whc
                                                                                                                   it obligatory o:
                                                                                                               C that the ordim
                                                                                                                  them , and eve
                                                                                                                  purpose o f app
                                                                                                                  T he experienc
                                                                                                                  indicated that ;
                                                                                                              ^ definition o f tt
 wal^ “„TThr4eP,‘* UlS I t ‘’A " <T °t±1S                                                    ** ‘                 is perfectly op
 skilled doctor should h , « g i “ t * '             f d Wl“ ‘                                                    appropriate in
 causing death by n e d ie e n c e W VH       1 •  ^ JUry to convict him o f                                      to w h ich a def<
 with the statem ent o f a necessarv    y Spea^ ng this passage is concerned
                                                                                                                  o f care, I do i
a conviction unless that condition ^ s a t S e d ^ It “ "ViCti° n by Preventing                                   certainly not ri
stating a sufficient condition fr>r ^            ■ It is incorrect to treat it as                 g
                                                                                                              e Lawrence [ 1981]
Passage in the                                       S S ^ E        i T s l 'Y **
this case was n ot to be mdc-eH Kv L       .   j     j r   y         1 tbe defendant in
                                                                                                                      L O R D KEITH
the standard o f a ^ S y ^                ^         0^     " r h e r f ^ dOCt“ S b ” ^                                o f m y noble an
passages in the su m m in g up w h ic h V m n h a slse d r L     T f       T ™ 7 ° ther                               read in draft ai
                                                                                                              f       answ er the cert
                 uh; =           £ i s r “ d rad - tb~                                         '
                                                                                                                      L O R D GOFF
and that * e S      S    , »“ , * ! ,                                    b' diS”’ ‘S“ d                               sp eech o f m y n
                                                                                                                      I have read in c
                                                                                                                      and answ er the
   d»                              S T h e a‘         ™ 0 l™ e » br“ d ' ° f 9                            9
   test set „ » , b y the Court T « ° S ‘“V ' ' ad° pt ,he * " » ™ g B g « c c
   Bateman (1925) 19 Cr Aon R 8 and A ^        Present case follow ing R v                                        LORD b r o w ;
   [1937] AC 576 and it £                      V ° PP [1937] 2 M ER ” 2,                                          sp eech o f m y n'
                                                                                                                  I have read in d
   recklessness in R v Lawrence [19^       Z       e r   977 % S ] AC s l f S * '       °h
                                                                                                                  and answ er the
                                                                                                          h
                                                                                              h
                                                                                                                  L O R D W O O L]
   appropnate in the circum stances o f the particular case                         $   11
                                                                                                                  sp eech o f m y n
                                                                                                                  w ith w hich I ag
                                                                                                                  q uestion as he h
                                                                                                          J
                                                                                                                  Appeal dismissed
3 All ER             HL                    R v A d om ako {Lord M ackay LC)                           89

case was                I have reached the sam e conclusion on the basic law to be applied in this
         a       a   case as did the C ourt o f Appeal. Personally I w o u ld not w ish to state the law
law in a
m ing up             m ore elaborately than I have done. In particular I think it is difficult to take
                     expressions used in particular cases ou t o f the context o f the cases in w hich
                     they w ere used and enunciate them as if applying generally. This can I think
 n o f the           lead to am biguity and perhaps unnecessary com plexity. T he task o f trial
•y Street    ^   ^   judges in setting o u t for the jury the issues o f fact and the relevant law in
le in this           cases o f this class is a difficult and dem anding one. I believe th a u th e
"hey are             suprem e test that should be satisfied in such directions is that they are
  to the             com prehensible to an ordinary m em b er o f the public w h o is called to sit on
;asis that           a jury and w h o has no particular prior acquaintance w ith the law. T o m ake
Ifiil m en           it obligatory on trial ju d g es to give directions in law w h ich are so elaborate
 in your     C   C   that the ordinary m em b er o f the jury w ill have great difficulty in follow ing
he least             them , and even greater difficulty in retaining them in his m em ory for the
 onvict a            purpose o f application in the jury room , is no service to the cause o f justice.
m ething             T he experienced cou n sei w h o assisted your Lordships in this appeal
                     indicated that as a practical m atter there w as a danger in over-elaboration o f
                 ^   definition o f the w ord ‘reckless’. W hile therefore I have said in m y v iew it
 n d jg t it d       is perfectly op en to a trial jud ge to use the w ord ‘reckless’ if it appears
a sd ^ P sy          appropriate in the circum stances o f a particular case as indicating the extent
r him o f            to w hich a defendant's conduct m ust deviate from that o f a proper standard
 ncem ed             o f care, I do n ot think it right to require that this should be done and
  venting            certainly n ot right that it should incorporate the full detail required in R v
eat it as e      e   Lawrence [1981] 1 All ER 974, [1982] AC 510.
that this
ndant in             LO RD KEITH O F KINKEL. My Lords, for the reasons given in the speech
 s but by            o f m y noble and learned friend Lord Mackay o f C lashfem LC, w h ich I have
 y other             read in draft and w ith w h ich I agree, I, too, w o u ld dismiss the appeal and
 egree o f
                 f   answer the certified question as he has proposed.
 der that ^
                     LO RD GOFF OF CHIEVELEY. My Lords, for the reasons given in the
 smissed             speech o f m y n oble and learned friend Lord Mackay o f C lashfem LC, w hich
                     I have read in draft and w ith w hich I agree, I, too, w ou ld dismiss the appeal
                     and answer the certified question as he has proposed.
reach o f g
gligence
ring R v             LO RD B R O W N E -W IL K IN SO N . My Lords, for the reasons given in the
ER 552,              speech o f m y n o b le and learned friend Lord Mackay o f C lashfem LC, w hich
ition o f            I have read in draft and w ith w hich I agree, I, too, w o u ld dismiss the appeal
                     and answer the certified question as he has proposed.
sv    its h
 eem s it            LO RD W O O LF. My Lords, I have had the advantage o f reading in draft the
                     speech o f m y n o b le and learned friend Lord Mackay o f C lashfem LC, and
                     w ith w hich I agree, I, to o , w o u ld dismiss the appeal and answer the certified
nission,             question as he has proposed.
35), and j       j
ave also             Appeal dismissed.
4] Crim
co these                                                                         Celia Fox    Barrister.
ly view
  304                                        R v Holloway and Others (CA (Cr Div))                                          [19       I - I f .


            R v HOLLOWAY                                              breach o f duty in failing to perform his essential uuu sole
                                                                      duty to see that patient was breathing satisfactorily and to
             R v ADOM AKO                                             cope with breathing emergency in operating theatre.
    R v PRENTICE AND SULLM AN                                                 r P rentice and D r Sullman (see p 310 col 2 to p 313

             Court of Appeal
            Criminal Division
                                                                     D        col 2).



                                                                         On February 28, 1990 Malcolm Savage, (“Malcolm") a 16
    Before Lord Taylor of Gosforth CJ,                               y ea r o ld b o y s u f f e r in g from le u k a e m ia , w a s due at the
                                                                     P eterborough G eneral H osp ita l for a regular in jection o f
     Mr Justice Henry and Mr Justice                                 c y t o t o x ic d r u g s . O n c e e v e r y m o n th h e w a s in je c te d
                 Blofeld                                             intravenously with Vincristine and once every two months he
                                                                     was injected intrathecally with Methotrexate.
   Dates of hearing: February 25 and March
                                                                        The day before the injections were due to be administered
                     1,1993                                          (February 27, 1990) Dr Fairham, the consultant in charge, filled
       Date of judgment: May 20,1993                                 out the necessary paperwork including the prescription forms
                                                                     and drugs chart. Both the prescription forms and the drugs chart
  Negligence - Criminal law - Involuntary manslaughter               were duly despatched to the hospital’s pharmacy department
    by breach of duty.                                               which prepared the drugs and placed them in syringes. The
                                                                     drugs were returned to the ward where M alcolm was to have
 ^ ^ c t o r - Duty of care - Injection of Vincristine and           the in jection s the next day. At the ward the syringes were
     Methotrexate into patient’s spine - Patient suffered            placed in a red box which bore labels warning staff that there
     from leukaemia - Patient subsequently died.                     were cytotoxic drugs in the box and which named the drugs, the
                                                                     method o f injection and the patient’s name. The syringes also
                                                                     had the forementioned information on labels attached to them.
  Anaesthetist - Duty of care - Detached retina operation
    - A n a e sth e tist’s failure to reco g n ize signs of
                                                                        S o m e t im e o n F eb ru ary 2 7 , 1 9 9 0 D r P r e n tic e , a p r e ­
    disconnection of breathing apparatus from patient                registration houseman, was informed by Dr Fairham's secretary
    during operation - Hypoxia of patient.                           that M alcolm was due for his lumbar puncture the next day
                                                                     (February 28, 1990). However Dr Prentice was not told then
  Appeal - Whether trial judge directed jury correctly               that he would be required to administer the drugs.
    on test to establish involuntary manslaughter by
    breach of duty.                                                     On February 28, 1990 the box containing the drugs was
                                                                     placed onto the lumbar-puncture trolley in the ward. However
      Liability o f medical practitioners fo r involuntary           the m anufacturer’s data sheet was not transferred from the
   m anslaughter by breach o f d u ty w as to be ju d g e d          cytotoxic trolley to the lumbar-puncture trolley.
   according to test laid down by Lord Atkin in Andrews v
   DPP [1937] AC 576 and Court o f Appeal in R v Stone                   At 9 30 am on February 28, 1990 M alcolm and his mother
   and Dobinson [1977] 1 QB 354. Accordingly test laid               arrived on the ward. Dr Prentice explained that he did not know
J jo w n in R v Lawrence [1982] AC 576 and R v Caldwell              i f he w o u ld b e p e r fo r m in g th e tr e a tm e n t as he w as
     982] AC 341 was inappropriate.                                  inexperienced. Dr Prentice subsequently consulted Dr Chuah. a
                                                                     re g istr a r , w h o a sk e d Dr P r e n t ic e to a sk D r S u llm a n . a
    Ingredients o f involuntary m anslaughter were (a)               houseman, to supervise Dr Prentice to perform the treatment.
 existence o f duty; (b) breach o f duty causing death; and          Dr Sullman’s experience was also limited as he had previously
 (c)-gross negligence which ju r y considered ju stified            attempted to perform a lumbar puncture which had failed, had
 criminal conviction.                                               lim ited p revious experience o f cy to to x ic drugs and on one
                                                                    previous occasion had injected Vincristine intravenously. Dr
    Proof o f following states o f mind could properly lead to      Prentice's concerns were made known to a ward sister at which
 finding o f gross negligence: (a) indifference to an obvious       point Dr Sullman agreed to supervise him in administering the
 risk o f injury to health, (b) actual foresight o f risk coupled   drugs. Subsequently a trained nurse set up a trolley ready for
  with d eterm ina tion n ev e rth e le ss to run risk, (c)         the lumbar puncture and took the tro lley and the reii box
 appreciation of risk coupled with intention to avoid it but        containing the drugs to a side ward where the injections were
 also coupled with such high degree o f negligence in               due to be administered. Upon reaching the side ward the nurse
 attem pted avoid ance as ju r y c o n sid e red ju s tifie d       left the trolley with Dr Prentice as she b eliev ed that as Dr
 conviction and (d) inattention or failure to advert to a           Prentice and Dr Sullman were present with two student nurses
 serious risk which went beyond “mere inadvertence” in              her assistance was unnecessary.
 respect o f obvious and im p o rta n t m a tte r which
                                                                       Prior to the lum bar p un cture a lo c a l a n a e sth e tic w as
 defendant’s duty demanded he should have addressed.
                                                                    adm inistered by Dr Prentice. F o llo w in g the anaesthetic Dr
   Trial judge had erred in failing to instruct jury that           Prentice successfully inserted the lumbar puncture needle into
 excuses and mitigating circumstances could be taken into           M alcolm ’s spine upon which a small amount o f fluid leaked
 account in determining gross negligence.                           out. This led to Dr Prentice putting on a pair o f goggles. He
                                                                    then asked for the drugs. Dr Sullman opened the red box, took
   Anaesthetist was guilty o f involuntary manslaughter by          out a syringe and handed it to Dr Prentice. Dr Sullman warned
                                                                    Dr Prentice that the syringe was unsterile as he (Dr Sullman)
 [1993] 4 Med LR                                  R v Holloway and O thers (CA (Cr Div))                                                                  305


 had not scrubbed up, was not wearing g lo v e s and thus was                 (b) the correct test for recklessness was that laid down in R v
 unsterile. Subsequently the second drug was injected also via                Cunningham [1957] 41 Cr App R 155 or alternatively the gross
 the lumbar puncture. Neither doctor checked the labels before                negligence test in Andrews v D PP [1937] A C 576;
 the dru gs w e r e in j e c t e d in to M a l c o l m ’s sp in e . A s a
 consequence Vincristine was injected into the spine rather than              (c) if the jury had been directed by O w en J on the gross
 administered intravenously with fatal results.                               n eg lig en ce test they could properly have taken into account
                                                                              e x c u s e s or m itigating circum stances in order to determine
   Dr Prentice and Dr Sullman were subsequently charged with                  whether the necessary high degree o f gross negligence had been
 manslaughter and tried at Birmingham Crown Court before                      established;
 Owen J and a jury.
                                                                             (d) the question was whether, in the case o f each doctor, the
    At the trial                                                             jury were sure that the failure to ascertain the correct mode o f
                                                                             administering the drug and to ensure that only that mode was
 (a) Dr Prentice d en ied responsibility for M a lc o lm ’s death            ad opted , w as grossly n egligen t to the point o f crim inality
 contending that he was at all times under the supervision o f Dr            having regard to all the excuses and mitigating circumstances in
 Sullman; and                                                                the case;

 (b) Dr Sullman testified that he thought he was only supervising            (e) the excuses and mitigating circumstances were
 the lumbar puncture, not the administration o f the drugs.
                                                                             (i) that the treatment was required to be g iven w ithout the
 ^ P ^ ith er defendant gave evidence at the trial.                          con su ltant w ho prescribed the treatment h aving g iv e n any
                                                                             instructions or thought as to who should perform the treatment;
   The case against Dr Prentice was that
                                                                             (ii) that Dr Prentice was inexperienced, reluctant to administer
 (a) he ought to have known o f the dangers involved in the                  th e t r e a tm e n t and w a s w h o l ly u n a w a r e o f the fa ta l
 spinal injection o f Vincristine:                                           consequences o f injecting Vincristine by lumbar puncture;

 (b) he ought to have checked the labels before injecting the                (iii) that Dr Prentice did not have the data chart on the cytotoxic
 drugs either by looking at the labels on the red boxes and/or in            trolley as that trolley was not in use;
 addition at those labels on the syringes when they were handed
 to him:                                                                     (iv) that the senior nurse was not present;

 (c) he gave no thought to any o f the above matters; and                    (v) that two student nurses were present; and

(d) the failure to give thought to the above matters or any o f              (vi) that Dr Prentice asked for supervision and believed that Dr
them meant that he was reckless.                                             Sullman was supervising the whole treatment; and

   The case against Dr Sullman was that                                      (f) as regards Dr Sullman, he believed

(a) he had a duty to supervise the whole operation and to ensure             (i) that he was simply required to supervise the insertion o f the



•
       the right drugs were inserted into the patient at the right           lumbar puncture needle by an inexperienced houseman (Dr
     ; by checking the labels and making sure that Dr Prentice               Prentice);
     injected the drugs correctly;
                                                                            (ii) that he understood the drugs were for injection via lumbar
(b) even if he did not have a duty to supervise the w h o le                puncture; and
operation he had a duty to intervene when he saw Dr Prentice
was preparing to inject Malcolm with a drug which he had not                (iii) that he did not have special experience in or knowledge of
checked; and                                                                cytotoxic drugs.

(c) on one or other or both o f the grounds he was reckless.                D r A d o m a k o (see p 313 col 2 to p 316 col 1)

  On N ovem ber 1, 1991 Dr Prentice and Dr Sullman were                        On January 3, 1987 Mr Loveland was diagnosed as suffering
convicted o f manslaughter and were sentenced to 9 months                   from a detached retina. An emergency operation was scheduled
imprisonment suspended for 12 months.                                       for the follow ing day.

   On behalf o f Dr Prentice and Dr Sullman it was contended                    The operation took place at 9 30 am on January 4, 1987.
that                                                                        Prior to the operation pre-operative procedures were followed,
                                                                            in te r a li a , p r e - o p e r a tiv e s e d a tio n w a s p e r f o r m e d and
(a) Owen J had been wrong to direct the jury that the correct               V ecu r o n iu m was inserted into the p a tien t’s left arm via a
test to determine whether or not they had been reckless was one             butterfly needle. The Vecuronium rendered the patient’s body
based on a test which took into account recklessness as defined             paralyzed and the patient unconscious.
by the court in R v Lawrence [ 1982] AC 510 combined with the
gross negligence test laid down by Lord Atkin in A ndrew s v                  The anaesthetist scheduled for the operation was a Dr Said
D PP [1937] AC 576;                                                         who prior to the operation connected the patient to a variety o f
                                                                            machines including an ECG, a Dynamap machine and a Manley
   306                                                     R v H ollow ay and O thers (CA (Cr Div))                                                  [1993] 4 Med LR


   P u llm a n m a c h in e . O x y g e n w a s s u p p lie d th r o u g h an            (a) had failed to observe that the patient had ceased to breath or
   endotracheal tube inserted through the patient’s mouth which                          to check the patient to make sure that he was still breathing;
   was connected to the machines all o f which had warning alarms
   and lights.                                                                           (b) had failed to observe the dials on the machines as he should
                                                                                         have done; and
       At 10 35 am Dr Said had to leave theatre and handed over to
   Dr Adomako, a Russian trained anaesthetist, who had worked                            (c) had failed to notice the patient’s change in colour.
   in the United Kingdom since 1972 as a locum anaesthetist on a
   number o f six m onthly contracts. He had experience o f eye                             On behalf o f Dr Adomako it was contended that
   o p era tio n s but had not acted as s o le a n a esth e tist in such
   operations.                                                                          (a) his actions were reasonable given the circumstances;

      Upon taking over from Dr Said, Dr Adomako performed the                           (b) with hindsight he should have observed the disconnection;
   following tasks
                                                                                        (c) he was not negligent;
   (a) he injected more Vecuronium into the patient and checked
   the patient’s pulse (which was low); and                                             (d) all he did was to make a wrong diagnosis;

   (b) he checked the tubes from the ventilator to the patient’s                        (e) it was difficult to determine whether the patient had suffered
   body but did not check the Malinkrodt connector nor the tube                         from a disconnection; and
 ^ ^ t ran from the Malinkrodt connector to the patient’s mouth.
                                                                                        (f) his actions after the patient suffered a cardiac arrest, in
      At 11 05 am the tube which connected the patient’s mouth to                       injecting Atropine, were proper and correct.
   the Malinkrodt connecter became disconnected. H ow ever Dr
   A d o m a k o f a ile d to a p p r e c ia te th a t there had b een a                M r H ollow ay
   disconnection. The signs o f a lack o f oxy g en to the patient
   would have been                                                                         E d i t o r ’s N ote: The f a c ts o f the a p p e a l in re sp ec t o f M r
                                                                                        H o l l o w a y a r e n o t r e p o r t e d b e c a u s e the c a s e a g a in s t M r
   (a) the patient’s chest would have ceased to rise and fall;                          H ollow ay concerned the liability o f an electrician and thus was
                                                                                        outside the scope o f the law covered by M edical Law Reports.
   (b) the patient’s cessation o f breath would have registered on
   the pressure gauge o f the Manley Pullman machine;                                   — Held by L ord Taylor o f Gosforth CJ (Henry and Blofeld
                                                                                        JJ agreeing) that
   (c) the respirator on the Manley Pullman machine would have
   ceased to rotate; and                                                                (I) in r e s p e c t o f t h e p r i n c i p l e s to b e a p p l i e d in c a s e s
                                                                                        involving involuntary manslaughter by breach of duty
   (d) the alarm on the ventilator would have sounded after 30
   seconds.                                                                             (1) there was no reason to doubt that Andrews v D P P [1937]
                                                                                        AC 576 was still good law (see p 310 col 1);
         S u b seq u e n tly the patient su ffe r e d a cardiac arrest. Dr
^fcL dom ako did not re a lis e that the o x y g e n tube had been                      (2) the proper test in manslaughter cases based on breach o f
^ d i s c o n n e c t e d until after the patient had suffered the cardiac              duty was the gross negligence test established in Andrews v
    arrest. He, had never experienced an oxygen tube disconnection                      D P P [1937] AC 576 and R v Stone and Dobinson [1977] QB
    although he was aware that it could happen during an operation.                     354 (see p 310 col 1);
    Following the cardiac arrest Dr Adomako
                                                                                        (3 ) the lin es o f ca s es from R v D o h e r t y ( 1 8 8 7 ) 16 C o x 's
   (a) injected Atropine into the patient;                                              Criminal Cases 306 through R v Bateman [1925] 19 Cr App R 8
                                                                                        to Andrews v D P P [1937] AC 576 and R v Stone and Dobinson
   (b) observed that the ECG showed that the patient had suffered                       [1977] QB 354 were binding authority (see p 310 col 1);
   a cardiac arrest;
                                                                                        ( 4 ) the L a w r e n c e ! C a l d w e l l r e c k l e s s n e s s ap p ro a ch w as
   (c) called for an emergency cardiac arrest team; and                                 inappropriate (see p 310 cols 1 and 2);

  (d) following the removal o f the operating drapes saw that the                       (5) the ingredients o f involuntary manslaughter by means o f
  o x y g en tube had d isco n n e cted it s e l f from the M alinkrodt                 breach o f duty which needed to be proved were
  connector.
                                                                                        (a) the existence o f the duty;
     U p o n d i s c o v e r i n g the d i s c o n n e c t i o n , the tu b e s w ere
  im mediately reconnected h ow ever the patient had suffered                           (b) a breach o f the duty causing death; and
  irreversible brain damage. The patient later died o f hypoxia on
  July 12, 1987.                                                                        (c) gross n e g lig en ce which the jury co n sid ered justified a
                                                                                        criminal conviction (see p 310 col 2); and
     Dr Adomako was subsequently charged with manslaughter
  and tried at the Central Criminal Court before Alliott J and a                        (6) proof o f any of the following states o f mind in the defendant
  jury. During the trial the Crown alleged that Dr Adomako                              w ould have properly lead a jury to make a finding o f gross
  [1993] 4 Med LR                                         R v H ollow ay and Others (CA (Cr Div))                                                                   307


 negligence                                                                              (5) the jury were left with adequate directions on the particular
                                                                                         points [of (a) involuntary manslaughter requiring a high degree
 (a) indifference to an obvious risk o f injury to health;                               o f n eg lig e n c e rather than recklessness; and (b) the j u d g e ’s
                                                                                         guidance to the jury on the degree o f negligence and the degree
 (b) actual foresight o f the risk coupled with the determination                        o f c o m p eten ce required by the doctor w hich he did so by
 nevertheless to run the risk;                                                           reading various passages from a number o f different cases] and
                                                                                         consequently there was nothing in that ground (see p 316 col 1);
 (c) an appreciation o f the risk coupled with an intention to                           and
 avoid it but also coupled with such a high degree o f negligence
 in the attempted avoidance as the jury considered justified                             (6 ) it w a s c le a r ly o p en to the jury to c o n c l u d e that the
 conviction;                                                                             appellant’s failure to perform his essential and in effect sole
                                                                                         duty to see that his patient was breathing satisfactorily and to
 (d) inattention or failure to avert to a serious risk which went                        cope with the breathing emergency which should have been
 b ey o n d “m ere in a d v erten ce” in respect o f an o b v io u s and                 obvious to him, justified a verdict o f guilty. They were entitled
 im portant matter which the defendant’s duty dem anded he                               to conclude his failure was more than mere inadvertence and
 should have addressed (see p 310 col 2).                                                c o n stitu te d gross n e g lig e n c e o f the d eg re e n e c e s s a r y for
                                                                                         manslaughter (see p 316 col 1).
 (II) in respect o f Dr P rentice’s and Dr SuIIman’s appeals
                                                                                         E d ito r ’s Note: The court’s ruling in respect o f the appellant
 (1) the appellants’ submission that the correct test was one o f                        H ollow ay is not reported for the reasons previously stated (see
 r ^ K e ssn e s s as defined in R v Cunningham [1957] 41 Cr App R                       p 306 col 2).
 f l W v a s not consonant either with the L awrence/Caldwell test
 o f recklessness or with Lord Atkin’s formulation in A ndrew s v                        T h e follow ing cases were referred to in the ju d g m en ts:
 D P P [1937] AC 576 and had to be rejected (see p 312 col 2);
                                                                                         Andrews v DPP [1937] AC 576
 (2) the correct approach was Andrews v D P P [1937] AC 576
 and the gross negligence test (see p 312 col 2);                                        Kong Cheuk Kwan v The Queen [1986] 82 Cr App R 18

 (3) had the directions to the jury left it open to them to take the                    R v Adomako [1991] 2 Med LR 277
 “e x c u s e s ” and mitigating circumstances into account on the
 s p e c i f i c is s u e o f g ro ss n e g lig e n c e they c o u ld w e ll h a v e    R v Bateman [1925] 19 Cr App R 8
 c o n clu d ed that the prosecution had failed to establish that
 essential ingredient (see p 313 col 2): and                                            R v Caldwell [1982] AC 341

 (4) accordingly the appeals o f the two appellants had to be                           R v Cunningham [1957] 41 Cr App R 155
 allowed and their convictions quashed (see p 313 col 2).
                                                                                        R v Doherty {1887) 16 C o x ’s Criminal Cases 306
— H e ld b y B lo f e ld J (L o r d T a y lo r o f G o s f o r t h C J and
H enry J agreeing) that                                                                 R v Lawrence [1982] AC 510

^ j ^ s p e c t o f Dr A d o m a k o ’s appeal                                          R v P rentice and Sullman (unreported N o v e m b e r 1, 1991.
                                                                                        Owen J)
the ap peal w ould be dismissed (see p 316 col 1) because
                                                                                        R v Reid [1992] 1 WLR 793
 (1) complaint was made on behalf o f the appellant that the trial
judge did not deal sufficiently with the evidence o f the medical                       R v Scarlett (1993) Times Law Reports (May 18, 1993)
experts. But it was perfectly clear that the judge dealt with the
salient points o f this evidence. He made the issue clear to the                       R v Seymour [1983] 2 AC 493
jury and could not properly be criticised for not going into that
evidence in further detail (see p 315 col 1);                                          R v Seymour [1983] 76 Cr App R 211

(2) as the jury acquitted the appellant on the two perjury counts,                     R v Stone and Dobinson [1977] 1 QB 354
it fo llo w ed that, observing the direction by the jud g e, they
would not have taken the alleged perjury into account when                             T h e fo llo w in g statutes were referred to in the ju d g m en ts:
considering the count o f manslaughter. Consequently there was
nothing to be found in that submission (see p 315 col 2);                              Criminal Damage Act 1971

(3) there was nothing to be found in the submission that the trial                     Offences Against The Person Act 1861
judge did not deal with the issue o f causation with sufficient
clarity (see p 315 col 2);                                                             Road Traffic Act 1972, section 1

(4) subject to the trial judge’s direction in law on manslaughter,                     Road Traffic Act 1991, section 1
the matter was properly left to the jury and it was open to them
to return a verdict o f guilty on the facts (see p 315 col 2);                             Anthony Arlidge Q C and Alan Jenkins (Hem psons [Ian S P
                                                                                       B a r k er] ) f o r D r P ren tice; Adrian W h itfield Q C a n d M artin
  308                                  R v H ollow ay and O th ers (CA (Cr Div): Lord Taylor o f Gosforth CJ)                                               [1993] 4 Med LR

                                                                                              negligence, nor do the ideas of crime and punishm ent in
  Reynolds (assigned by Registrar o f C rim inal A p p e a ls ) f o r D r
                                                                                              themselves carry a jury much further in deciding whether in a
  S u llm a n ; S te p h e n C o w a r d Q C a n d P h i l i p H e a d ( C r o w n            particular case, the degree of negligence shown is a crime
  Prosecution Service) f o r the Crown.                                                       and deserves punishment. But the substance of the judgment
                                                                                              is most valuable, and in my opinion is correct. In practice it
     R i c h a r d D u Cann Q C a n d J a m e s W a ts o n (L e B r a s s e u r               has generally been adopted by judges in charging juries in all
                                                                                              cases of m anslaughter by negligence, w h eth er in driving
  [Michael D e G ra e v e ] ) fo r D r Adomako; M iss Ann Curnow Q C                          vehicles or otherwise...
  an d A n th ony L eo n a rd (Crow n P ro se c u tio n S e r v ic e ) f o r the
  Crown.                                                                                      “Simple lack of care such as will constitute civil liability is
                                                                                              not enough: for the purposes of the criminal law there are
                                                                                              degrees of negligence; and a very high degree of negligence
                                    JU D G M E N T                                            is required to be proved before the felony is established.
                                                                                              Probably o f all the epithets that can be applied ‘reckless’
     L O R D T A Y L O R O F G O S F O R T H C J : T h e s e three                            most nearly covers the case. It is difficult to visualise a case
 appeals again st c o n v ic tio n s for m a n sla u g h te r w ere listed                    of death caused by reckless driving in the connotation of that
                                                                                              term in ordinary speech which would not justify a conviction
 together and argued in succession before us since they all raise                             for manslaughter: but it is probably not all-embracing, for
 sim ilar legal problems. T w o o f the ca ses in v o lv e d doctors                          ‘r e c k l e s s ’ suggests an in d ifferen ce to risk , w hereas the
 administering treatment; the third involved an electrician wiring                            accused may have appreciated the risk and intended to avoid
 up a central heating system. The issues raised concern the true                              it and yet shown such a high degree of negligence in the
                                                                                              m e a n s a d o p t e d to a v o id the ris k as w o u l d ju s t i f y a
 legal basis o f involuntary m anslaughter by breach o f duty.                                conviction.”
 Essentially, the question is that posed in the current edition o f
_A rchbold at paragraph 19-97:                                                               It is thus to be noted that the word “reckless” was introduced
        “has gross negligence manslaughter survived C aldw ell and                        by Lord Atkin to denote the degree o f n egligen ce required.
        Lawrence?”                                                                        Further, while he thought “reckless” most nearly covered the
                                                                                          case, he recognised it was not exhaustive; there was still scope
     We have been referred to a plethora o f legal authority going                        for manslaughter by a high degree o f negligence, even in the
  back as far as Bracton and Coke and, at our invitation, as far                          absence o f indifference.
  abroad as the C o m m o n w ea lth j u r is d ic t io n s . In our v ie w ,
  however, it is necessary for the purposes of this judgment to                             Lord Atkin excluded “mere inadvertence” (see page 582).
  cite only two authorities prior to the leading case o f Andrews v                      But he was not sayin g that a ll in adverten ce falls short o f
  D P P [1937] AC 576. In R v Doherty (1887) 16 C o x ’s Criminal                        creating criminal liability. On the contrary, he indicated that to
  Cases 3 0 6 , at page 3 0 9 Stephen J d escrib ed the degree o f                       establish guilt o f manslaughter, the accused must be proved to
  negligence by a doctor which would support a manslaughter                              have had “criminal disregard” for the safety o f others (page
  charge. He said:                                                                       582) and he gave as examples “the grossest ignorance or the
        “Supposing a man performed a surgical operation, whether                         most criminal inattention”. Where a duty o f care is owed, the
        from losing his head, or from forgetfulness, or from some                        inattentive will often be negligent so as to be civilly liable even
        other reason, omitted to do something he ought to have done,                     though, as a result o f their inattention, they may not have
        or did something he ought not to have done, in such a case                       adverted to the risk. But negligent inattention characterised as
        there would be negligence. But if there was only the kind of
        forgetfulness which is common to everybody, or if there was                      “mere inadvertence" does not create criminal liability. To do so,
        a slight want of skill, any injury which resulted might furnish                  the inattention or inadvertence must be, in the jury’s v ie w ,
        a ground for claiming civil damages, but it would be wrong                       grossly negligent.
        to proceed against a man criminalfy in respect o f such injury.


•
        But if a surgeon was engaged in attending a w oman during
                                                                                            In R v Stone and Dobinson [1977] QB 354, this court had to
        her confinement, and went to the en gagem ent drunk, and
        through his drunkenness neglected his duty, and the w om an’s                    con sid er a ca se concerning an inadequate cou p le who had
        life was in consequence sacrificed, there would be culpable                      undertaken the care o f S t o n e ’s sister. Her death occurred
        negligence o f a grave kind. It is not given to everyone to be a                 through their neglect. It was accepted that the prosecution had
        skilful surgeon, but it is given to every one to keep sober                      to prove gross negligence (page 361 A). However, contrary to
        when such a duty has to be performed.”
                                                                                         the appellant’s contention. Lane LJ made clear (at page 363B)
   In R v B atem an [19 2 5 ] 19 Cr A pp R 8 a c a s e charging                          that proof o f foresight o f the consequences was not necessary.
 manslaughter against a doctor, Lord Hewart CJ said at page 11:                          What was necessary was proof o f a high degree o f negligence
      “In explaining to juries the test which they should apply to                       reflecting the Andrews' approach. He said specifically at page
      determine whether the negligence, in the p articu lar case,                        363C:
      amounted or did not amount to a crime, judges have used
      m a n y epith ets, such as ‘ c u l p a b le ’, ‘c r i m i n a l ’, ‘g r o s s ’,       “It is to Andrews r DPP that one must turn to discover the
      ‘wicked’, ‘clear’, ‘complete’. But. whatever epithet be used                           definition of the requisite degree of negligence.”
      and whether an epithet be used or not, in order to establish
      criminal liability the facts must be such that, in the opinion of                  He then quoted the passage from Andrews set out above and
      the jury, the negligence of the accused went beyond a mere                         went on at page 363F-G:
      matter o f compensation between subjects and show ed such
      disregard for the life and safety of others as to amount to a                          “ It is clear from that passage that indifference to an obvious
      crime against the State and conduct deserving punishment."                             ri s k a n d a p p r e c i a t i o n o f su c h ris k , c o u p l e d w ith a
                                                                                             determination nevertheless to run it, are both examples of
    In Andrews v D P P a case o f motor manslaughter, Lord Atkin                             r e c k l e s s n e s s ... M ere in a d v e r te n c e is n o t e n o u g h . T he
 quoted the above passage from R v Bateman and went on as                                    defendant m ust be proved to have been indifferent to an
 follows ([1937] AC at page 583):                                                            obvious risk of injury to health, or actually to have foreseen
                                                                                             lhe risk but to have determined nevertheless to run it.”
      “Here again I think with respect the expressions used are not,
      indeed they probably were not in tended to be, a precise                           That was in 1977, and the language used again shows that the
      definition of the crime. I do not myself find the connotation                      quest was lor the appropriate definition o f the requisite degree
      of mens rea helpful in distinguishing between degrees of                           o f negligence.
[1993] 4 Med LR                R v Holloway and Others (CA (Cr Div): Lord Taylor o f Gosforth CJ)                                                        309


    In 1981, the H ouse o f Lords decided both R v C a ld w e ll               Thus, what had seemed to be drawing a legal distinction, was
[ 1 9 8 2 ] A C 341 and R v L a w r e n c e [1 9 8 2 ] A C 5 1 0 . Lord        said in the latter case to be simply guidance to prosecutors in
D ip lo ck ga v e his w ell-k now n definition o f reck le ssn e ss in         considering what charge to bring.
regard to the Criminal Damage Act 1971 in R v C aldw ell and in
regard to section 1 o f the Road Traffic Act 1972 (as amended)                    The reasoning for the decision in R v Seymour is to be found
in R v L a w re n c e. Each definition involved two stages. The                at page 506 where Lord Roskill said:
actus reus consisted o f the defendant creating an obvious and                      “Once it is shown that the two offences co-exist, it would be
serious risk. The mens rea was defined in the alternative as                        quite wrong to give the adjective ‘reckless’ or the adverb
     “without having given any thought to the possibility o f there                 ‘recklessly’ a different meaning according to w hether the
     being any such risk or, having recognised that there was                       statutory or the common law offence is charged.”
     some risk involved, had nevertheless gone on to take it”.
                                                                               However, Lord Roskill went on immediately to add:
(See R v Lawrence at page 527A).                                                    “ ‘R e c k le s s’ should, today be given the sam e m e an in g in
                                                                                    relation to all offences which involve ‘recklessness’ as one of
    T o jum p forward in time, the w ide D ip lo ck m ea n in g o f                 the elements unless Parliament has otherwise ordained.”
recklessness in those statutory contexts has survived all attacks
upon it, most recently in R v R eid [1992] 1 WLR 793 - see per                     It has been submitted to us that that sentence was obiter and
Lord Keith (page 795E to page 796D). per Lord Ackner (page                     should not be followed in regard to the class o f manslaughter
801C to page 805H). per Lord Goff (page 807D to page 812D)                     i n v o l v e d in the three c a s e s b e fo r e us. W e a c c e p t that



»
         er Lord Browne-Wilkinson (page 818F to page 820A ).                   submission.
         lose very passages supporting it as epitomising the law
          clearly the difficulty the wide definition has caused -                  Whilst the co-existence o f a charge o f manslaughter and a
perhaps because the first impression o f the ordinary lawyer and               charge of causing death by reckless driving, which formed the
the ordinary juror would incline to a more restricted meaning of               basis o f the decision in R v Seymour is. for the future, o f only
the word. It is beyond doubt that, at least since 1982, the word               academ ic interest, since the latter offence was abolished by
“ r e c k l e s s ” h as c a u s e d the courts p r o b le m s in regard to    sectio n 1 o f the Road Traffic A ct 1991, w hich substituted
involuntary manslaughter which would not have occurred had                     “causing death by dangerous driving”, the Seymour definition
the focus been on gross negligence rather than on recklessness.                o f m otor m anslaughter remains. To this extent, the hopes
                                                                               expressed by Lord G off in R v Reid (at page 814A ) that “we
    To return to the chronology o f case-law, although neither R v             will no longer be troubled by the meaning o f recklessness in
Caldw ell nor R v Lawrence directly affected the common law                    this context” may not be realised.
o ffe n c e o f manslaughter, that extension f o llo w e d from the
House o f Lords’ decision in R v Seymour [1983] 2 AC 493.                         Finally, in this chronology, we refer again to R v Reid, which
There it was decided that the ingredients o f the two offences of              involved, as already mentioned, a challenge to the Lawrence
causing death by reckless driving and motor manslaughter were                  direction. In particular, the question certified was whether the
the same. True, Lord Fraser o f Tullybelton at page 500 said:                  ipsissima verba of Lord Diplock’s direction need be given to
    “ Although the ingredients of the two offences are the same,               the jury. The H ouse o f Lords re-affirm ed Lord D ip lo c k ’s
    the degree o f recklessness required for conviction o f the                approach to the definition of “recklessness” in the context o f
    statutory offence is less than that required for conviction of             reckless driving, and accepted the jury direction he formulated
    the common law crime."                                                     was, as Lord Diplock himself put it, an appropriate direction.
                                                                               However, their Lordships ruled that it was not necessary to use
      also, Lord R oskill, with whose speech the other three                  the ipsissima verba. Further, the formulation might need to be
Lords o f Appeal agreed, answered the certified question as                   “m o d ifie d or added to ” (per Lord Keith o f K inkel at page
follows at page 508:                                                          796D ), was not "designed for universal application” (per Lord
  , “Where manslaughter is charged and the circumstances are                  A ckner at page 805), should be regarded as a m odel “to be
    that the victim was killed as a result of the reckless driving of         adapted to fit the facts ’o f the particular case” (per Lord Goff at
    the defendant on a public highway, the trial judge should give            page 813), and was not “a test applicable in all cases” (per Lord
    the jury the direction suggested in R v Lawrence, but it is               Browne-W ilkinson at page 819). Moreover, each o f the four
    appropriate also to point out that in order to constitute the
                                                                              Law Lords who gave full speeches referred to the need to take
    offence of manslaughter, the risk of death being caused by
    the manner of the defendant's driving must be very high.”                 account o f any excuses or explanations put forward on behalf of
                                                                              the defendant (at pages 796D. 806B, 813E and 819G).
So Lord Fraser and Lord Roskill seem ed to be saying that
although the ingredients o f motor manslaughter and causing                       It has been submitted to us by all counsel in all three cases
death by reckless driving are identical, the former requires as a             that the effect o f the history briefly outlined above has been to
matter o f law that the risk of death must be higher than that                crea te c o n f lic t in g a p p r o a ch es and u n c e r ta in ty as to the
required for the latter.                                                      appropriate tests and the proper jury direction in ca ses o f
                                                                              involuntary manslaughter involving breach o f duty. Is the mens
   H owever, in the later Privy Council case o f K on g Cheuk                 rea o f the offence to be characterised as gross negligence or as
Kw an v The Queen [1986] 82 Cr App R 18, Lord Roskill at                      L a w r e n c e /C a ld w e ll recklessness as m o d ified by R v R e id ?
page 25 qualified the final words o f the answer he gave in R v               Some judges have sought to combine the two, or put a dash of
Seymour, saying they were added:                                              one with a preponderance o f the other. The diversity o f views is
    “not to alter the pre-existing law as to m a n sla u g h te r by          illustrated by the stances adopted in these three appeals which
    recklessness but only to point to those cases in which it still           have not been consistent even among counsel for the Crown on
    m ight be thought appropriate to charge the com m on law                  the one hand and those for the defence on the other.
    rather than the statutory offence.”
 310                               R v H ollow ay and O thers (CA (Cr Div): Lord Taylor o f Gosforth CJ)                                   [1993] 4 Med LR


     The first point to be made is that A n d re w s v D P P , and in                Lawrence/Caldw ell recklessness approach is, for reasons, some
 particular the w ell-k n o w n p assage quoted in Lord A tk in ’s                   o f which we have ventured to give above, inappropriate in this
 s p e e c h , has in n o n e o f the c a s e s w e h a v e s e e n been             class o f case.
 disapproved. On the contrary, Andrews v D P P was applied in R
 v Stone and Dobinson. In R v Seymour, Lord Roskill, referring                           Accordingly, except in motor manslaughter, the ingredients
 to the trial judge's summing-up, said at page 504D:                                 o f involuntary manslaughter by breach of duty which need to be
       “His admirably clear direction not only properly reflected the                proved are:
       decision o f this House in Lawrence, but also Lord A tkins’
       speech in Andrews."                                                           (1) The existence o f the duty.

    Accordingly, there is in our judgment, no reason to doubt                        (2) A breach o f the duty causing death.
 that Andrews v D P P is still good law. Likewise, R v Stone and
 Dobinson was also referred to in argument in R v Seymour and                        (3) Gross negligence which the jury consider justifies a criminal
 not disapproved.                                                                    conviction.

     It may be thought that the modifying effects o f the speeches                      The range o f p o ssib le duties, breaches and surrounding
 in R v R eid brought the Lawrence/Caldw ell approach closer to                      circumstances is so varied that it is not possible to prescribe a
 the A ndrew s’ gross negligence test. Certainly, the emphasis in R                  standard jury direction appropriate in all cases. The judge
 v R e id on the need to take the d efe n d a n t’s exp lan ation or                 should tailor his summing-up to the specific circumstances of
 excuses into account has tempered the perceived rigidity of                         the particular case. However, in accordance with the authorities
^ ^ - d D iplock’s test.                                                             reviewed above and without purporting to give an exhaustive
                                                                                     definition, we consider proof o f any o f the following states o f
    However, it is a basic premise o f Lord D iplock’s formulation                   mind in the defendant may properly lead a jury to make a
 that the defendant himself created the obvious and serious risk.                    finding of gross negligence:
 This is entirely appropriate in a case o f driving, or setting fire to
 an hotel. U nless and until the defendant drives, or strikes a                      (a) Indifference to an obvious risk o f injury to health.
 match, there is no risk. But, breach o f duty cases such as those
 involving doctors are different in character. Often there is a                      (b) Actual foresight o f the risk coupled with the determination
 high risk o f danger to the deceased's health, not created by the                   nevertheless to run it.
 defendant, and pre-existing risk to the patient’s health is what
 causes the defendant to assume the duty o f care with consent.                      (c) An appreciation o f the risk coupled with an intention to
 His intervention w ill often be in situations o f em ergency.                       avoid it but also coupled with such a high degree of negligence
 Further, the “obvious risk” o f Lord D ip lo ck ’s formulation in                   in the a ttem p ted a v o id a n c e as the jury co n sid er ju s t if ie s
 Caldwell meant obvious to “the ordinary prudent individual.”                        conviction.
 Everyone knows what can happen when you strike a match, and
 practically everyone, whether as driver or passenger, knows the                     (d) Inattention or failure to advert to a serious risk which goes
 risks o f the road. But in expert fields where duty is undertaken,                  b eyon d “mere in adverten ce” in respect o f an ob vious and
 be it by a doctor or an electrician, the criteria o f what the                      important matter w hich the d efen da n t’s duty demanded he
 ordinary prudent individual would appreciate can hardly be                          should address.
 applied in the same way.
                                                                                       W e have borne in mind the dicta in R v Seymour [1983] 76
   Again, the defendant who recognises the existence of a risk                      Cr App R 211 at page 216 and in K on g Cheuk Kwan v The
and who does not “go on to take it”, but seeks to deal with it in                   Queen [1986] 82 Cr App R 18 at page 26. They were to the
a g ro ssly n eg lig en t w ay, w ould fall ou tside the L a w r e n c e            effect that the word “reckless” was to be preferred to the word
definition of recklessness. He may, however, be caught by Lord                      “n egligen ce” with whatever epithet. However, in view o f the
Atkin’s gross negligence test, s                                                    different tests and meanings which have in various contexts
                                                                                    been attached to “reck less” and “r e ck le ssn e ss” we think it
    It seems to us that the application o f the L aw rence test to                  preferable to avoid those words when directing juries as to
motor manslaughter by the House o f Lords in R v Seym our                           involuntary manslaughter by breach o f duty.
came about for historical reasons flowing from the co-existence
o f the common law and statutory offences. Unless and until the                        In each o f the three appeals before us, criticism has been
H ouse o f Lords, or Parliam ent, reverse R v S e y m o u r , the                   made in argument o f the directions given by the learned judge.
L a w r e n c e test m u st a p p ly in m o to r m a n s la u g h te r ,            Before proceeding to the specific issues raised in each o f the
notwithstanding the abolition of the statutory offence which                        appeals, we wish to say that w e have the greatest sympathy
gave birth to it. The House o f Lords is unlikely to reverse it                     with the judges in having to decide how to direct the jury as to
since the appeal in R v R eid was an express attempt to upset R v                   the true ingredients o f involuntary manslaughter. By reason of
Lawrence and it failed.                                                             the history which we have briefly outlined, it has been difficult
                                                                                    forjudges to know which line o f authority to follow.
    L e a v in g m o to r m a n s la u g h te r a s id e , h o w e v e r , in our
judgment the proper test in manslaughter cases based on breach                                            R v Prentice and Sullman
o f duty is the gross negligence test established in Andrews v
D P P and R v Stone and Dobinson. W e reach this conclusion                            On November 1, 1991 in Birmingham Crown Court before
principally because the line o f cases from R v D oherty through                    O w e n J, Dr S u llm a n and Dr P re n tic e w ere c o n v ic te d o f
R v Bateman to Andrews v D P P and R v Stone and Dobinson is,                       m a n sla u g h te r and w er e each s e n t e n c e d to nine m o n t h s ’
w e b eliev e, binding authority. S e c o n d ly , w e c o n sid er the             im p r iso n m e n t su spend ed for tw e lv e m onths. Both appeal
[1993] 4 Med LR                 R v Holloway and Others (CA (Cr Div): Lord Taylor o f Gosforth CJ)                                                       311


against their convictions by leave o f the single judge.                       that Dr Sullman was going to supervise Dr Prentice doing a
                                                                               lumbar puncture. But here it appears that an important and
   Malcolm Savage aged 16 suffered from leukaemia. He came                     regrettable misunderstanding took place. Dr Prentice thought
regularly for treatment with cytotoxic drugs at the Peterborough               Dr Sullman was supervising the whole procedure, including the
General Hospital. Once a month he was injected intravenously                   administration o f the cytotoxic drugs, whereas Dr Sullman
(IV) with Vincristine and every other month intrathecally (IT)                 thought he was there only to supervise the use o f the needle to
with Methotrexate, that is into his spine.                                     make a lumbar puncture but had no responsibility over the
                                                                               administration o f the cytotoxic drugs.
    Malcolm Savage was due for both his injections on February
28, 1990. On the previous day the consultant in charge, Dr                         A responsible nurse set up the trolley ready for the lumbar
Fairham, filled out the necessary prescription forms and the                   puncture and took that and the red box with the drugs to the
p a t i e n t ’s d r u g s ’ ch art. He se n t them to the p h a r m a c y     side ward where the patient and the two doctors were. As it
department to be prepared for injection. Dr Fairham had no                     happened there were two student nurses on the ward who
doctors working directly under him. If he needed junior doctors,               wished to watch the lumbar puncture. Seeing that there were
he used those working for a fellow consultant, Dr Dronfield.                   two doctors and two student nurses present, the nurse left. In
The latter worked in general medicine and gastroenterology.                    v ie w o f the misunderstanding between Dr Prentice and Dr
Under him were his registrar, Dr Chuah, his houseman, Dr                       Sullman, this was unfortunate. The two student nurses had no
Sullman, and a pre-registration houseman, Dr Prentice.                         e x p e r ie n c e o f c y to to x ic drugs and, as students, w ere not
                                                                               allowed even to touch them.
   The drugs were duly prepared by the pharmacy and taken to
^fc&vard which Malcolm Savage was due to attend. They were                       B e f o r e the lum bar puncture a lo c a l a n a e s t h e tic w as
p B r in a red b o x bearing labels in d ica tin g that they w ere            administered by Dr Prentice. One of the student nurses handed
cytotoxic drugs. Also on the outside o f the box were two labels              him the local anaesthetic, reading aloud its name in accordance
bearing the patient's name, the name of the drug and the route                with her training as she did so. After that had been done. Dr
by which it was to be injected, that is bearing either the letters            Prentice inserted the lumbar puncture needle into the spine
“IT” (intrathecal) or “IV” (intravenous). Inside the box were the             successfully. A little spinal fluid leaked out. This sometimes
two syringes containing the drugs. They too bore labels with the              happens, but it appeared to trouble Dr Prentice. He then asked
same information upon each of them as the labels on the outside               for a pair o f goggles, which was the normal procedure when
of the box. The drugs’ chart showing Dr Fairham’s prescription                dealing with cytotoxic drugs. After putting them on. he asked
usually was put with the patient's medical notes which went on                for the drugs themselves. Both student nurses refused to touch
the trolley with the drugs. It is not clear if that happened in this          them because they were not allowed to. Dr Sullman opened the
case.                                                                         red box. took out the first syringe and handed it to Dr Prentice
                                                                              him, warning him that it was now unsterile. Dr Sullman was not
   Sometime on February 27. 1990 Dr Prentice was informed                     scrubbed up. nor was he wearing gloves, so he was unsterile. It
by Dr Fairham’s secretary that Malcolm Savage was coming in                   is not clear how Dr Prentice understood this comment by Dr
for his lumbar puncture on the next day. Dr Prentice was not                  Sullman. Dr Prentice then fitted the syringe on the needle and
told then that he would be giving the lumbar puncture.                        injected it into the patient's spine. He then unscrewed that
                                                                              syringe and took the second syringe from Dr Sullman and also
   On February 28. 1990 the box o f cytotoxic drugs was put out               injected that into the spine. Neither doctor checked the labels on
on a trolley in the ward. Normally cytotoxic drugs are put on a               the box or the labels on the syringes before these two injections.



•
    cial cytotoxic trolley which also contains the manufacturers’             So it was that the Vincristine was injected wrongly into the
    a sheet. But on this occasion the lumbar-puncture trolley was             spine with fatal results.
    used because it was larger and could hold all the necessary
equipment. Unfortunately, the data sheet was not transferred                     A little later, after the patient had been cleaned up and the
from the cytotoxic trolley to the lumbar-puncture. The medical                trolley removed to the preparation room. Dr Fairham arrived.
notes were on the trolley, but whether the drugs" chart was                   He quickly discovered; that a terrible mistake had been made.
there is not clear.                                                           Dr Prentice went to the preparation room and looked at the data
                                                                              chart on the cytotoxic trolley. He was extremely upset and said:
   About 9 30 am Malcolm Savage and his mother arrived at                     "Oh my God. It can be fatal." From this it can be inferred that
the ward. Dr Prentice told them that he did not know if he                    he had never previously read the data sheet and had never been
would be dealing with the matter as he was inexperienced. He                  informed by anyone that an injection o f Vincristine into the
then saw the registrar. Dr Chuah. and told him that Malcolm                   spine could be fatal.
Savage had com e in for his cytotoxic and added that he was
reluctant to do it because o f inexperience. Dr Chuah asked him                   Thereafter, every effort was made by the hospital to treat
to g et Dr S u llm a n to supervise him, but added that if Dr                 M a l c o lm S a v a g e . The m a n u fa c tu re rs o f the drug w er e
Sullman had not done a lumbar puncture previously he would                    contacted, as were experts at Great Ormond Street Hospital.
supervise the treatment himself. Dr Sullman had only on ce                    The Royal Marsden Hospital and Addenbrookes Hospital in
previously attempted to do a lumbar puncture and that attempt                 C a m b r id g e w h ic h w a s so m e f o r t y - t w o m i l e s a w a y . A s
had fa ile d . H e had so m e lim ited p r ev io u s e x p e r ie n c e o f   Vincristine is a drug that destroys cells, the advice was that its
cytotoxic drugs and on one occasion previously had injected                   contents had if possible to be removed from the spinal column.
Vincristine intravenously.                                                    A w a sh -o u t procedure was co m m en ced. It is a technically
                                                                              difficult neurosurgical operation, fraught with danger, and it
   A ward sister saw Dr Prentice with Dr Sullman. Dr Prentice                 had to be attempted without loss o f time if Malcolm Savage’s
m ade k n o w n to her his con cern about d o in g the lum bar                life was to be saved. Sadly it was unsuccessful and did in fact
puncture. Dr Sullman agreed to supervise. The sister considered               cause damage to the base o f the brain and the spinal cord. This
    312                            R v H olloway and O thers (CA (Cr Div): Lord Taylor o f Gosforth CJ)                                    [1993] 4 Med LR


    w as the im m e d ia te cau se o f death. But it is c le a r that a             S u llm a n , that too w ould be “su ff ic ie n t e x c u s e ”. In th o se
    su b sta n tia l ca u se o f death w as the w ro n g fu l in je c tio n o f     circumstances, it was said that his conduct was not properly to
    Vincristine into the spine. Although the issue o f causation was                be described as reckless (or grossly negligent).
    canvassed at the trial, it was abandoned as a ground o f appeal
    before this court.                                                                 For Dr Sullman it was argued that once the judge accepted,
                                                                                   as he did, that Dr Sullman may indeed have thought he was
     Dr Prentice was interviewed in the presence o f a solicitor                   only supervising the lumbar puncture and not the administration
 and declined to answer questions. At trial his case was that he                   o f the cytotoxic drugs, there was insufficient evidence on which
 considered he was at all times being supervised by Dr Sullman.                    a jury could find that he was reckless (or grossly negligent).
  In evidence Dr Dronfield said that where a junior doctor asks a
  senior doctor to supervise, he could reasonably expect him to                       Mr A r l i d g e ’s argum ent has b een b a sed p rin cipally on
 su p e r v is e the w h o le op eration. T hus it w as sa id that the             criticism o f the summing-up. He recognises that the learned
 evidence showed it was reasonable for Dr Prentice to consider                     judge was at pains to be scrupulously fair to these appellants.
 that he was being generally supervised and consequently he                        But he submits that by adopting an approach based essentially
  should be acquitted. His pre-registration status and level o f                   on Lawrence recklessness, albeit tempered with a seasoning of
 experience were emphasised, as was his obvious anxiety about                      Andrews gross negligence, the learned judge fell into error.
 the lumbar puncture. It was said that his failure to check the
 route o f the Vincristine injection, although arguably negligent,                     Mr Arlidge’s first submission is that the correct test is one o f
 was not in all the circumstances capable o f being conduct of                     recklessness as defined in R v Cunningham [1957] 41 Cr App R
 such a nature as to justify a charge o f m anslaughter being                      1 5 5 . T h e r e , the cou rt a d o p te d a p a s s a g e from K e n n y ’s
^ p > w e d to go to the jury.                                                     “Outlines of Criminal Law”, 16th Edition (1952) as follows:
                                                                                        “ ... recklessness as to whether such harm should occur or not
    Dr S u llm a n g a v e a w it n e s s s t a t e m e n t and la ter w a s            (i.e. the accused has foreseen that the particular kind of harm
 interviewed at length by the police. He made it clear that he                          might be done, and yet has gone on to take the risk of it).”
 thought he was only supervising the lumbar puncture and not
 the administration of the cytotoxic drugs. He said he had been                        However, as the context shows, that passage was part o f a
 told that the drugs were for injection by lumbar puncture. He                     definition o f the word "maliciously” in the Offences Against
 came into the situation very late and did not appreciate that Dr                  the Person Act 1861. Its application has clearly been confined
 Prentice would have thought that he was supervising the whole                     to that definition (see R v C a ld w e ll at page 3 5 1G. per Lord
 operation. The trial judge told the jury that there was a body o f                Diplock). It is not consonant either with the Lawrence/Caldwell
 evidence to show that it would have been reasonable for Dr                        test o f r e c k le s s n e s s , or with Lord A t k in ’s form ulation in
 Sullman to assume that he was only concerned with the lumbar                      A n d r e w s v D P P . A ccordingly, we reject Mr A rlid g e’s first
 puncture. The evidence was that Dr Sullman had no significant                     submission. His fall-back position was reliance on Andrews v
 experience o f cytotoxic drugs.                                                   D P P and the gross negligence test. A s already indicated, we
                                                                                   accept that that is a correct approach.
      Neither appellant gave evidence at trial.
                                                                                     The learned judge directed the jury (at page 11B) that the
     The prosecution put the case against Dr Prentice on the basis                 prosecution had to prove four main elements:
 that he ought to have known o f the dangers in v olv ed in the
                                                                                        “Firstly, that the defendant whose case you are considering
 injection into the spine of Vincristine. They further said that he



«
                                                                                        had a duty to take care to prevent harm to Malcolm Savage.
    ght to have checked the labels before injecting the drugs,                          Secondly, that without any sufficient excuse that defendant
    her by looking at the ones on the red box and/or in addition at                     failed in that duty. Thirdly, that that failure caused Malcolm
    those on the syringes when they were handed to him. They said                       Savage’s death; and. lastly, that in failing in his duty, the
                                                                                        defendant acted recklessly.”
 that he g ave no thought to any o f these matters, but those
 failures to give thought to them, or any o f them, were reckless.                    It is to be n oted that he related c o n sid er a tio n o f “any
                                                                                  sufficient excuse” to the issue as to whether there was a breach
   The prosecution case against Dr Sullman was put in two                         o f duty. It is a principal plank in Mr Arlidge's argument that
ways. First, that he had a duty to supervise the whole operation                  although that was intended to achieve fairness to the appellants,
and ensure that the right drugs were inserted in the right place,                 the important factor of "excuses” was addressed to the wrong
by c h e c k in g the labels and m aking sure that Dr P rentice                   issue.
injected the drugs correctly. Secondly, they said that even if he
did not have a duty to supervise the whole operation, he had a                        It is true that the learned judge (at page 14) gave the jury the
duty to intervene when he saw Dr Prentice was preparing to                        h o m e ly test quoted above from R v B a te m a n and cited in
inject the patient without having checked the labels himself. It                  Andrews v D P P . He said:
was said that on one or other of these grounds his conduct was
reckless.                                                                              “ You have to be satisfied that the defendant’s conduct went
                                                                                       b ey o n d , w en t further than, a q u estio n o f co m p en satio n
                                                                                       between citizens, that it was in your view criminal conduct
   It was argued on behalf o f both appellants that the case                           requiring punishment. That is the position. Recklessness
should have been withdrawn from the jury at the close o f the                          would be such conduct.”
prosecution case. In regard to Dr Prentice the judge accepted, as                 H o w e v e r , he w e n t on to g i v e a L a w r e n c e d ir e c t io n on
his direction to the jury shows, that if Dr Prentice had been                     recklessness as follows (at page 15A-F):
handed the syringes by either o f the consultants Dr Fairham or
Dr D ron field , that, in the j u d g e ’s words “m ight w ell be a                    “ What do the prosecution have to prove for recklessness?
                                                                                       You must be satisfied of three factors:
sufficient excuse”. It was submitted that it followed that as he
was being supervised by another more senior doctor, namely Dr                          “ (1) T hat the defendant whose case you are considering
                                                                                       created a serious risk of causing serious harm to Malcolm
 [1993] 4 Med LR                                R v H ollow ay and Others (CA (Cr Div): Blofeld J)                                                             313

      Savage ...
                                                                                      not have special experience or knowledge o f cytotoxic drugs.
     “Next, you have to be satisfied that that risk would have been                   Although the box in which the drugs came was red and properly
     obvious to any ordinary prudent doctor of the experience, of                     labelled, it was accepted that to put the two syringes into the
     the k n o w le d g e and o f the status o f the d e fe n d a n t b e in g
                                                                                      same box was bad practice which is no longer followed.
     considered when performing the task which the defendant
     was performing.
                                                                                          Had the directions to the jury left it open to them to take
     “Thirdly, you have to be satisfied that the defendant gave no
     thought to the possibility of there being any such risk.”
                                                                                      th ese matters into account on the s p e c ific issu e o f gross
                                                                                      negligence which we hold was the right issue, they may well, in
    Whatever the “excuses” or mitigating circumstances in this                        our judgment, have concluded that the prosecution had failed to
case, it would have been difficult to argue in a civil action that                    establish that essential ingredient. Accordingly, in our view the
there was no breach o f duty, ie no negligence. A s the learned                       appeals o f these two appellants must be a llo w e d and their
ju d g e’s use o f the Bateman test recognised, there can be civil                    convictions quashed. That being so, it is unnecessary for us to
law negligence without criminal liability. Breach o f duty was                        consider any other o f the grounds put forward on their behalf.
number 2 in the learned judge's list o f ingredients. Once that
point in the learned judge’s list was passed, his directions left                                                   R v A dom ako
litt le r o o m for a c o n sid er a tio n o f e x c u s e s or m it i g a t i n g
circumstances in deciding whether the necessary mens rea for                             M R J U S T I C E B L O F E L D : On January 26, 1990 at the
manslaughter was proved.                                                              Central Criminal Court before Alliott J, John Asare Adomako
                                                                                      was convicted o f manslaughter and sentenced to six months’
    The learned judge came back to the mental element towards                         imprisonment suspended for twelve months (Reported at [1991]



«
     nd o f his summing-up (at page 113). He said:                                    2 Med LR 277). He renews his application for leave to appeal
      ‘The third requirement is that the defendant gave no thought                    against conviction after refusal by the single judge. We give
     to the possibility of there being any such risk. Well, you ask                   him leave.
     that question and see if it is proved by the prosecution or not.
     As far as that is concerned, you might think it is quite clear                      On Saturday January 3. 1987 at the Mayday Hospital in
     that neither doctor thought there was a risk because, if they
                                                                                      Croydon Mr Lovelan d was d iagnosed as su fferin g from a
     had thought there was a risk of serious harm, they w ould
     have done something about it. Indeed, that may be som e                          detached retina in his right eye. An emergency operation at that
     evidence, not very much, it may be some evidence as to what                      hospital was fixed for the next day. At 9 30 am on Sunday
     the ordinary prudent doctor of the experience, knowledge and                     January 4, 1987 the operation took place. The patient received
     status o f the defendant being considered would have when                        pre-operation sedation. Once in the operating theatre he was
     performing the task which he was performing because you
     know that they, each o f them, in the ordinary way, w;as an                      injected with Vecuronium inserted through a butterfly needle
     ordinary prudent doctor.”                                                        on his left arm. There were tw o doctors carrying out the
                                                                                      operation. Dr Said was the anaesthetist. He had an operating
   In effect, therefore, once the jury found "that the defendant                      department assistant (ODA) with him.
gave no thought to the possibility of there being any such risk”,
on the learned ju d g e’s directions they had no option but to                           Vecuronium totally paralyses the body as well as rendering
convict. Mr Arlidge's point is that if the jury had been given the                    the patient u n c o n sc io u s . O x y g e n is su p p lie d through an
gross n e g lig e n c e test, they could properly have taken into                     endotracheal tube inserted through the mouth and connected to
account “excuses" or mitigating circum stances in d ecid in g                         a ventilator. From the mouth the tube runs down the body to
whether the necessary high degree of gross negligence had been                        the c h e s t w h e re it is a tta c h e d to an in v e r te d Y -s h a p e d



•
   a b lish ed . T he q uestion for the jury sh o u ld h a v e b een                  M alin k ro d t c o n n e c to r . From the tw o lo w e r en d s o f this
   bther, in the case o f each doctor, they were sure that the                       connector are attached two tubes which go to the ventilator. At
   failure to ascertain the correct mode o f administering the drug                  the foot o f the operating table is an array o f m a ch ines to
and to ensure that only that mode was adopted was grossly                            monitor the patient’s condition. There is the ventilator itself
negligent to the point o f criminality having regard to all the                      which has two warning systems, an alarm which can be turned
excuses ,-and mitigating circumstances in the case.                                  o ff with a key and a light which comes on and off. There is also
                                                                                     an ECG which shows a graph on a video screen o f the electrical
   O f those, there were many. Dr Prentice was required to give                      activity in the brain. Then there is a Dvnamap machine which
the treatment without the consultant who prescribed it giving                        measures the patient’s pulse and blood pressure. That too has an
any instruction or thought as to who should do so. This, despite                     audible alarm and lights which go on and off. Finally, there is
the fact that Dr Prentice was inexperienced, reluctant to give the                   the Manley Pullman machine with two dials which record the
treatment and wholly unaware (as it seems was Dr Fairham) o f                        inhalation and exhalation o f breath.
the likely fatal consequences o f giving Vincristine by lumbar
puncture. Dr Prentice did not have the data chart on the                                For an eye operation the patient is completely draped. Only
cytotoxic trolley because that trolley was not in use. The senior                    the area around the eye and the left arm which contains the
nurse was not present, leaving only two students at the scene.                       butterfly needle are visible above it. The two doctors who carry
Moreover, having asked for supervision and believing that Dr                         out the operation work at the head o f the patient and they may
Sullman was supervising the whole treatment, he was actually                         need to lean across the chest o f the patient while doing it. This
handed each o f the two syringes in turn by Dr Sullman and                           does occasionally cause a disconnection o f the tube from the
administered the drugs under his very eyes.                                          Malinkrodt connector.

    So far as Dr Sullman was concerned, he believed he was                              The anaesthetist sits at the side o f the patient. It is his duty to
s im p ly required to su p erv ise the insertion o f the lum bar                     ensure the safety o f the patient. He does this by observing him
puncture needle by an inexperienced houseman. He understood                          throughout the operation and by paying careful attention to the
the drugs were for administration by lumbar puncture. He did                         different monitoring devices which have just been described.
  314                                          R v H ollow ay and Others (CA (Cr Div): Blofeld J)                                          [1993] 4 Med LR


     About 10 35 am Dr Said had to leave for an emergency in                         machine would also cease to rotate. The alarm on the ventilator
  another part o f the hospital and handed over to the appellant                     should sound after thirty seconds and the amber light upon it
  b efo re le a v in g . T he O D A left ab out the s a m e tim e . H is             stops flashing. But it is common ground that at no time did the
  replacement did not arrive until some time later. S o during the                   ventilator alarm sound. As we have said, it can be turned off
  crucial period the appellant was on his ow n . T h is was not                      with a key. There was a suggestion by the prosecution that this
  proper p roced u re. A n O D A is not a fu ll a s s is ta n t to the               appellant had turned the ventilator alarm o ff with a key when he
  anaesthetist but is subservient to him in all matters. It is his duty              left to go next door. This was denied by the appellant. When
  to wheel the patient in and out o f the theatre and to assist the                  tested after the operation, the ventilator alarm system was
  anaesthetist as and when required to do so.                                        working perfectly. There was no clear evidence before the jury
                                                                                     why the ventilator alarm did not go off.
      Around 11 05 am the tube w hich ran from the patient’s
  mouth to the connector became disconnected. Probably this was                         The Dynam ap which registered blood pressure and pulse
  due to the inadvertent m o v em en t o f one o f the operatin g                   movements has a three-minute cycle. If it had just completed a
  doctors. The appellant failed to realise that there had been a                    cycle, three minutes would pass before it took a further reading.
  d is c o n n e c t io n . A cardiac arrest o c c u r r e d . T h is c a u se d    If that reading violates the normal limit, its alarm goes off and a
  irreversible brain damage. As a result the patient died o f lack                  flashing display o f lights appears. The patient suffers no further
  o f oxygen to the brain (hypoxia) on July 12, 1987.                               deterioration for about three minutes after he ceases to breath.
                                                                                    This is b ecau se he is continuing to use the oxygen that is
     Before considering the final minutes on the operating table it                 circulating in his body. After three minutes the patient begins to
  is appropriate to say a few words about the appellant himself.                    b ecom e cyanosed, that is, he starts to turn blue. In the next
  He was in his late forties and was trained in R ostov in Russia.                  m inute his b lo o d pressure and p ulse rise slightly. At four
J b came to this country in 1972 and has worked as a perennial                      m inutes after d isco n n ectio n the ch a n g e o f colour is more
^rocum tenens in anaesthesia mainly on six-month contracts in                       pronounced. Blood pressure and pulse drop rapidly. By now his
  various hospitals. In January 1987 he had a full-time job at a                    brain would already be in a state o f hypoxia and would have
  different hospital but when required worked in addition at                        been so for about two minutes. If oxygen is not received bv his
  weekends at the Mayday Hospital. It was said that this was not                    brain in another minute, irreversibly brain damage will start to
  satisfactory because he might be tired. He had been at the                        occur and if the brain still receives no oxygen, the patient will
  Mayday Hospital on the Saturday, getting to bed at 3 30 am                        shortly suffer a cardiac arrest.
  after a busy day. He slept at the hospital. He was back on the
  w ard s by 7 0 0 am on S un day January 4 , 1 9 8 7 . H e had                          The appellan t did not appreciate that there had been a
  experience o f eye operations in the past but had not acted as                      disconnection o f the tube from the connector until after the
  sole anaesthetist in such operations. He was accustomed to the                      cardiac arrest took place. Although he was aware that there was
  various machines in use. save that the ventilator failure alarm                     a possibility o f such disconnection, he had never experienced
  was o f a different system from the one he was used to.                             one himself. When he fitted the tube to the connector he always
                                                                                     taped it to be sure that it did not become disconnected. In this
     We now return to the operation itself.                                          o p era tio n Dr S a id had fitted the tube to the M alinkrodt
                                                                                     connector. The appellant said that when he took over from Dr
      Shortly after his arrival the appellant is said to have left the               Said all was well. A little later, he injected the patient with
  patient unattended and gone to the room next door to obtain a                      more Vecuronium and checked his pulse. The pulse was low.
  glass o f milk or coffee. This was strongly denied at the trial by                 He then checked the tubes running from the ventilator to the
  the ap pellan t. It w o u ld be a g ro ss b reach o f d uty for an                 body, but did not check the Malinkrodt connector, or the tube
® p e s t h e t i s t to leave the patient unattended during an operation.           that ran from that connector to the patient’s mouth. That is all
®5ut even if the appellant left the patient, it was som e minutes                   he did until the Dynamap alarm went off. He did not think there
  before the disconnection took place and his leaving would only                    was an emergency. He thought the Dynamap was overheating.
 be relevant as in dica tiv e o f his attitude. A t h is trial, the                 There was evidence that Dynamap machines from time to time
 appellant, in addition to the count o f manslaughter, faced two                    do cause problems and the alarm does go o ff when it should not
 counts o f perjury relating to this incident. The prosecution                      do so. B y this time the replacement O D A had arrived at the
 alleged that Dr Said had seen the appellant in the next room at                    operating table. The appellant asked him for Atropine for him
 the relevant period. It was also alleged that the appellant had                    to inject into the patient's hand. He wished to do this because
 told another doctor subsequently that he had left the patient                      he considered that the patient had had an occulo-cardiac reflex.
 during the operation. At the coroner’s inquest he gave evidence                   T h is c o n d itio n so m e t im e s o c c u r s in e y e o p era tio n s. An
 that he had never left the patient. This was said to be perjury.                  injection o f Atropine is the proper treatment for it. He first
 At trial the appellant denied he had left the patient unattended.                 injected through the butterfly needle in the arm and then with a
 The jury acquitted him o f these tw o cou n ts. W e therefore                     bigger needle injected further Atropine into the same arm. He
 disregard that allegation.                                                        then observed that the ECG was showing a straight line which
                                                                                   in d ic a te d that the patient had s u ff e r e d a cardiac arrest.
   Once the tube became disconnected the patient had only                          Immediately he called for the emergency cardiac arrest team.
limited time before a cardiac arrest took place. This limited                      Dr Davis stopped the operation and pulled the drapes from the
period varies from patient to patient with a range o f six to                      patient's body. He then saw the disconnection o f the tube from
eleven minutes. There was no oxygen com in g into his body                         the connector. It was reconnected, but by then irreversible brain
from the ventilator and as the patient was paralysed he was                        damage had been done.
totally unable to breathe. On disconnection, his chest would
immediately cease to rise and fall. This could be seen or felt.                      The prosecution called witnesses who severely criticised the
The fact that he had ceased to breath would be indicated on the                    appellant’s actions. Professor Payne said:
pressure gauge o f the Manley Pullman. The respirator on that
                                                                                       "The standard of care [hat the patient received was abysmal."
  [1993] 4 Med LR                                        R v H ollow ay and O thers (CA (Cr Div): Blofeld J)                                                                 315


 Professor Adams said:                                                                           ([1991] 2 Med LR 277 at page 279 col 1)
      “ A n y c o m p e t e n t a n a e s t h e ti s t sh o u ld h a v e r e c o g n i s e d
      complete disconnection of the tube within fifteen seconds.”                                    As the jury acquitted the appellant on the two perjury counts,
                                                                                                 it follows that, observing the direction by the judge, they would
 His conclusion was that:                                                                        not have taken it into account when considering the count of
      “The anaesthetist has shown a gross dereliction of care."                                  m anslaughter. In any ev e n t that e v id e n c e w a s potentially
                                                                                                 admissible on the manslaughter count because it was capable of
 A further witness. Dr Monks, said that the appellant failed to                                  assisting the jury in deciding the degree o f attention that the
 observe that this man was without breath. He failed to observe                                  appellant was giv ing to the patient after his arrival in the
 any dial which would indicate that. There were two, or if the                                   operating theatre prior to the disconnection o f the endotracheal
 ventilator alarm was on, three dials which would have indicated                                 tube. Consequently we do not find anything in this submission.
 this. He failed to observe those warning signals. For six minutes
 no rem edial m easu res w ere taken and by that fa ilu re the                                      The appellant also mounted a somewhat tentative submission
 appellant allowed the patient to get into an irreversible position.                             that the trial judge did not deal with the issue o f causation with
                                                                                                 sufficient clarity. There was never any dispute at trial about the
     Consequently the Crown alleged that the appellant had failed                                cause o f death which was hypoxia. The jury were clearly told
 to observe that the patient had ceased to breath, or to check the                               that they had to decide whether the appellant was responsible
 patient to make sure that he was still breathing. The appellant                                 for that hypoxia because o f his gross negligence. Consequently
 did not observe the dials as he should have done. He failed to                                  we do not find anything in this ground o f appeal.
 notice the change in colour on the patient which would have
 b j » plain on the exposed arm. The prosecution did not rely on                                   We have therefore com e to the conclusion that, subject to
 tU P entila to r alarm because there was no evidence to indicate                               our co n sid eration o f the trial j u d g e ’s d irection in law on
 that it ever did sound.                                                                        manslaughter, the matter was properly left to the jury and that it
                                                                                                was open to them to return a verdict of guilty on the facts of
      The d efen ce case was that the ap pellan t's actio n s were                              this case.
  r e a so n a b le in all the circu m sta n c es. T h e y said that w ith
  hindsight it may be unfortunate that he failed to observe the                                     Having in an earlier part o f this judgment already given an
  disconnection, but he was in no way negligent. All he did was                                 analysis o f the approach which we consider to be the correct
  to make a wrong diagnosis. As occulo-cardiac reflexes do occur                                one in all cases o f involuntary' manslaughter, except for motor
  in eye operations, it was by no means unreasonable for him to                                 manslaughter, we turn to consider Mr Du Cann's criticisms o f
 consider that the patient had just suffered from one. His actions                              the trial judge's direction in this case. He submitted that it was
 in injecting Atropine thereafter was the proper treatment and he                               not appropriate for the jury to be directed on the basis of gross
  should not be criticised. But it must be remembered that by the                               negligence and that they should have been directed on the basis
  time the appellant considered that the patient had suffered an                                o f recklessness. But this case is an obvious exam ple o f the
 occulo-cardiac reflex, at least three minutes had elapsed since                                problems that would have arisen if this jury had been directed
 the disconnection. During that period the appellant had taken no                               on recklessness as defined by Lord Diplock. On the basis o f his
 action and had not observed that the patient was not breathing,                                first test that the necessary mens rea is present if a defendant
 nor that the relevant dials showed this. Dr Monk in evidence                                   has not given any thought to the possibility o f there being an
 said that an occulo-cardiac reflex might have taken place as                                   ob vious and serious risk, it would appear extrem ely likely,
 well as the disconnection, That reflex might have caused the                                   considering the circumstances o f this case, that the jury would
 Qjmamap alarm to go off. He further said that if the appellant                                 have convicted this appellant out o f hand. Once the Malinkrodt
 ^ ^ e n g a g e d in difficult activity which distracted him, it meant                        connector came apart, there was clearly a serious risk to the
 his failure to discover the fact that the patient was not breathing                           patient. The evidence demonstrated that this appellant gave no
 was, if not excusable, mitigated. Complaint is made on behalf                                 thought to that possibility at any relevant stage. It is true that
 o f the appellant that the trial judge did not deal sufficiently with                         the appellant did at a late stage consider that the deceased had
the evidence o f the medical experts. Professor Payne. Professor                               s u ff e r e d an o c c u l o - c a r d ia c reflex ; T h e ju r y c o u ld h a v e
A d a m s and Dr M on k s w ho w a s c a lle d on b e h a lf o f the                           considered this explanation, but it would, at best, have been a
appellant. But it is perfectly clear that the judge dealt with the                             tenuous defence to this type o f recklessness. Conversely, when
salient points o f this evidence. He made the issue clear to the                               the appellant b ecam e aware that so m eth in g had happened
jury and cannot properly be criticised for not going into that                                 creating a serious risk to the patient’s health, his response was,
evidence in further detail.                                                                    according to the prosecution doctors, g r o s sly n eg lig en t, a
                                                                                               situation covered by Lord Atkin but not by Lord Diplock.
   Mr Du Cann further submitted that the ev id e n c e w hich
related to the two counts o f perjury was not evidence on the                                      The trial judge in this case directed the jury on the basis o f a
manslaughter count and that the jury should have been so                                        high degree o f negligen ce, rather than recklessness. Mr Du
directed. The trial jud ge made it clear to the jury that the                                   Cann argues that it was inappropriate for him to give the jury
evidence relating to this incident, if proved, had nothing to do                               guidance on the degree o f negligence by reading out various
with the cause o f death o f the patient. He gave them a careful                               p a ssa g es from a num ber o f d ifferent c a s e s that had been
warning how to approach this incident, telling them that if they                               decided in the past, some o f them many years ago. He mounts a
were not sure they would have to acquit the appellant o f the                                  similar criticism in respect o f the way the jury should have
perjury counts and then explained too that they must:                                          approached the proper degree o f com petence required by the
    “ ... G o on to c o n s id e r the ev id e n c e u p o n c o u n t 1 (the                  doctor. Here again the trial judge chose to deal with this by
    manslaughter count) upon the basis that the appellant never                                reading out a number o f extracts from previous cases. These
    left his post.”                                                                            criticisms have caused us some anxiety. A circular tour around
                                                                                               the area o f law affected by the case is often productive o f more
    316                                R v H olloway and O thers (CA (Cr Div): L ord Taylor o f Gosforth CJ)                                         [1993] 4 Med LR


    obscurity than light, as was said by Lord H ailsham in R v                              will reinforce the comments made in that case.
    L a w re n c e at page 519. The risk is that different quotations,
    instead o f assisting the jury, will only serve to confuse them. It                          C o m m en ta ry by M argaret Puxon Q C M D FRCO G
    is consequently not a practice that we endorse and we deprecate
    its use in this case. Nevertheless, having carefully considered                            M a n sla u g h te r is perhaps the m o st d iffic u lt area o f the
    the passages that the judge selected in respect o f these two                          crim inal law; w hen it concerns the doctor it presents both
    p o in ts w ith w h ic h he w a s d e a lin g , w e h a v e c o m e to the             advocate and judge with particular problems, and juries must,
    conclusion that in this case his directions were sufficient. The                       e v e n w ith the m o s t c a r efu l d ir e c t io n s , fin d the task o f
    jury were left with adequate directions on the particular points                       co n sid e r in g “breach o f d u ty ”, “r e c k le s s n e s s ”, and “gross
    and consequently w e find that there is nothing in this ground                         n egligence”, all in the same case, a serious intellectual struggle.
    raised and argued so carefully by Mr Du Cann.                                          The task is not made easier for any o f the protagonists by the
                                                                                           mass o f case-law which surrounds the subject, which is further
       It was in our view clearly open to the jury to conclude that                        con fu sed by the co-existence o f statutory and com m on law
    the appellant’s failure to perform his essential and in effect sole                    manslaughter.
    duty to see that his patient was breathing satisfactorily and to
    cope with the breathing emergency which should have been                                   In R v H o l l o w a y , R v A d o m a k o and R v P r e n ti c e a n d
    obvious to him. justified a verdict o f guilty. They were entitled                     S u llm a n , tw o o f them in v o lv in g doctors and one a skilled
    to conclude his failure was more than mere inadvertence and                            electrician, the Court o f Appeal went some way to clearing the
    co n stitu ted gross n e g lig e n c e o f the d eg re e n e c e ss a r y for          undergrowth; it will require the Law C om m ission, and the
    manslaughter.                                                                          H o u s e o f L o r d s (or P a r lia m e n t ) to se p a r a te the w o o d
                                                                                           completely from the trees. All four appellants caused the death
      The remaining points put forward on behalf o f [he defendant                         o f a person to whom they owed a duty, all behaved towards the
  concerned the broad issue o f the definition o f manslaughter                            deceased with a high degree o f negligence; all were convicted
  which w e have already covered. W e do not consider that it                              by juries after careful summings-up by experienced judges. The
  would be helpful to rehearse the individual arguments in each                            appeals were a llo w ed in R v P r e n ti c e a n d Sullman on the
  o f the three cases with which we are dealing. Many o f the same                         grounds that the judge, Owen J, in each case directed the jury
  points were inevitable covered in each case and we have dealt                            w r o n g ly on the n ece ssa r y in g r e d ie n ts for m ansla ug h ter,
  comprehensively with the arguments put forward on behalf of                              follow ing the line of cases which impose “recklessness” as the
  the three appellants when considering the general question.                              test o f criminal liability in cases o f death caused by negligence.
  C o n s e q u e n t ly it s u f f ic e s to say that w e fin d there is no
. substance in the argum ents put forw ard on b e h a lf o f this                             The speeches o f the House o f Lords in Andrews v DPP', in
  appellant and his appeal is dismissed.                                                   particular the words o f Lord A tkin, set the standard for a
                                                                                           finding o f criminal conduct in bringing about death:
                                    R v Holloway                                                “a very high degree of negligence is required to be proved
                                                                                                before the felony is established.”2
        E d it o r ' s N o te: The ju d g m e n t o f the c o u r t d e l i v e r e d by
    H en iy J, in respect o f the appellant H olloway, is not reported in                  W h i l e h e u se d “r e c k l e s s n e s s ” to d e n o t e the d e g r e e o f
    full because o f the reasons already stated at p a g e 3 0 6 col 2.                    n egligence required for a conviction, Lord Atkin specifically
                                                                                           stated that “reckless” was not all-embracing as a test, since it
       LO R D T A Y L O R OF G O SF O R T H CJ: For the reasons set                        im plies indifference to the risk in volved, and there m ay be



«
     ut above, the appeals o f Dr Prentice and Dr Sullman will be                          “gross negligence” where the accused appreciated the risk yet
     llo w e d , the appeal o f the appellant Dr A d o m a k o w ill be                    was seriously negligent in the means he adopted to avoid the
     dismissed and the appeal o f Mr Holloway will be allowed.                             risk.

       B efore parting with these cases, the state o f the law o f                            It was the cases o f R v Caldwell3 and R v Lawrence4 in 1981
    manslaughter prompts us to urge that the Law5Commission take                           which brought “recklessness” to the fore as the test o f criminal
    the opportunity to examine the subject in all its aspects as a                         culpability. Lord Diplock's wide definition o f recklessness in
    matter or urgency.                                                                     those ca ses has caused problems w hich, as Lord Taylor o f
                                                                                           Gosforth CJ recognised in the present cases, would have been
         In 1980, the Criminal Law Revision Committee reported on                          avoided if “gross negligence” had remained the test.
    o f f e n c e s a g a in s t the p er s o n . T h e L a w C o m m i s s i o n
    subsequently considered both murder and manslaughter when                                  Can it be said, then, that Andrews v D P P has survived R v
    preparing their draft criminal code.                                                   C aldw ell and R v Lawrence? It seems that this is so: Andrews i’
                                                                                           D P P has n ev er been disapp roved in the interval, and the
       In 1992. the Law Commission reported on offences against                            application o f Lord D iplock’s definition can be restricted to
    the person and general principles in consultation paper L I 22,                        motor manslaughter cases. From the judgments of the Court o f
    but that excluded both murder and manslaughter. At paragraph                           Appeal in R v Holloway, R v Adom ako and R v Prentice and
    2.10 they say there are many aspects o f the law o f homicide that                     Sullman, it is clear that the courts can, and should, distinguish
    require attention from the point o f view o f law reform.                              between motor manslaughter cases and those involving breach
                                                                                           o f duty by doctors (or indeed by an electrician). In medical
        These cases exemplify the problems in this particular type o f                     cases the risk is not created by the doctor, whereas in motor
    manslaughter. Others have recently been highlighted in the case                        manslaughter cases the risk is created by the defendant and the
    o f R v S carlett (Tim es Law Reports, May 18, 1993) where                             culpability lies in his reckless approach to that risk.
    another d iv is io n o f this court a lso urged that the law o f
    manslaughter be reviewed. We hope that our comments here                                  Without, therefore, departing in any way from the decisions
 [1993] 4 Med LR                                        R v H ollow ay and O thers (CA (Cr Div))

                                                                                      '[1937] A C 576
 o f the House o f Lords, the Court o f Appeal has been able to
 rule that in manslaughter cases based on breach o f duty, as                         2ibid at page 583

 opposed to m otor manslaughter cases, the proper test is the                         3 [1982] A C 341
 Andrews test o f “gross negligence”.                                                 ‘[1982] A C 510

                                                                                      3ibid at page 519
     W h ile leg a lly important, those appeals do not g iv e very
 much com fort to doctors who find them selves charged with                           ‘ [1986] 3 All E R 801 at page

 causing the death o f their patients. Although they can take some
 encouragement from the need for the prosecution to prove gross
 n e g li g e n c e , in clu d in g taking into accoun t any m itig a tin g
 c ir c u m sta n c e s - p ro v id ed the jud ge sum s up co r re ctly in
 accordance with the Andrews test - a jury will be entitled to find
 negligence o f such a degree as to justify a criminal conviction.
 It was the failure o f Owen J in R v Prentice and Sullman and
 Boreham J in R v Holloway to give the accused the opportunity
 to present to the respective juries the p ossible ex c u ses and
 e x p l a n a t i o n s o f th e ir c o n d u c t, w h ic h w o u l d f a ll to be
 considered under the “gross negligence” test, that vitiated their
 verdicts. R v Adom ako was one where the jury, who had been
 properly directed on the high degree o f negligence test rather



 •
           recklessness, were entitled on the evidence to conclude
        the failure o f the anaesthetist to observe and cope with the
        patient’s failure to breathe was such gross n eg lig en ce as to
 amount to a criminal offence. (The trial judge, Alliott J, was
 criticised for his w id e references to the case-la w ; as Lord
 Hailsham said in R v Lawrencei a “circular tour ... is often more
 productive o f obscurity than light”)

    It is illuminating to contrast R v Adomako with the case o f R
 v P r e n t i c e a n d S u llm a n , w h e re there w a s c o n s id e r a b l e
 mitigation which the jury could not take into account on the
 basis of the direction as to “recklessness”.

    R v P ren tice an d Sullman raises socio-political problems
which cannot be ignored when considering the law. W ho is
responsible for the errors committed by junior doctors? In civil
cases Sir N icholas Browne-Wilkinson V-C (as he then was)
s u g g e s t e d the a n s w e r in W il s h e r v Esse.x A r e a H e a l t h
Authority6:




•
      “... a health authority which so conducts its hospital that it
       fails to provide doctors of sufficient skill and experience to
      give the treatment offered at the hospital may be directly
      liable in negligence to the patient.”

    These words read curiously alongside a prosecution o f junior
 doctors for manslaughter, and prompt the question, w ho was
 responsible for the death of this leukaemic child? If a health
 authority could be held responsible in civil negligence, how can
 the d octors be cr im in a lly liable, w hen they carried out a
 procedure under orders for which they had neither the skill nor
the e x p e r ie n c e ? A nd what r e sp o n sib ility a tta ch es to the
consultant who ordered the injections without ensuring that
those who carried out his orders were properly instructed and
“o f sufficient skill and experience"? Hopefully the prosecuting
authorities will ponder these inconsistencies. More urgently,
however, health authority managements and consultants must
learn the risks their patients run from inadequate training o f
junior staff and what perils those juniors may face from the
criminal law, even if the Court of Appeal eventually com es to
their rescue. Cases such as this, which are not in the same class
as R v Adomako, are in truth the result of invention outstripping
education in m edicine: too many undertrained doctors are
required to deal with advanced techniques - a situation well
illustrated in Wilsher.
    44                                       All England Law Reports                                     [1994] 1 All ER


          R v Tower Bridge Metropolitan Stipendiary                                                                                        a
                Magistrate, ex parte Chaudhry
    QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
    KENNEDY LJ AND BELLJ
    30 JUNE, 1, 7 JULY 1993                                                                                                                b


    M a g is tr a te s - S u m m o n s - R e fu s a l to is s u e s u m m o n s - P r iv a te p r o s e c u tio n - P riv a te
    p r o s e c u tio n a g a in s t d e fe n d a n t a lr e a d y c h a r g e d in r e s p e c t o f s a m e m a tte r - D r iv e r
    c h a rg e d w i t h m in o r tr a ffic o ffen ce s in r e s p e c t o f c o llis io n i n w h i c h a p p lic a n t’s so n
    k ille d - A p p lic a n t s e e k in g is s u e o f s u m m o n s a g a in s t d r iv e r f o r c a u s in g d e a th b y         c
    re ck less d r iv in g -      M a g is tr a te r e fiis in g to is s u e s u m m o n s -         W h e th e r m a g is tr a te
    re q u ire d to ta k e in to a c c o u n t e x is te n c e o f p r o s e c u tio n b y C r o w n P ro s e c u tio n S ervic e -
    W h e th e r m a g is tr a te p r o p e r ly r e fu s in g to is s u e s u m m o n s - M a g is tr a te s ’ C o u rts A c t
    1980, s i - P ro se c u tio n o f O ffe n c e s A c t 1 9 S5, s 6.


 The applicant’s son suffered fatal injuries when a van collided with his motor ^
 cycle at a junction. Statements made to the police in the course o f their
 inquiries indicated that the van driver had driven through red traffic lights
 controlling the junction. The file was submitted to the Crown Prosecution
 Service, which laid informations against the van driver alleging three offences,
namely driving without due care and attention, failing to comply with a traffic e
 sign and failing to ensure that his brake lights were clean and in working order.
The applicant, who was concerned at the absence o f any allegation o f causing
death by reckless driving, laid an information alleging that offence before a
stipendiary magistrate. The magistrate decided that since the conduct of the
case was being dealt with by the Crown Prosecution Service he was bound by
authority to refuse to issue a summons for that offence and that even if he was f
not so bound the Crown Prosecution Service would, in the exercise o f its
powers under the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985, take over the applicant’s
prosecution and it would not be in the interests o f justice for a summons to be
issued. The applicant applied for judicial review o f the magistrate’s decision.
                                                                                                                                       g
Held - A magistrate when deciding whether to exercise his discretion under s
 l a o f the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 to issue a sum mons at the behest o f a
private prosecutor was required to have regard to all the relevant circumstances
o f the case, including (i) whether the incident giving rise to the information had
already been investigated by a responsible prosecuting authority which was
pursuing what it considered to be the appropriate charges against the proposed
defendant, (ii) the fact that if a summons for a more serious charge was issued
the discretion of the Crown prosecutor would be overridden in a way which
might appear to the defendant to be oppressive and (iii) the fact that the
Director o f Public Prosecutions could, and in reality might, take over the
prosecution under s 6(2)b o f the 1985 Act. Although it was not the case that a j
magistrate should never issue a summons for a private prosecution when the
Crown Prosecution Service had already laid informations in respect o f the same
matter, it would only be in special circumstances, such as apparent bad faith on

a       Section 1, so far as material, is set o u t at p 4 7 / to j, post
b       Section 6 is set o u t at p 48 b c, post
  ER                  QBD DC              R v T o w e r Bridge M ag istrate, ex p Chaudhry                                           45


                   the part of the public prosecutor, that the issuing o f a summons for a private
                 a prosecution would be justified. On the facts, the magistrate had properly had
                   regard to the action already taken by the Crown Prosecution Service and to the
                   power of Director of Public Prosecutions pursuant to s 6(2) of the 1985 Act to
                   take over and bring to end any prosecution. The application would therefore
                   be dismissed (see p 5 1 /t o p 52 eg, post).
                       R v W e s t L o n d o n J u s tic e s , e x p KLahn [1979] 2 All ER 221 and R v S ta ffo r d Ju stic es,
                   e x p C u sto m s a n d E x c is e C o m rs [1991] 2 All ER 201 considered.
                       R v E a lin g M a g is tr a te s ’ C o u rt, e x p D ix o n [1989] 2 All ER 1050 distinguished.
-iv a te
) r iv e r
                   N otes
s so n
                   For the jurisdiction o f justices to issue summonses, see 29 H a ls b u r y ’s L a w s (4th
-h b y       c   C edn) paras 223, 321, and for cases on the subject, see 33 Digest (Reissue) 124,
strat^L
                      821- 8 2 8 .
nee -                    For the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980, s 1, see 27 H a b b u r y ’s S ta tu te s (4th edn)
s A ct
                      (1992 reissue) 149.
                         For the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985, s 6, see 12 H a b b u r y ’s S ta tu te s (4th
                      edn) (1989 reissue) 939.
lo to r          a
 their                Cases referred to in judgments
lights                B eresford, R e (1952) 36 Cr App R 1, Assizes.
ution                 G o u rie t v U n io n o f P o st O ffic e W o r k e r s [1977]   3 All ER 70, [1978] AC 435, [1977] 3
:nces,                    WLR300, HL.
:raffic          e    R v B r o s (1901) 85 LT 581, DC.
)rder.                R v E a lin g M a g is tr a te s ’ C o u rt, e x p D ix o n   [1989] 2 All ER 1050, [1990] 2 QB 91,
using                     [1989] 3 WLR 1098, DC.
ore a                 R v G a te sh e a d J u s tic e s, e x p T esco S to re s L td , R v B ir m in g h a m J u s tic e s, e x p D W
)f the                    P a r k in C o n s tru c tio n L td [1981] 1 All ER 1027, [1981] QB 470, [1981] 2 WLR 419,
ad by                     DC.
e was             f   R v N u n e a to n J u s tic e s, e x p P a rk e r [1954] 3 All ER 251, [1954] 1 WLR 1318, DC.
o f ijjte             R v S ta ffo rd J u s tic e s, e x p C u s to m s a n d E x c is e C o m rs [1991] 2 All ER 201, [1991] 2
cant.™                    QB 339, [1990] 3 WLR 656, DC.
 to be                R v W e s t L o n d o n J u s tic e s, e x p K l a h n [1979] 2 All ER 221, [1979] 1 WLR 933, DC.
                      R v W ib o n , e x p B a tte rse a B C [1947] 2 All ER 569, [1948] 1 KB 43, DC.
                 a    R a y m o n d v A - G [1982] 2 All ER 487, [1982] QB 839, [1982] 2 WLR 849, CA.
ider s                S a m m y -Jo e v G P O M o u n t P le a s a n t O ffice [1966] 3 All ER 924, [1967] 1 WLR 370.
it o f a
cances             Cases also cited
in had                                [1982] 2 All ER 963, sub nom'R v M a n c h e s te r
                      H ill v A n d e r to n                                                           S tip e n d ia r y M a g istra te ,
hi was               e x p H ill [1983] 1 AC 328, HL.
iposed           " Snodg ra ss v T o p p in g (1952) 116 JP 332, DC.
issued
which               Applications for judicial review and for leave to apply for judicial review
at the              Mrs Brigitte Chaudhry applied, with the leave o f Otton J given on 28 January
er the              1992, for judicial review by way o f orders o f certiorari to quash the decisions
 that a           j made by Mr A T Evans, a             metropolitan stipendiary magistrate sitting inthe
en the              Tower Bridge Magistrates’ Court on 5 July 1991, (i) refusing to allow the
; same              applicant to lay an information before him relating to a prosecution against
dth on              Nicholas Sansom for causing death by reckless driving contrary to s 1 o f the
                    Road Traffic Act 1988, (ii) declining to issue a summons pursuant to the
                    information and (iii) permitting the Tower Bridge Magistrates Court to
                    proceed to accept a plea o f guilty from Nicholas Sansom to a charge o f driving
 46                                      All England Law Reports                       [1994] 1 All ER

 w ithout due care and attention contrary to s 3 o f the Road Traffic Act 1988. The
 applicant, having been refused leave by Hidden J on 22 June 1993, also renewed 3
 her application for leave to apply for judicial review by way o f an order o f
 certiorari to quash the decision o f the T ow er Bridge Magistrates’ Court on 5
 July 1991 to accept a plea o f guilty by Nicholas Sansom to the charge o f driving
 w ithout due care and attention and the sentence pertaining thereto. The facts
 are set out in the judgment o f Kennedy LJ.      ,                                 ^

 A n t h o n y S c riv e n e r Q C   and C h rista F ie ld e n (instructed by B lo o m C a m illin ) for the
      applicant.
                        (instructed by the T r e a s u r y S o lic ito r ) for the magistrate.
 S te p h e n R o b b in s
 P e te r H u n t (instructed by J e ffr e y G o rd o n & C o) for Mr Sansom.
                                                                                                                   c
                                                                                              C u r a d v v u lt


 7 July 1993. The following judgments w ere delivered.

  KENNEDY LJ. This is an application for judicial review o f a decision of a
  metropolitan stipendiary magistrate, Mr Evans, dated 5 July 1991, when he
  refused to issue a summons, an information having being laid before him which
  alleged that Nicholas Sansom had, on 27 October 1990, caused the death of
  Mansoor Chaudhry by reckless driving.
     The background facts are simple and tragic. On 27 October 1990 Mansoor
  Chaudhry, the only son of Mrs Brigitte Chaudhry, was riding his motor cycle 1
  across the junction o f Lambeth Road with St George’s Road, London SEl, when
  he was in collision with a van driven by Nicholas Sansom, and as a result
  Mansoor Chaudhry sustained injuries from which he died. The police made
  inquiries and took statements from witnesses, some at least of which
  statements clearly indicated that at the material time the traffic lights
  controlling the junction were green for the m otor cyclist and red for the van '
 driver. In the normal way the file was submitted to the Crown Prosecution
 Service, and on 22 April 1991 informations were laid and summonses were
 issued against the van driver, alleging three offences, namely: (1) driving
 without due care and attention, contrary to s 3 o f the Road Traffic Act 1988 and
 Sch 2 to the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988; (2) failing to comply with a traffic Q
 sign, namely traffic lights; (3) failing to ensure that brake lights were clean and
 in working order.
    Mr Sansom was due to appear before Tow er Bridge Magistrates’ Court to
answer those summonses on 5 July: 1991 but Mrs Chaudhry was very disturbed^
by the absence of any summons alleging causing death by reckless driving, and ^
on 4 July 1991 solicitors acting on her behalf advised the court that on the
following day, on her instructions, counsel w ould lay an information and invite
a magistrate to issue a summons alleging that offence. So the matter came
before Mr Evans. For present purposes it is accepted that he received the
information, and that he was not informed as to the intentions o f Mr Sansom in
relation to the existing summons. The magistrate heard submissions by counsel J
for Mrs Chaudhry, and there is before us an affirmation o f the magistrate, paras
5 and 6 o f which read:

         ‘5. I was aware that the prosecution o f Nicholas Sansom on a charge o f
      driving without due care and attention and other road traffic offences was
      listed to be heard before a lay bench at Tow er Bridge Magistrates’ Court on
                      QBD DC       R v Tower Bridge Magistrate, ex p Chaudhry (Kennedy LJ)             47

                           5 July 1991. So far as the Court’s records went, they indicated that the case
                           was listed so that a date for trial as a contested case could be set. The case
                           was being dealt with by the Crown Prosecution Service.
art on 5                     6. I considered the case and the decision in ex parte Dixon ([1989] 2 All ER
f driving                  1050, [1990] 2 QB 91). In my Judgment, ex parte Dixon was binding
^he facts                  authority upon m e preventing m e from issuing a Summons in these
                 b         circumstances where the Crown Prosecution Service had conduct o f the
                           case. Even if that were wrong, it seemed to me that if a Summons were
' for the                 issued, the Crown Prosecution Service would, in the exercise o f its powers
                          under the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985, take over Mrs Chaudhry’s
                          prosecution. It did not therefore appear to me to be in the interests o f
                          Justice that a Summons should be issued even if I were wrong about the
             c            applicability o f the decision in ex parte Dixon. I therefore refused to issue a
' adv vult                Summons.’

     •                  Before us Mr Scrivener QC submits that the decision of the magistrate was
                     wrong because: (1) he was not bound by the decision o f this court in R v Ealing
on o f a     r       Magistrates’ Court, ex p Dixon [1989] 2 All ER 1050, [1990] 2 QB 91; (2) the
/hen he
             ul      magistrate’s alternative ground o f decision was equally flawed, because he
n which              should not have speculated as to whether the Crown Prosecution Service would
ieath o f            take over Mrs Chaudhry’s prosecution; (3) had the magistrate approached his
                     task as he should have done, he would have concluded that there was no reason
/lansoor             not to issue a summons.
or cycle e               The statutory provisions which are relevant in this case are to be found in s 1
 1, w hen            of the Magistrates Courts Act 1980 and in ss 3, 6, 15 and 23 of the Prosecution
a result             o f Offences Act 1985.
:e made                Section 1 o f the 1980 Act, so far as it is relevant, provides:
   which
: lights f                   '(1) Upon an information being laid before a justice of the peace for an
          i               area to which this section applies that any person has, or is suspected of
the van
:ecution                 having, committed an offence, the justice may, in any o f the events
:s were                  mentioned in subsection (2) below ... issue a summons
 drivgjf                    (2)     A justice o f the peace for an area to which this section applies may
988 arid                 issue a summons ... under this section— (a) if the offence was committed or
a traffic 9              is suspected to have been committed within the area, or (b) if it appears to
san and                  the justice necessary or expedient, with a view to the better administration
                        of justice, that the person charged should be tried jointly with, or in the
 ourt to                same place as, som e other person w ho is charged with diat offence, and
sturbed                 who is in custody, or is being or is to be proceeded against, within the area,
ng, and                 or (c) if the person charged resides or is, or is believed to reside or be, within
             h          the area, or (d) if under any enactment a magistrates’ court for the area has
 on the
d invite               jurisdiction to try the offence, or (e) if the offence was committed outside
r came                  England and Wales and, where it is an offence exclusively punishable on
red the                summary conviction, if a magistrates’ court for the area would have
isom in                jurisdiction to try the offence if the offender were before i t ...’
counsel      i
                      Section 3(2) o f the 1985 Act, so far as it is relevant, provides:
  paras
                          'It shall be the duty o f the Director ... (a) to take over the conduct of all
                       criminal proceedings, other than specified proceedings, instituted on behalf
arge of
                       o f the police force (whether by a member o f that force or by any other
:es was
                       person) ...’
Durt on
48                                All England Law Reports                           [1994] 1 All ER


    It is com m on ground that proceedings under the Road Traffic Act 1988 are
not ‘specified proceedings' for the purposes o f s 3(2) o f the 1985 Act. Section 6
o f the 1985 Act states:

         ‘(1) Subject to subsection (2) below , nothing in this Part shall preclude
      any person from instituting any criminal proceedings or conducting any
      criminal proceedings to which the Director’s duty to take over the conduct
      o f proceedings does not apply.
         (2)   Where criminal proceedings are instituted in circumstances in which
      the Director is not under a duty to take over their conduct, he may
      nevertheless do so at any stage.’

   Both ss 3 and 6 of the 1985 Act fall within Pt I o f that Act, in relation to which
s 15(2)(a) states:                  '

        ‘For the purposes of this Part, proceedings in relation to an offence are
      instituted—(a) where a justice o f the peace issues a summons under section
      1 o f the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980, when the information for the offence
      was laid before him ...’

     Finally, s 23 provides that where the Director o f Public Prosecutions has the
 conduct of proceedings for an offence he can, by notice, discontinue.
     E x p D ix o n was concerned with alleged infringements o f copyright. When
 executing a search warrant, the police were accompanied by Mr Dixon and
 another employee of the Federation Against Copyright Theft Ltd (FACT).
 W hen the defendants were charged, Mr Dixon was present and signed the
 charge sheet as the person charging. The charge sheet was also signed by the
 custody officer as the officer taking the charge. He read out the charge and the
 defendants were granted bail. Against that background the Divisional Court
 held that for the purposes o f s 15(2) o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985
proceedings were instituted o n b e h a lf o f a p o lic e fo r c e when the charge was read
 out, and by virtue of s 3 (2) o f that Act, it then became the duty of the Director
 o f Public Prosecutions to take over the conduct o f the criminal proceedings.
     Consequently, the magistrates were right to hold that before them the
solicitor for Mr Dixon and FACT could not conduct the prosecution.
     In R v S ta ffo rd Ju stices, e x p C u s to m s a n d E x c is e C o m rs [1991] 2 All ER 201, [1991]
2 QB 339 a differendy constituted Divisional Court had to consider a somewhat
similar situation whe^e the customs officer was described as ‘the person
charging’. The court declined to follow the decision in E x p D ix o n , which it said
was wrongly decided. In the present case the attention of the magistrate was
not invited to the decision in the S ta ffo r d J u s tic e s case, but in my judgment
neither Divisional Court decision was really o f any assistance to the magistrate
in relation to the issue that he had to decide. I therefore conclude that Mr
Scrivener is right in his submission that the magistrate was not bound by the
decision in E x p D ix o n .
    Before us Mr Hunt for Mr Sansom tried to place som e further reliance on
s 3(2)(a) of the 1985 Act, and on the decision in E x p D ix o n , by submitting that
once the Director of Public Prosecutions is, as he put, it ‘seised of the matter’
(meaning in this case the traffic accident) she m ust take over all criminal
proceedings arising out of it. In m y judgm ent s 3(2)(a) cannot be stretched that
far. It simply defines the duty of the Director o f Public Prosecutions in relation
to criminal proceedings instituted on behalf of a police force.
II ER               QBD DC      R v Tower Bridge Magistrate, ex p Chaudhry (Kennedy U )             49


8 are                   I deal with the second and third submissions made by Mr Scrivener together.
io n 6             As he pointed out, the jurisdiction which the magistrate was being asked to
                   exercise is to be found in s 1(1) and (2) o f the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980. At
                   first sight the words of s 1(1) confer an unfettered discretion, which has to be
elude              exercised within the framework o f s 1(2). In the present case the offence alleged
I anY              satisfied the requirements o f s l(2)(a), and accordingly, Mr Scrivener submits,
iduct               the magistrate had no option but to issue the summons. He accepts that, in
             b
                   deciding whether or not to issue a summons, the magistrate is making a judicial
vhich              determination (see R v Gateshead Justices, ex p Tesco Stores Ltd, R v Birmingham
 may               Justices, exp D W Parkin Construction Ltd [1981] 1 All ER 1027, [1981] QB 470), but
                   he contends that the magistrate can only have regard to those matters set out in
                   s 1(2) and to the question o f whether the issue o f a summons can be vexatious.
/hich              In support o f that proposition, he invited our attention to the decision of this
                    court in R v Nuneaton Justices, exp Parker [1954] 3 All ER 251, [1954] 1 WLR 1318,
                   where the court held that the chairman o f the justices was wrong to refuse a
e ar^ ^             summons for driving without due care to a police inspector, it being the opinion
ctioi^P             o f the magistrate that the summons should be for dangerous driving. Reference
fence              was made to the fact that in Re Beresford (1952) 36 Cr App R 1 Devlin J had
                    observed that when death resulted from dangerous driving there should
                    normally be a charge o f manslaughter, but, said Lord Goddard CJ in Parker’s
s the
                    case [1954] 1 WLR 1318 at 1319, cf [1954] 3 All ER 251 at 252, that was only a
                    recommendation to the police, not to the magistrates: ‘It must be for the
/h en               Director of Public Prosecutions or the police to decide what charges should be
  and              preferred.' Lynskey J agreed, saying ([1954] 1 WLR 1318 at 1320, cf [1954] 3 All
 CT). e             ER 251 at 252-253):
I the
t the
                          ‘It must not be thought that it is laid down that in every case where death
i the                   occurs it should be manslaughter, or in every case where there is some
.'ourt                  defect it should be dangerous driving; it is a matter for the prosecution. On
 1985 f                 the other hand, the offence o f dangerous driving or careless driving is a very
read                    serious one, and the police ought always, in m y view, where the facts
:ctor                   support it, to bring the more serious charge rather than the lighter charge;
                        but they are not bound to bring the more serious charge where the
 the^^                  evidence will not support that charge.'
         g
 991]                 Parker’s case is o f some interest on its facts, but in my judgment it does not
vhat               really assist Mr Scrivener’s case. All that it does is to warn magistrates not to
rson               exceed their discretion by using it to usurp the discretion o f the prosecuting
 said              authorities and the police.
 was                  The next authority which w e were invited to consider is Sammy-Joe v GPO
nent h           h
                   Mount Pleasant Office [1966] 3 All ER 924, [1967] 1 WLR 370. There maintenance
.xate              payments had been deducted from a postman's wages pursuant to an order of
: Mr               the magistrates’ court. The postman sued the Post Office and the magistrate to
  the              recover the m oney on the basis that the magistrate had exceeded his
                   jurisdiction, and Pennycuick J found the claim against the magistrate to be
i on j             hopeless, because all the magistrate did was to issue a summons. As Pennycuick
that               J said ([1966] 3 All ER 924 at 929, [1967] 1 WLR 370 at 374):
tter
tinal                      ‘That is merely a document which brings the proceedings into being. It
that                    is clearly not the duty o f the magistrate w ho issues a summons to make any
tion                    inquiry on his own into the facts on which the summons is based.’
 50                          All England Law Reports                 [1994] 1 All ER

   So, as Mr Scrivener points out, Sammy-Joe s case is authority for the
 proposition that there is no duty on the magistrate to make inquiries on his 9
 own, but it does not follow that he must ignore material circumstances o f which
 he is aware.
    In R v West London Justices, exp Klahn [1979] 2 All ER 221, [1979] 1 WLR 933 a
 defendant in a civil action wanted a summons issued against the plaintiffs
 solicitor alleging peijury. The magistrate refused to hear counsel on behalf o f b
 the solicitor, and the Divisional Court upheld his decision. Lord Widgerv CJ
 said ([1979] 2 All ER 221 at 222-223, [1979] 1 WLR 933 at 935-936):

           ‘The duty o f a magistrate in considering an application for the issue of a
        summons is to exercise a judicial discretion in deciding whether or not to
        issue a summons. As Lord Goddard CJ stated in R v Wilson [1947] 2 .Ail ER C
        569 at 570, [1948] 1 KB 43 at 46-47: ‘‘A summons is the result o f a judicial
        act. It is the result o f a complaint which has been made to a magistrate on
        which he must bring his judicial mind to bear and decide whether or not on
        the information or complaint before him he is justified in issuing a
        summons.” It would appear that he should at the very least ascertain: (i) ,
        whether the allegation is of an offence known to the law and if so whether
        the essential ingredients of the offence are prima facie present; (ii) that the
        offence alleged is not “out o f time”; (iii) that the court has jurisdiction: (iv)
       whether the informant has the necessary authority to prosecute. In
        addition to the specific matters it is clear that he may and indeed should
       consider whether the allegation is vexatious: see R v Bros (1901) 85 L T 581. e
       Since the matter is properly within the magistrates’ discretion, it would be
       inappropriate to attempt to lay down an exhaustive catalogue of matters to
       which consideration should be given. Plainly he should consider the whole
       o f the relevant circumstances. In the overwhelming majority of cases, the
       magistrate will not need to consider material beyond that provided by the
       informant. In my judgment, however, he must be able to inform himself ^
       o f all relevant facts. Counsel w ho appeared as amicus curiae, and to whom
       the court is indebted for his assistance, submitted that the magistrate has a
      residual discretion to hear a proposed defendant if he felt it necessary for
      the purpose o f reaching a decision. W e would accept this contention. The
      magistrate must be able to satisfy him self that this is a proper case in which g
      to issue a summons. There can be no question, however, o f conducting a
      preliminary hearing.         Until a summons has been issued there is no
      allegation to meet: no charge has been made. A proposed defendant has no
      locus standi and no right at this stage to be heard. Whilst it is conceivable
      that a magistrate might seek information from him in exceptional ■
      circumstances it must be entirely within the discretion o f the magistrate
      whether to do so.’ (Lord Widgery CJ’s emphasis.)

   Mr Scrivener submits that in the present case the magistrate must have been
able to satisfy himself quite readily as to the four factors which Lord Widgery
CJ identified as the minimum that he should ascertain and no one suggests that j
the allegation he was asked to consider was vexatious. So, submits Mr
Scrivener, it being conceded that vexatiousness is not an issue, if the magistrate
had confined himself, as he should have done, to what appeared on the
information, he would have felt constrained to issue the summons. But I can
find nothing in Klahn s case which requires a magistrate to adopt that sort of
tunnel vision. On the contrary, it says in terms that he should consider 'the
94] 1 All ER
                              QBD DC            R V Tower Bridge Magistrate, ex p Chaudhry (Kennedy U )                   51

)rity for the
juiries on his     3     a                   releJ ant circumstances and may need to consider information
                              beyond that provided by the informant, in order to decide if it is a proper case
nces o f which
                              in which to issue a summons, provided o f course, that he does not go so far as
                              to conduct a preliminary hearing.
 1 WLR 933 a
                                Underlying all o f Mr Scrivener’s submissions is o f course the individual’s
:he plaintiff s
 on behalf o f £              pg .     ° P r~     at?    ? re US no ° ne has questioned it. In G o u riet v U n io n o f
                        b                           [1977] 3 All ER 70 at 79, [1978] AC 435 at 477 Lord
                                                W o rkers
  Widgery CJ                  Wilberforce paid tribute to it, saying:

                                       This historical right which goes right back to the earliest days of our legal
:he issue o f a
 her or not to                       r h S tt ° U         m exerc!sed 111 relation to indictable offences, and
                                     though ultimately liable to be controlled by the Attorney-General (by
?4 7] 2 All ER
                        C            taking over the prosecution and, if he thinks fit, entering a nolle prosequi)
: o f a judicial
nagistrate on                        thrPTrt%afllorietyCOnStltUn0nal SafegUard agdnSt toertia 0r                      °n
ler d|H|ot on
in id lin g a
 ascertain: (i)           A   r t 3W ° i Wed f° r by ^ T rdil,g ° f 116(1) o f the pK*ecuaon c f Offences
                        d Act 1985, but I see no conflict between the existence of that right and of the
f so whether
: (ii) that the              an ^ :1M K a maglStrate to decide whether or not to issue a summons. After
                             all as Mr Scnvener recognises, an individual prosecutor does not have the
 sdiction; (iv)              unfettered nght to pursue his prosecution to trial. By virtue o f s 6(2) of the 1985
>secute. In
                             Act the Director o f Public Prosecutions may, at any stage, take over in order to
 deed should
) 85 LT 581.             b iW the6 aym°nd V A ' G [1982] 2 A U E R 487>1^82] QB 839), and he may even
                       S the 1985 5nag1^ ates. court Proceedings to an end by notice pursuant to s 23 of
  it w ould be
                         ,    n   ,    ,?°> as ir seems to m e- ^ any given case, a private prosecutor will
>f matters to
ir the whole              aT um m ons"          T      f , He ^ W         t0          a             to issue
                            summons, and thereafter, if he wishes to retain control o f the case he may
j f cases, the             ave to persuade the Director o f Public Prosecutions not to take it over But in
aded by the
                       f         the cnteif aP f?ed hY the magistrate and the Director will be different
Dim him self
id to w hom              he              Sh° ul,d h ave rp rd » * o f * e relevant circumstances o f w S
                         he is aware (see K la h n s case), such as whether the incident givin* rise to the
istrate has a            information which he is considering has already been in^sdJaT d by a
ecess^rv for
:ntio^PThe                 a o o ro n S t pr° SeCUrmS autho,rit5' w hkil is P i n i n g what it considers to be the
                            PP P,             charges against the same proposed defendant. If so. as Mr Hunt
ise in which c
                       7 rZ         o               magistrate may have in mind the provisions o f the Guide for
inducting a                Cmvn Prosecutors issued under s 10 o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985,
here is no
                          s         ,’' (i ^ ,’eS the Crow” Prosecution Service generally to charge the most
dant has no
                          interest f              revealed by the evidence but to have regard to the public
conceivable
exceptional ^             o f securing                      ,e '■lct'm ’ 31113 tile Prospects on the available evidence
  magistrate           1 afleeed W f " COnT,ct10" (whlch                     ■> « be very high where recklessness is
                         a                     Sam m ° nl     a more serious charge is issued on the application o f
                         wav whichr° SeCUt0Iii             ^screnon o f the Crown prosecutor is overridden in a
                         way wtach may well appear to the defendant and to those who represent him
: have been
                         to be oppressive, and so, whilst I would not go so fkr as to s u r e s t thaT^
'd Widgery
iggests that j           S s t T d S? ° d d neT “          beheSt ° f a Private Prosecutor issu etsu m m on s
                         against a defendant who, in respect o f the same matter, alreadv has to answer
nbmits Mr
 magistrate                  OI m ?K mformations lald by the Crown, it seems to me that unless there
ed on the               proserm c‘rcumstances' s“ ch “ >PP»«nt bad faith on the part o f the public
  But I can             the mnreh r ma*fstrate should he very slow to take that step. He will be all
hat sort o f            well             T    because, he knows * a t the Director can, and in reality may
nsider 'the             factOT e te n lf'a s MPr9 Ce    85 ° f           Prosecutor- That too is a relevam
                               even ,C as Mr & nvener contends, the magistrate in the present case was
  52                            All England Law Reports                      [1994] 1 All ER

  to some extent guessing when he said that it seemed to him that the Crown
  Prosecution Service would take over Mrs Chaudhry’s prosecution.           9
    If a magistrate does decide to issue a summons, the Director in deciding
 whether or not to exercise her powers under s 6(2) o f the 1985 Act will no doubt
 look at the evidence in a way that the magistrate was not expecting to do when
 he decided to issue the summons, so the functions are different, but I do not
 accept that the discretion o f the magistrate is anything like so confined as Mr fo
 Scrivener would have us accept. In m y judgm ent the magistrate in the present
 case, albeit he was wrong to regard him self as bound by Dixon’s case, was right
 to have regard to the action already taken by the Crown Prosecution Service
 and to the Director’s powers under s 6(2) o f the 1985 Act, and accordingly this
 court cannot and should not interfere with his conclusion, arrived at in the
 exercise of his discretion, that in *the interests o f justice a summons should not C
 be issued.
    I appreciate that my conclusion will disappoint Mrs Chaudhry, but, as Mr
  Robbins for the magistrate pointed out, it would be an odd situation if, where a
  killing occurs, or a serious sexual offence is committed, and the Director, after
  anxious consideration, decides to charge an offence other than the most serious ,
  offence which can be contemplated in the circumstances, that decision can, in
  effect, be overridden by a member of the public. The magistrate, if Mr Scrivener
 is right, can do nothing to stop it. He must issue the summons and the
  defendant must answer to it unless and until the Director decides to exercise her
 powers under s 6(2) to intervene. That alternative is so unattractive that in my
 judgment it reinforces the conclusion at which I have arrived as to the extent of e
 the magistrate’s discretion as set out in s 1(1) of the 1980 Act. Accordingly, I
 would dismiss the substantive application for judicial review of the decision of
 the metropolitan stipendiary magistrate, and refuse leave to move for judicial
 review of the subsequent decision of the lay justices. At the end of the hearing
 it was agreed that if the substantive application should fail, the application for
 leave to move must also fail.                                                      f
    We have also before us an application on behalf of the magistrates to strike
 out parts of the applicant’s evidence as scandalous. That application was not
 pursued, and it too is therefore dismissed.

 BELLJ. I agree.

Applications dismissed.

 30 July. The court refused leave to appeal to the House o f Lords but certified, under s
  1(2) o f the Administration o f Justice Act I960, that the following point o f law o f general
 public importance was involved in the decision: whether a magistrate, in exercising his
 discretion whether or not to issue a summons on an information laid by a private
 citizen, is entitled to take into consideration that (1) criminal proceedings have been
 already instituted by the Crown Prosecution Service against the same defendant arising
 out o f the same facts and (2) i f a fresh summons is issued the Director o f Public
 Prosecutions will have power pursuant to s 6(2) o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985
 to take over the conduct o f the case in order to abort it, or whether the magistrate’s
 discretion is so confined that i f the offence in respect o f which a summons is sought was
 committed or is suspected to have been committed within the area, and the application
fo r a summons is not vexatious, a summons must be issued.

                                                                   DilysTausz       Barrister.
Printing completed: Turn printing option off and press RETURN
   1**15 Sep 95 Mills calls    for private prosecutions   to be
monitored; Barbara
                Mills: The Times (Ql:86)

   By FRANCES GIBB
THE Director of Public     Prosecutions  supports  the right  of
individuals to
bring private cases but, in a robust defence of policy, tells
Frances Gibb
that the established tests of evidence must remain
THE Director of Public Prosecutions is calling for an end to
the haphazard
system of private prosecutions, which are not monitored by the
legal
authorities.
In an interview with The Times,    Barbara Mills, QC, said that
problems could
be caused when private prosecutions went ahead without       the
knowledge of the
Crown Prosecution Service. 'If there were to be any changes, I
would like
some form of notification or monitoring, to know how many
there are. It's
pretty unsatisfactory to learn about     them late in the day,
through the media
or in other ways,' she said.
She emphasised that   she did not wish to curb the right      of
individuals to                                             ,
bring   private    prosecutions,   which had   been given by
Parliament. Nor did she.                 _
favour the     Crown   Prosecution   Service taking a    more
interventionist' stance
and using its powers to take over such cases.
The private prosecution brought by the parents of Stephen

London0 schoolboy stabbed to death in 1993, and the committal
of two youths                                 , .     ..
on Monday to stand trial,   have raised the whole question of
prosecution                                          .
policy. Mrs Mills could not comment on any specific      case,
including the
Lawrence case. But    she delivered a robust defence   of CPS
policy in general.                       ,        . . .
She also defended its principle of not intervening m private
prosecutions.                                               ,
She believed that should remain the case. 'If there were to be
more                                                    ^
interventions,   we would have to apply our own code           (on
prosecutions); and                                   ,
that is a higher test     than that applied by magistrates      at
committal (whether
there is an arguable case)'.
Mrs Mills rejected criticisms that the CPS was dominated by a
culture of
'excessive caution' or by reference to its budget. Every case
had to be                                                   ,,
looked at against    the test of whether there was sufficient
evidence to make
a conviction    more likely than not,    she said. 'Although we
discontinue only
11.7 per cent   of cases, it does not   follow that .victims find
it easy to
accept that the case does not meet the tests (for bringing a
prosecution).
'Our prosecutors   are very alert to that and there are a number
of cases,
very tragic cases, when of course we would prosecute provided
the evidence
was there. But if it's not, it is our duty not to proceed.'
Decisions  to   discontinue cases were often    'very difficult,
emotional,
responsible and made   against very difficult backgrounds',   she
said. 'The
idea that these decisions are     lightly taken or    in any way
influenced by cost
or how statistics will look at the end of the year is absolute
nonsense.'
Under the CPS code for Crown prosecutors, any case meeting the
two tests of
sufficiency of  evidence and whether prosecution was in the
public interest
would be prosecuted and 'by far the bulk of cases' were, she
said. She
rejected a lesser test for high-profile, tragic or emotional
cases.




'You have got to look at it from everyone's interests from the
defendant's
point of view. Why, just because it is a high-profile      case,
should the
defendant be prosecuted on less evidence?'
She also rejected criticisms that     the CPS,  which prosecutes
some 1.5 million
cases   a year,    went   for cases    which would be    certain
convictions. 'Conviction
rates play no part whatever.'
The CPS,    she added,   was  in a no-win position.     'If the
conviction rate rises,
the suggestion   is we are not prosecuting difficult cases. If
it falls, the
suggestion is that we are not doing a very good job.'
A decision to discontinue a prosecution,     which was taken by
more than one
person (including herself on occasion), was often harder than
letting the
case proceed and someone else make the decision,       she said.
'People say that
discontinuing is the easy option.    Let me tell you it is not.
That is a
complete fallacy.'
The reasons were discussed with police; and a survey had shown
that in all
but 4 per cent of cases they agreed with them, she said.
But such decisions could lead to adverse publicity, letters to
newspapers,
MPs and ministers. 'The idea that discontinuance is the end of
the matter is
absolutely untrue.   It is not the easy option; in many ways it
is the hard
option,' she said.
Of the 100,000 cases prosecuted in Crown Courts a year, 77 per
cent were
guilty pleas,    13.1 per cent   resulted in convictions   after
trial and.9.7 per
cent were acquittals.

The Times
Issue   65373.
Copyright (C) Times Newspapers Ltd,   1985-1997
