                                                                Po\ 12 1 ) I f ,



                             THE HILLSBOROUGH TRIBUNAL


                       BRIEF FOR ACC BY SUPERINTENDENT FELL



You were directed on 11 July 1991 under Section 93(3) Police and Criminal

Evidence Act 1984 to prefer a specified discipline charge against

Superintendent Murray and to arrange a tribunal to hear that charge.          The

charge was set out in the letter from PCA of 7 May 1991 when the
recommendation was made that led to the discussion.      You have a duty under

Section 93(5) to prefer and proceed with it.    You have yet to prefer the
cha r ge .



Sub-section (6) of Section 93 says:-



     " The Authority may give a chief officer leave - (a) not to prefer charges

     which Section 90(10) or Sub-section (5) above would otherwise oblige

     him to prefer."



Sub-section (7) of Section 93 says:-


     "The Authority may request a chief officer of police to furnish them

     with such information as they may reasonably require for the purpose
     of discharging their ffedJiae^under this section."



Sub-section (8) of Section 93 s a y s :-


     "It shall be the duty of a chief officer to comply with any such request."



I suggest,   therefore, we continue to seek consultation to lead to a request

from PCA which will enable us to give information relating to the charge

against Superintendent Murray that will enable PCA to exercise its function
under Section 93(6) if that is the inclination.
     1991-07-11       11=18     POLICE COMPLAINTS




BRIGADIER J L POW NALI,, OHI
                                               POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
Deputy Chairman (Diteiplint )

                                                                 London SW1
                                                               Telephone:



    6 Moore, Esq
    Assistant Chief Constable                                   l l , July, 1991
    West Yorkshire Police
    P.O. Box 9, Wakefield
    WEST YORKSHIRE
    WF1 3QP




                                              i

                                      HILLSBOROUGH TRAflEDY

   Thank you for your letter of 26 June, 1991 and for the various
   papers you enclosed. The Authority are also grateful to you and
   Mr Fell for coming to our offices to discuss this matter.

   The Authority wish to assure you that we have given the roost
   careful consideration to the representations Bade by yourself and
   Mr Fell.   We found these by far the most compelling arguments.
   Whilst we have considered Mr Sharp's letter of 16 May addressed to
   Mr Hayes, we did not feel it was altogether appropriate for the
   investigating officer to set out so fully his views on the
   disciplinary action to be taken.

   We have also taken into account the opinion provided by Mr Richard
   Payne. It is our view that the extracts which he quotes and the
   opinions he expresses are selective and do not reflept some
   important points especially some of those made toy the Coroner who
   on more than one occasion separates the question of unlawful
   killing from the question of neglect, for example, pages 8, 48, 54
   on 21 March, 1991 and page 31 on 26 March, 1991.

   Since our meeting we have held a separate meeting at which the
   Chairman has fully rehearsed the arguments to be considered in
   deciding whether or not the Authority should direct that charges be
   preferred against any of the officers involved. We can assure you
   that we gave very serious consideration to all the points which you
   and Mr Fell raised. We are, of course, bound to set these against
   our duty to consider the complainants* allegations of "neglect of
   duty* as defined in the Regulations.    We considered the question
   strictly in the context of complaints by members of the public
   against individual police officers and in accordance with the
   procedures and guidance laid down.
                                                         P. 03
1991-07-11   11!19   POLICE COMPLAINTS




The Authority have decided in accordance with Section 93(3) of the
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 to direct that disciplinary
charges be preferred against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
Superintendent Murray as set out in our letter of 7 May, 1991 and
for the reasons explained in that letter.     We confirm that the
Authority do not consider it appropriate to prefer disciplinary
charges against any other officers.

The Authority hope that it will be possible to confine the
presentation of the case which is concerned solely with the
overcrowding in Pens 3 and 4 and Mr Duckenfield's alleged
discreditable conduct to within a week and that the hearing can be
arranged for early October.

I would be grateful if you would inform me of the date of the
tribunal as soon as you are able to arrange it so that I nay
appoint two members from the Authority.




J L POWNALL
    b r ig a d ie r j l p o w n a l l , obe          POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
    Deputy Chairman (Discipline)

                                                                                   London S w |
                                                                                Telephone:


       IN CONFIDENCE



       G Moore, Esq                                                    Your Ref:    ACC(D&C)CJD
       Assistant Chief Constable
       South Yorkshire Police                                           Our Ref:   COM 91/131/39
       Snig Hill
       SHEFFIELD                                                                      y      May, 1991
       S3 9LY




•                            A .

                                              HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY
                                                   15 APRIL, 1989

       1. The Authority have now com pleted a careful and detailed examination of the report
       and th e evidence relating to the individual com plaints arising from the Hillsborough
       tragedy on 15 April, 1989. We have considered Mr Anderson's memoranda, subm itted to
       us in accordance with the provisions of Section 90(5) of the Police and Criminal
       Evidence Act, 1984, and his le tte r of 10 April, 1991. We have noted your force's
       proposals not to prefer disciplinary charges against any of the officers who are the
       subject of complaint and your reasons for these proposals. However, as I told Mr
       Anderson on the telephone, the Authority were disappointed th a t he did not explain
       your reasons more fully. We have also taken into account the views expressed by Mr
       Sharp, the investigating o fficer.

       2. Having considered the evidence relating to the complaints against Police Constable
       Smith, Police Constable Illingworth, Superintendent Marshall or Superintendent Green-


•
       wood we have concluded th a t the evidence in respect of these four officers does not
       justify disciplinary proceedings and we agree with your proposal. #      t* "

       3.     We have also considered those complaints which have been laid against Chief
       Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray which allege th a t they were in
       'n eg lect of duty'. These complaints raise difficult issues. In reaching our conclusions
       we have borne in mind the decisions of the D irector of Public Prosecutions as one
       fa c to r amongst others. As you are aw are we do not a cc e p t th a t culpable misfeasance
       and neglect of duty a re coterminous nor th a t, even if they were, we would be bound (as
       far as discipline is concerned) by the decision of the D irector not to bring criminal
       prosecutions. We have, throughout, borne in mind th e definition of neglect of duty set
       out in paragraph 4 of Schedule 1 of The Police (Discipline) Regulations, 1985.
4. The incident which gave rise to the tragedy a t the Hillsborough Stadium on 15
April 1989 would not have occurred had sensible and simple steps been taken to secure
the safety of spectators in Pens 3 and k on the Leppings Lane T erraces. It is clear
th a t the basic cause of the disaster was overcrowding in these pens.      We have
concentrated on this m a tte r.
5. In reaching our decisions we have taken into account various m a tte rs which can be
advanced as arguments for taking no disciplinary action on th e grounds th a t to take
such action would be unfair and/or oppressive. Amongst such m a tte rs we re fe r briefly
to the following:
           a. the passage o f time since 15 April, 1989;

           b. the various consequences arising from th e earlier hearings
           before Lord Ju stice Taylor and the Coroner;

            c. the e ffe c t of the extensive media coverage of th e incident
            itself, m atters associated with it and the hearings referred to in
            b. above;
            d. the perception th a t if any o fficer is charged he may be seen
            as a scapegoat carrying th e blame for the a c ts or omissions of
            others;
            e. the recent promotion of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
            the fa c t th at he took over the m atch arrangem ents devised by
            som eone e lse and his b e lie f t h a t th e plan had o p e r a te d
            successfully before;
            f. the anguish which both Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
            Superintendent Murray must have experienced as the result of the
            tragic and unexpected events on 15 April, 1989, and

            g. the e ffe c t th a t disciplinary action against any officer would
            have on the morale and well-being of the South               Yorkshire
            Police.
 6 Despite these factors it cannot be denied th a t the police, under the control of Chief
 Superindent Duckenfield, assisted by Superintendent Murray, were de facto in control of
 the ground a t the relevant tim e and had responsibility for the safety of the spectators.
 In the opinion of this Authority there is sufficient evidence to support disciplinary
 charges on the following grounds:
            a. Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, as the o fficer in overall
            command, failed to address himself properly to the problems
            involved in, and the plans for, crowd control even before the
            spectators arrived;

             b. failed to monitor the numbers of sp ectators entering Pens 3
             and 4;
            c. failed to take any action when Pens 3 and 4 becam e obviously
            overcrowded;

            d. a u th o ris e d G a te 'C ' to be o p e n e d a n d , to g e th e r w ith
            Superintendent Murray, failed to take any step s to control the
            movement of those who e n te re d the ground through this g ate a t a
            time when it was, or should have been, c le a r to both of them
            that Pens 3 and 4 were, or w ere likely to becom e, overcrowded.

7. In the view of this A uthority responsibility for th e s a fe ty of those in Pens 3 and 4
and blame for overcrowding in those pens should re st w ith those in the Police Control
Box from which the pens could be observed, the deploym ent of police manpower could
be directed and the decision to open G ate 'C ' was m ade with its atten d an t responsibil­
ity for controlling those who en tered through it. The A uthority a re conscious of the
complex circumstances which rrfay have contributed to th e tragedy, but we do not
a c c e p t th at the fa c t th a t th ere may be others who a re also in some way blameworthy,
should cause us to decide against the recom m endation o f charges under the Regulations
if, as here, the evidence is available to support such ch arg es. You will appreciate the
Authority are concerned solely with the evidence in re s p e c t of the m atters which are
the subject of complaint and not with m itigation which would only become relevant if a
breach of discipline w ere to be proved against an o ffic e r who is the subject of a
charge.

8. For these reasons th a t the Authority have decided to recom m end under Section
93(1) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 th a t th e following charges be
brought against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield:

            i. Neglect of Duty - contrary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of
            the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in th a t he failed to
            acquaint himself with th e planning and problem s related to the
            control of the semi-final.

            ii. Neglect of Duty - contrary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of
            the Police (Discipline) R egulations 1985 in th a t he failed to
            monitor crowd numbers in Pens 3 and 4.

            iii. Neglect of Duty - c o n tra ry to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1
            of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in th a t he failed to
            act when Pens 3 and 4 w ere obviously overcrow ded.

            iv. Neglect of Duty - co n trary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1
            of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in th a t he failed to
            control the m ovement of supporters subsequent to the opening of
            Gate 'C'.

9. We have given sep arate attention to the degree of responsibility attributable to
Superindent Murray. We concluded th a t in view of C hief Superintendent Duckenfield's
very recent appointment ,and promotion to his position as Divisional Commander,
Superintendent Murray had a special responsibility to assist and advise Chief Super­
intendent Duckenfield particularly in view of Superintendent Murray's g re a te r exper­
ience of policing a t Hillsborough. He was aware th a t a u th o rity had been given to open
G ate 'C'.
10. We therefore recommend under Section 93(1) of the Police and Criminal Evidence
Act 1984 that Superintendent Murray also be charged with:

            Neglect of Duty - c o n tra ry to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of the
            Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in th a t he failed to control
            the movement of supporters subsequent to th e opening of G ate


11.    We have also carefully considered th e allegation th a t C hief Superintendent
Duckenfield was deceitful and misled senior police officers and m em bers of the public.
We do not agree with the investigating o ffic e r's conclusions th a t this m a tte r is not
substantiated. It is clear th a t Mr Kelly, Mr Kirtin and Mr Mackrell w ere told by Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield th a t G ate 'C ' had been forced, and th a t th e re had been an
in-rush of Liverpool supporters. While we a re aw are th a t he did not wish to encourage
a hostile reaction which might im'pede rescue work we share the opinion of Lord Justice
Taylor th at this did not require anyone being told a falsehood.             This misleading
explanation led to serious allegations being made against Liverpool supporters in general
causing grave offence and distress.

12 We have, therefore, decided to recommend under Section 93(1) of the Police and
Criminal Evidence Act 1984 th a t Chief Superintendent Duckenfield also be charged
with:

            Discreditable Conduct - contrary to paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 of
            the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in th a t he a cted in a
            manner likely to bring discredit on th e reputation of the fo rce or
            the police service.

13.   I would be grateful for your response to our recom m endations as soon as possible.

14. If you accept the A uthority's recom m endations we shall be minded, in view of the
exceptional circumstances a ffe c tin g this case, to d ire c t th a t the charges are heard by a
tribunal, in accordance with Section 94(2) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act
1984.

15.    I would particularly req uest th a t you maintain the confidentiality, of this
correspondence until such tim e as th e procedures laid down in the Act for determining
the disciplinary charge? to be p referred have been com pleted. This will involve not
informing those against whom we a re agreed th a t no charges should be p referred until
the whole m atter has been resolved between us.




a L POWNALL
     f 0' I z r l l j z                                                     /jA c



                       THE POLICE (DISCIPLINE) REGULATIONS 1985

                               PROCEEDINGS DIRECTED AGAINST


                             CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT DUCKENFIELD

                                               and

                                    SUPERINIENDENT MURRAY



                                            ADVICE



       I have been asked to comment upon the Police Complaints Authority's

letter dated              30th September 1991 and the Assistant Chief Constable's

reply thereto dated 1st October 1991.



       Whilst      I       am grateful     for the Chairman's notes,     these do not,

with respect to him, represent the problems that presently give cause

for concern.           I had the advantage of visiting the Chairman and Deputy

Chairman       in London on the 1st August 1991 when Iwas most courteously

received       and afforded helpful guidance.              At the    time of that visit

I was perhaps a child in this matter.                     Now I am hopefully attaining

puberty,      and         the following    problems    have   become apparent   to   me:-


1.     Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

       (a)     Whilst I intend so far as possible to                 rely upon evidence

       given     byChief       Superintendent Duckenfield at         the Inquest,     the

       justification          for   this   being    that he was then represented by

       Counsel and the Coroner gave regular warnings about the possibility

       of incriminating himself,              I had not anticipated that he would

      have      given       some    answers which     were against    his interests but

      were untrue.            It appears that he "wilted" under cross-examination.

       It would be entirely wrong to seek to rely                    upon answers which

      we genuinely believe to be untrue.                 It is only by the thoroughness

      of our consideration that such errors were discovered.                     So far
as Charge 5 is concerned, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield upon

advice declined to answer any questions at the Inquest.

(b)     It will   be necessary to use        some of the evidence given

by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield to the Taylor Enquiry.                This

not given on oath, he received no warnings, he was not individually

represented,   but if Charge         5 is to be pursued then        as matters

currently stand the best evidence that is available is that given

by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield to the Enquiry.

(c)     For the sake of completeness,        I make the observation that

Chief   Superintendent        Duckenfield, when interviewed    in     relation

to the Regulation 7 notices on 3rd July 1990, declined at that

stage   to   answer   any questions.       His   Solicitor,   Mr.    Coughlin,

at 3 minutes 21 seconds into the transcript of that                 interview,

makes the position clear in these terms, "Well, I think the position

on the discipline aspects          of the case were made clear in our

letter to you Mr. Sharp,        onthe 25th June 1990 which is essentially

that David has been           advised by myself and his legal         advisers

that whilst there's any possibility of prosecution for any criminal

matters, then he would wish to reserve his position in relation

to the discipline notices.            However,   once the discipline, the

criminal aspects have been dealt with, then Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield would wish to, to assist as far as he can with regard
                         ii
to discipline matters.



I have not seen any material to suggest that once the Director

of Public Prosecutions decided against bringing criminal proceedings

that there has been any approach to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

to resume the interview and seek his assistance or explanations.

Bearing in mind it is now two and a half years since the Hillsborough
disaster and that          the direction has been given to bring such

proceedings, it may be considered inappropriate to seek to interview

him further.



The state of material evidence available

(a)     The   vast      majority    of   the    written material       available   is

not in the form of                 recognisable statements signed and dated.

The vast      majority     comprises     recollections      in    computer   format.

There is nothing to indicate that they have ever been checked

by the persons whose recollections are recorded.                       There is some

doubt     that    the     recollections        are   uncensored   or    uninfluenced

compilations.        The recollections in computer format do not include

much that the individuals have said at the Taylor Enquiry and/or

the Inquest.      There are conflicts at times with the three accounts.

(b)     Witnesses who give some evidence do not expand on the relevant

points,    e.g.      Messrs. Kelly       and    Mackrell,   regarding     Charge   5.

(c)     Many potential witnesses who it would appear can give material

evidence have not been asked for their evidence,                        e.g. persons

present in the Boardroom - Charge                    5, persons closing off the

tunnel in 1988 - Charge 4.



Consequences

It is vital to the drafting of the charges and furthermore the

Defence have a right to know upon what evidence we seek to rely.

It is therefore necessary to obtain signed statements in order

to:-

(a)     know what the witnesses can be expected to say;

(b)     serve the statements on the Defendants in order that they

        may be prepared to admit some of the evidence without the

        necessity of calling oral testimony and thereby shortening
        the length of the hearing;

(c)     separate      the     volurrfinous material          from    that    pertinent   to

        the discipline charges;

(d)     adduce    recollections Taylor Enquiry,                 Inquest evidence and

        disciplinary          interviews       of     the     respective       Defendants.

        Prove    plans,       photographs,      video       recordings,      films,   green

        guide, four           standing    orders, ACPO          document, operational

        plan, print-out of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club computer.


There is some difficulty with the evidence here.                       I had erroneously

believed that there was a video recording taken from the control

box showing what was available to be seen by Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield      and    Superintendent         Murray had they chosen to look

on their monitor of the scene outside in Leppings Lane and the

turnstiles      and    also     Pens     1-7   inclusive.           Unfortunately,     what

is available is a series of flashing scenes.                        It is very difficult

to follow and perhaps stills will need to be taken.                         Unfortunately,

without explanation the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club video

of     turnstiles      9-16    went      missing      shortly    after      the   disaster.



Who is to obtain the statements?

There are two types of statements:

(a)     It would seem to be entirely appropriate for the matters

at 3(d) above which are essentially uncontroversial to be obtained

by South Yorkshire Police Officers.

(b)     Statements      of      potentially         controversial      witnesses,     e.g.

those present in the control box and boardroom - currently my

team     are    endeavouring        to    prepare       "phantom"      statements      from

information gleaned from the combined material - but there are

gaps     to    fill    in     the     sense    of     ambiguities,       contradictions,
clarifications and expansions.           Furthermore,     some persons should

be    seen in order to determine the state of knowledge of the likes

of    Mr. Kelly, Mr.      Mackrell, Mr. Curten, and A.C.C. Jackson at

the times when Chief Superintendent Duckenfield spoke about the

events that afternoon.            Furthermore,   we need to know what it

is alleged was said by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

The West      Midlands    Police conducted the investigation into the

complaints and the Police Complaints Authority have given their

certificate of satisfaction with that enquiry.                 I do not wish

to enter into the politics of the situation but if South Yorkshire

Police conducted such interviews for the amplification of matters

in the phantom statements or the eradication where there is possible

conflict or confusion in earlier accounts, then there could be

room for misunderstanding.



Complying with the Regulations

(a)     The   charge     should   be   served in the discipline form set

out in Schedule 2 - that form          provides for the names and addresses

of witnesses in support of the             charge whose        statements are attached

thereto - Regulation 8.           Not less than 21 days before the hearing

the Defendants should be supplied with copies of such statements.

(b)     The Defendants shall be supplied with copies of any statement

relating to the charge made by any person, other than a witness

to be called in support of the charge, to the investigating officer

or to anybody on his behalf,             together with the person's name

and address.

The complaints were made a considerable time after most of the

recollections,     statements,      oral observations and oral testimony

were given.        It is possible to argue that there is therefore

no requirement to provide copies of such material.
In my opinion,      such a stance would be unconscionable, it would

be contrary to natural justice.             The difficulty is, of course,

the sheer bulk of such material, perhaps the hire                  of two large

removal vans would do the trick, but are we to deposit such material

at Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's home?             My present inclination

is to provide a list of each and every witness in categories,

e.g.   Liverpool    supporters      in   pens     3 and 4,   and invite Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield to say whether he wishes all or only

some   of   the material       to be deposited at his home or at his

Solicitor's    address,     giving    him   the    option,   if   permitted,    of

using the services of P.C. Greenway to use the computer to retrieve

whatever material he seeks to consider for his defence.                 However,

I have to say that we are to some extent seeking the goodwill

and    co-operation    of   Chief    Superintendent     Duckenfield,    who    may

not feel inclined to take such a view of matters.                  Whatever the

South Yorkshire Police choose to do, the Regulations are mandatory.

However,    in the eyes of some of the public,                it would appear

unreasonable   or     indeed    a harsh application of the Regulations

to make delivery in full.           On the other hand, what if the charges

or some of them are found proved and the Defence appeal in due

course and claim that they did not have a copy of page 97,104

of witness number 19,739's statement and this might have made

all the difference to the Defence.              I appreciate that the latter

is an extreme but there is a problem!



Problems through lack of representation

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's representation at the Inquest

was no doubt very costly.            He may well take the view that he

simply cannot afford legal representation at the Tribunal.                     On

a Counsel to Counsel basis there are many avenues of opportunity

to smooth the way for the ease of presentation of a case which
is difficult for all concerned.           It has to be faced that at present

such avenues of opportunity are not open.

I suspect that the Defence will await the charges and supporting

evidence     that    Chief   Superintendent     Duckenfield      may    then    have

a conference with his Counsel - matters may then become clearer.

In the meantime we need to follow the strict Regulations.

Similar considerations apply to a lesser extent in Superintendent

Murray's case.



The hearing date

I, like everyone else in my team, would like a hearing date fixed

as soon as possible and a hearing that is neat and tidy, keeping

the issues so far as we are able short and succinct.                         To this

end, despite the thousands of hours of time already rightly expended

upon the Hillsborough disaster, still more time needs to be spent.

The case needs to be in a presentable form before the charges

are served and the evidence in support thereof is served.                        The

hearing is in private but I cannot imagine that all the complainants

will     refrain    from   communication with       the media.         To fail on

technicalities or to otherwise be seen to be too short on material

evidence would compound the grief of the bereaved and lead to

their     disenchantment     with   the    whole     system,   and      be    wholly

unsatisfactory for all concerned, be they the Police Complaints

Authority, the South Yorkshire Police, or indeed Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield    and    Superintendent      Murray.     I cannot     see that it

is proper to set a hearing date before the charges have been

served.      Furthermore,     just as we have needed time to get this

matter into shape, so the Defence will need time to prepare their

cases.     It could well be nearly three years after the event before

the hearing finally takes place.             At present we have proceeded
on the basis that there will be a joint hearing of the charges

against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray

on the basis that; the same evidential material will be used and

the opportunity thereby afforded of each Defendant to ask questions

of the other and public convenience and expense.          It is possible

that either party may seek severance.



Chief Superintendent Duckenfield1s Health

So far as we are aware, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield is

currently the subject of a sick note and not considered fit for

duties.   It seems to me that he should be treated like any other

serving   officer   who   has   been   off   sick for a lengthy period.

He   should be   seen by the Police Surgeon.         The Police Surgeon

should give his opinion as to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's

current state of health and be asked his opinion on the likely

effect of such health if charges and copy statements in this

matter were to be served upon him.            It may be that the Police

Surgeon would recommend investigation by a psychiatrist.      Nevertheless

if these steps were put in train, a decision could then be taken.



General

The above are not meant to be an exhaustive list of problems

but hopefully give some idea of certain broad difficulties that

have to be faced.    There are, for example, questions as to whether,

if a charge or charges are based upon a complaint of say Mr.

Jones or Mr. Hicks, then should Mrs. MeBrien be allowed to attend

the hearing.     On the one hand if she is not invited then this

could be interpreted by some as a cover-up, if she is invited

to attend it could be seen as oppressive towards Chief Superintendent
      Duckenfield and/or Superintendent Murray.           If she is considered

      a joint complainant she would have, of course, the right to seek

      to ask questions        through the Chairman.      The more persons were

      considered to be        joint complainants   the more that it would be

      the right of such persons to seek to ask questions which in turn

      would   prolong   the    hearing;   but there are competing interests.



10.     I hope the above explanations are helpful and that the Assistant

      Chief Constable will not hesitate to raise any matters not covered

      by    this   Advice,    or   indeed,   matters   that   require   expansion.




                                                               J . T . SLEIGHIHJLME

LEEDS                                                            9th October 1991
                                        ^   '   * .




                     - 1 9 9 1-




              THE POLICE (DISCIPLINE)
                 REGULATIONS 1985


               PROCEEDINGS DIRECTED
                       AGAINST



               CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT
                    DUCKENFTELD

                          and
              SUPERINTENDENT MURRAY




                     ADVICE




South Yorkshire Police,

Police Headquarters,

Snig Hill,

SHEFFIELD, S3 8LY.



Ref.   CCO/AF/NJP
PCA
POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY




BRIGADIER J. L. POWNALL, OBE
Deputy Chairman


     G Moore, Esq                                    3 o . September, 1991
     Assistant Chief Constable
     South Yorkshire Police
     Snig Hill
     SHEFFIELD
     S3 8LY




                                 /


     Following our telephone conversation of last week, I discussed with
     the Chairman your suggestion of a further meeting between presenting
     counsel and the Authority.   We gave careful consideration to your
     proposal but felt that it would, perhaps, be imposing too great an
     influence from the Authority on matters which are strictly the
     responsibility of the South Yorkshire Police.

     As an alternative way of guiding counsel on the case,as we see it, I
     enclose a note which the Chairman has drafted.   It is very much in
     note form but we hope it will provide some helpful guidance to
     counsel.

     I very much hope that you will soon be in a position to notify us of
     the dates of the tribunal so that we can nominate the Authority
     members.   I would be grateful if you would continue to keep me
     informed if any other difficulties arise.




     J L POWNALL
                         NOTES ON DISCIPLINARY CHARGES
                                      HILLSBOROUGH

The    charges which     the Police       Complaints Authority     have directed

against Chief Superintendent Dukenfield are very simple and easy to

understand.      This Authority appreciate that the overall enquiry gave

rise    to   a   vast   amount   of    paper-work.    The   case   against   Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield is concerned with a limited area namely his

failure to prevent over-crowding in Pens 3 and 4 and thereby to avert

the ghastly tragedy which resulted.           The charges which this Authority

have specified are deliberately framed so as to point to this failure

at three distinct stages, namely Charge 1. - to the time before the

crowds started to arrive;         Charge 2. - to the time between the first

arrival of the fans and the opening of Gate C;              and Charge 3. - the

time after Gate C was opened.           The charges are specified so as to keep

the issues within manageable limits.            They are in no way intended to
suggest that no-one else was responsible for the tragedy.



Charges 1,       2 and 3 are framed under Regulation 4 of the Police

(Discipline) Regulations 1985.           In order to prove any one of the three

charges (and, indeed the separate charge against Superintendent Murray

which mirrors charge 3 against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield) the

presenter of the charges must prove, beyond reasonable doubt, that the
officer charged:-



       (i)   was a member of a police force;         and



       (ii) that he was under a duty as a police officer to attend to

       or carry out certain things, namely in this case those things
    necessary for the proper control and safety of those members of

     the public who attended the match;          and



   (iii)    that, he neglected or omitted to carry out such

            things with due promptitude or diligence.



Proof of good and sufficient cause,          however,     lies on the officer
charged on the balance of probabilities.         Of these essential elements

in each charge (i) and (ii) apply          to all threeequally.

(i) is unlikely to be the subject          of dispute.



(ii) May not be contested.


If it is, brief evidence may need to be called as to the fact that not

only had the police accepted responsibility for crowd control and
safety     on   behalf   of   the   Club   but   that    Chief   Superintendent

Duckenfield, who was in charge of the police, knew this full well -

and accepted this.



Evidence:-      Operational Order

                The pre-match briefings



Evidence from Club - and if necessary, senior officers, if this is

disputed.



NB. Case of Harris v South Yorkshire Police which is referred to in
Taylor's report at page 29.
Duckenfield's evidence before the Coroner with regard to safety at
page 41, 43, 71, 82 at which he said:-



     On page 41 re pre-match briefing to Inspectors:



           (E)   "We (the police) must ensure the safety o f

           the public inside and outside the                ground."



           (F)   "I     cannot    stress     too     highly    the     word
                 1safety1".



           (G)   "Our     (the     police)     job     is     to   ensure     the
                 safety of spectators".



     On   page43 "Safetyof supporters in this ground is                  paramount":


           (D -G) rebriefing           to officers - same format.



     On   page71:                (D) See passage.



     On   page 82:               (C)     "Certainly not so much in            the

                              pens, but the whole ground, monitoring of
                              safety and levels was crucial".



In view of these answers and of the fact that police 'controlled' the

crowd, which must imply a responsibility for safety, in common-sense,
there may not be any dispute but that he was in charge of a police

operation which was concerned with the safety of spectators.
Hereafter references to his evidence before the Coroner which was

given on oath,     under caution and after warnings that he was not

obliged to answer will be by reference to the transcript with a page

number.


(iii)     In respect of the three   charges which the Authority have

directed and specified - the particulars will differ because the

charges deal with different stages.     Particulars may be sought.   If

they are it is for Counsel to draft them.       The basic charge will

stand.     The charge must be proved but this does not necessitate the
proof of all particulars (cf Machent v Quinn 1970 AER 255) but it does

mean that each member of the Tribunal must be agreed as to the proof

of a particular before it can convict of the charge (cf R v Brown 1983

79 CR App R 115).


If particulars are not sought Counsel will have to decide whether to

deliver them or provide the defence with a copy of his opening.



I have set out particulars which illustrate the case as the Authority

would wish it presented.     Where appropriate I have put page numbers

in brackets indicating references to the transcript.   Where the number

has a (2) after it this means it is in the second sequence of numbers

dealing with evidence on 13 March 1991.    It is for Counsel to decide
what particulars he relies on.



Charge Wo 1



Chief Superintendent Duckenfield neglected or omitted to carry out his

duty as a police officer as alleged in that he:-
(a)   took   over      as   operational      commander         (47C)    in

      overall        command        (67G)      without         adequate

      preparation;


(b)   signed     the    operational         order    without       first

      visiting the ground;



(c)   relied    on     an   operational      order       drawn    up    by

      someone else without further enquiry and accepted
      it as 'tried and tested' on the basis that it has

      been     operated     satisfactorily          on   two   previous
      occasions;



(d)   failed to brief himself adequately or to prepare

      for emergencies;


(e)   failed to acquaint himself with the layout of and

      facilities at the ground so as to be able to deal

      with     emergencies        (68C,   89(2),     90(2))      and    in

      particular:-



             (i)     did not know of association between

             turnstiles A-G and Leppings Lane Terrace
             (74C);



             (ii) did       not   know where        Gate   "C"    was        (53C)   and

                     (25(2)B);
             (iii) did not acquaint himself with the sign-posting
             (68D);



             (iv) did not acquaint himself with Club requirement or

                    know of print-out which the Club were able to
                    provide (50 B);



             (v)    did not know of         the    'penning' in LeppingsLane

                    Terrace (44B and        C) , (but cf 72 D or ignored it
                        79);



(f)   failed to appreciate the lay out of Leppings Lane

      Terrace and in particular             of the effect of the
      radial fences between Pens            3 and 4 and Pens 1 and

      2 and 5, 6 and 7 and the absence of any proper

      exits in case of emergency, thereby making over­

      crowding      a    very   dangerous    circumstance        which

      required special consideration.             Many references.


(g)   accepted "find your own level" on the Lepping

      Lane Terrace when even a cursory glance would

      have   made       it   clear   that   such    a   policy    was
      unworkable (44B).



(h)   failed to provide any contingency plan if these
      pens became overcrowded (90D-E).



(i)   failed to enquire and did not know whether the

      police or the Club were to act as stewards, in
      particular    in     relation   to    the   Leppings   Lane

      Terrace and made no such enquiries (68E and 77,

      18,   92C);


(j)   failed to provide any police stewarding at the

      entrance to the Tunnel to Pens 3 and 4;


(k)   failed to provide for crowd numbers in Pens 3 and

      4 to be monitored (77C and 77G,             78A);



(1)   failed to read, or, if he read, to take any steps
      to apply the recommendations on the Green Book as

      to crowd density (71);


(m) failed     to   heed    the   ACPO     recommendation    with

      regard to the drawing up of a schedule as to

      police and Club crowd management or to ensure

      that such a schedule was drawn up, or to enquire

      as to whether this was done (68, 69);



(n) failed to make any or any adequate enquiries as

      to police intelligence about the football clubs

      concerned;



(o)   failed to make any plan to encourage the even
      distribution of spectators on the Leppings Lane

      Terrace (91);
     (p)   failed to meet Club officials prior to 15 April

           1989 or to rearrange a meeting with them (38).



Evidence to include



     Plan of the ground.



     Plan of Leppings Lane Terrace.



     Photographs of the ground and Terrace.



     Sewill and Mole (if required).



     Transcript of Duckenfield's evidence before the Coroner.


Charge No 2



This charge is concerned with Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's

neglect or omission during the period between the first arrivals of

spectators and the opening of Gate C.



Suggested particulars:-



     (a)   failed to monitor crowd security in Pens 3 and 4

           and to observe the build up of spectators     in

           those pens (60, 31(2));



     (b)   failed to get print out of numbers of spectators

           who had entered the ground (49H);
     (c)   gave an order to a police constable to ask people

           to move forward and spread out but failed to
           ensure that this was carried out (52B);



     (d)   prior to the opening of Gate C failed to observe

           or to take action consequent upon the obvious

           over-filling of Pens 3 and 4 and the under use of

           Pens 1, 2, 6, and 7 or to draw the conclusion

           from this that the spectators on the Leppings

           Lane Terrace were not, and could not, find their
           own level (4(2));



     (e)   failed to control further entry by spectators

           into Pens 3 and 4 by placing police officers at
           the entry to the Tunnel.



Evidence. Plans, photos, videos, Duckenfield's evidence to Coroner.


Charge 3



This charge is concerned with the failure of Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray to provide for the control and

stewarding of spectators coming through Gate C when it was opened.


Suggested particulars



     (a)   failed   to   provide   any   control   over   spectators   coming
           through Gate C.
(b)   failed    to   appreciate       that      these    spectators       would   be
      likely to go to the Tunnel.



(c)   failed to observe that Pens               3 and 4 were already,             and

      obviously,         overcrowded       -      and      that,     if further

      spectators     were     to   enter       these    Pens,    there    would   be

      danger of injury and death (3(2) C and D);


(d)   failed to take any steps to monitor or                    control

      entry in Pens 3 and 4 (5(2), 6 and 7);



(e)   failed    to   inform     Superintendent          Greenwood   in

      whose sector Gate C the concourse behind Leppings

      Lane     Terrace    and   the    terrace     were     situated.
      (12(2));



(f)   failed to inform the Club, or anyone else, of the
      opening of Gate "C" (13 D, E);



(g)   failed to observe a surge of spectators in Pens

      3 and 4 (22(2)F - 23(2)C);



(h)   failed to observe overcrowding in Pens 3 and 4 or

      disparity between these pens and Pens 1, 2 , 6 and

      7 or that anything was wrong before spectators

      came from Pens 3 and 4 onto the pitch (31(2)); or

      to take any action whether by relaying a message

      or otherwise (21(2) and 22(2));
     (i)   failed to exercise those reasonable qualities of

           command expected of an 'overall commander' in the

           emergency.       [This was, the PCA believe, largely

           because     of      his   lack     of   preparation   and

           forethought, as particularised in Charge 1.]



The references to the transcript of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's

evidence do not cover all relevant references but are intended to

assist Counsel.


Evidence. Plans,     photos,    videos,     evidence of surge,   evidence from

officer in charge of concourse area to prove no steps taken to close

the tunnel     (as was done in 1988, unknown to Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield)    and transcript of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's

evidence to Coroner.
                                                                    ca.


                                                                I   ' Cu*»«wV/     ^allU ftt
H I G H L Y   C O H F I P E H T I A L                  v> -                  ^      U-    W J W
                                                                                  i<th$«.\ wK
                                                         % '
                                                                     COi*u(l\ ,          (alttUv r
                         PROBLEM PREVENTING PROGRESS OF -THE         _ .    . .    ,
                                                                     R.p»f f«R      It cW c* o MJ*
                               HILLSBOROUGH TRIBUNAL                                ^          * *
                                                                            V* f.CyA-----

                               SUPERINTENDENT A FELL
                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


 1.    The purpose of this paper is to set out the problem seen as preventing

       the progress of the Hillsborough Tribunal and to offer the solution

       so that problem and solution can be considered by those who will

       contribute to the making of decisions as to the way ahead.                 The paper

       avoids detailed descriptions, references and explanations since it

       is aimed at a restricted readership that has knowledge of the relevant

       legislation,   the particulars of the tragedy and the identities of the

       different witnesses.


 2.    The fundamental problem is that the Tribunal cannot proceed until

       charges accompanied by supporting statements of evidence have been

       served on the accused officers.       Such evidence does not presently exist

       in an appropriate form, that is as statements suitable for Regulation

       10 and Regulation 19 procedures.          A team of police officers conversant

       with the circumstances will have to be appointed to obtain such
       statements.    Such action after the Police Complaints Authority has

       certified on 15    August 1990 that it was satisfied with the investigation

       is difficult to    countenance.


  3.   The background to this problem is that immediately following the tragedy

       the police officers involved were required to write out their

       recollections.     Some of these were supplemented      by further
       recollections.     Some recollections were perhaps      influenced by advice

       as to what was required for the purpose of the Taylor Inquiry and civil

       litigation.




                                         -   1   -
Many members of the public, officials, club employees and others

completed questionnaires.   Some persons made signed statements; some

made unsigned statements.   Some key persons were interviewed under

caution and under Regulation 7 Notice and their evidence is largely

in the form of records of interview.


Most of the documentation has been entered on computer and the print

off of the computer version of some was used as 'statements'        in support

of the report submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions on which

the decisions as to criminal culpability were made.        It was this report

and its supporting evidence which was used as the supporting material

for the report of the complaint investigation that was considered by

the Police Complaints Authority when the direction was m a d e .     For many

of what appear to be witness statements the computer copy carries a

common heading of   'statement' and   'signed' and   'dated'.   This is

misleading as there are few statements that are signed, dated and

witnessed.   The date quoted is presumably the date that the material

was entered onto the computer.


This material is wide ranging in content and there is much in the

'statement' of a relevant witness that is extraneous to the disciplinary

charges.


Many witnesses gave evidence to the Taylor Inquiry and to the Inquest

that is in addition to that contained in their 'statements'.         In so
far as that oral evidence is pertinent to the charges, but not contained

in their 'statements', their 'statements' are incomplete.



In some cases there is an obvious need for amplification of what a

witness has said to establish what further evidence he can give.
The problem in relation to available evidence was raised in the report

of the investigating officer to the Director of Public Prosecutions

(Page 181) and his comments are rev e al i ng :-


"...many of the statements of witnesses obtained have been in the form

of non-CJA recollections.      Amongst these are accounts from individuals

who may be considered to have some culpability in Criminal Law.         None

of these recollections has at this time been converted into CJA

statement or admitted under caution."


"Recollections, whilst a very efficient method of collecting evidence

early for Counsel to the Inquiry, are very unsatisfactory for a criminal

investigation.       This is not only because they are not protected by

the provisions of the Criminal Justice Act, but also because they lack

the thoroughness which invariably follows an efficient one-to-one

interview.    Secondly,    they have been subjected to review and possible

editing by persons who may be more minded to protect the liability

interests of the individual or organisation at Civil Law."



"A related issue centres on the evidence taken from individuals at

the Public Inquiry oral hearings and the transcripts made of what was
said...   As far as witnesses are concerned, their accounts, as recorded

in transcripts, have not been converted into statements."



"Furthermore, in giving evidence at the oral hearings no person was

put on o at h ..."


There seems to be no alternative to obtaining appropriate and suitable

statements.    The discipline form served on an accused officer is

designed to include the requirements of Regulation 11.        Schedule 2

indicates the presumption that statements will be supplied at the same

time the discipline form is served.        Paragraph 12 of Annex   'H' states

 that "...the accused officer must be presented with copies of the

evidence..."     By Paragraph 7 of Annex     'H' "...normally these documents
should be served with the discipline form."      Obviously the discipline

form containing the charges requires the officer to consider how he

intends to plead, consider whether he should engage legal representation

and indicate which witnesses he requires to be called.       He is in no

position to make sensible decisions or be adequately advised on these

issues without having the evidence to consider.


Apart from being demanded by Regulations,     the preparation of appropriate

statements will produce real benefits since it will lead to smooth

Tribunal proceedings occupying the least time and incurring the least

cost, inconvenience and distress.     If the evidence the Tribunal is

asked to consider has been put in the form of written, signed and

witnessed statements containing the complete relevant testimony of

the witness concerned with extraneous material omitted, both the

presenter and the a c cu s e d s ' representatives can have given earlier

consideration to it and have suitably prepared the case.


A further consideration is that the obtaining of appropriate statements

will give an indication of the likely performance of witnesses.         It

is possible that some witnesses will be unwilling to co-operate with

such further investigation and indeed the Tribunal itself.        Possibly

some witnesses from impairment will be unable to complete suitable
statements.   Whether from unwillingness or impairment it is well that

the position is known before the Tribunal begins.


Suitable statements may enable Regulation 19 procedures to operate

and this is crucial to the smooth conduct of the Tribunal's business.


Regulation 19 procedures cannot occur without the consent of the accused

officers and statements unsatisfactory from ambiguity, incompleteness

or inconsistency with other testimony will make it unreasonable to

 expect such consent.   It may be, however,    that for economic reasons

 the accused would have wished to have the procedure operate and being
prevented from doing so because of the quality of the material can

be seen as unfair and so unsatisfactory.



Contemplation of the appointment of a team of officers to obtain witness

statements indicates the need to determine what witnesses are involved.

The conduct of the presentation would rely in large part on showing

that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray gave

accounts to the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquest that amount to admissions

when related to the discipline charges.    With regard to the technical

proof of the provenance of the transcripts (it is acknowledged that

general rules of evidence need not be scrupulously followed) one would

not anticipate difficulty in obtaining witness statements from the

transcribers.   Similar non-controversial statements will be needed

from witnesses to introduce in evidence other documents such as plans,

orders and p ho tographs.


There is likely to be controversy as to whether it is proper for the

Tribunal to consider the testimony given by the accused officers at

the Taylor Inquiry.   Similar, but less powerful objection is likely

to be made to the consideration of their testimony given at the Inquest.



The admissions in relation to the charges (there are no admissions

at the Inquest in relation to charge five) form a major part of the

case against the two officers.


Some of the answers given by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield were

against his interests, but were untrue.    It appears he 'wilted' under

cross-examination and it would be wrong, counsel advises, to seek to

rely upon answers that are believed to be untrue.


A fairly remote possibility exists that the Tribunal might decide not

to hear evidence of the admissions made at the Inquiry and at the

Inquest.   It would be likely to attract severe criticism if the
presented case relied completely on admissions adduced by transcript
      and then collapse because the transcripts were not admitted.       It follows

      that evidence from sources other than the accused officers themselves

      should be to establish the case.



20.   Accordingly, Counsel considers that the case will be based not only

      on the admissions made at the Inquiry and at the Inquest, but also

      on the testimony of witnesses.     These have been identified as

      including



      Charge One (Planning):


      (Possibly Mole, Sewell, Marshall), Mackrell, Lock, Charlesworth.



      Charge Two (Monitoring):


      Greenwood, Illingworth, Smith, Goddard, Bichard, Ryan, McRobbie,

      Mackrell, Lock, Guest, Nicholson, Hendry, Lackey, Spearritt, Sutton.



      Charge Three (Failing to Act on Overcrowding):


      Greenwood, Creaser, Illingworth, Smith, Guest, Nicholson.



      Charges Four and Six (Action after Gate C Op e ned):


      Greenwood, Creaser, Bennett, Bain, Marsh, Sewell, Goddard, McRobbie,

      Bichard, Ryan, Guest, Lock, Higgins, Delaney, White.



      Charge Five (Disrepute):


      Goddard, Bichard, Ryan, McRobbie, Mackrell, Kelly, Kirton, Jackson,

      Robinson, Roworth, Smith, Smart, McGee, Brown, Ensor, Lewis, Lock,

      Mole, Marshall, Sharpies.




                                       - 6 -
In addition Counsel is considering calling a small number of supporters

who were present in pens 3' and 4 and perhaps Mr Hicks himself.



The numbers and the rank, status and publicity potential of some of
these individuals make it obvious that it is unlikely that the obtaining

of their statements can be done without it coming to public attention.
It is of obvious interest that the supervised investigation did not

explore what took place in the Board Room or later in the police control

box in relation to the allegation of connivance made against Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield and Assistant Chief Constable Jackson.



It would seem appropriate that West Midlands police officers who had

a duty to investigate the evidence supporting or contradicting the

complaints against police should continue this duty and obtain the

evidence relating to the charges arising from these complaints for

the purpose of the discipline hearing.     They have now the knowledge

of the background circumstances that it would take other officers time

to acquire.   Furthermore the West Midlands Police have the necessary

independence so that suspicion of cover-up or manipulation of witnesses

can be avoided.     The continuing supervision of the investigation by

the Police Complaints Authority will provide a further shield against

such accusations.     If West Midlands Police are to do this work the

funding might lead to public comment.


Unpalatable though it might prove, the Regulations must be followed
and the solution to the problem of obtaining suitable statements appears

to be that West Midlands Police should complete the investigation under

the continuing supervision of the Police Complaints Authority.     Unless

someone completes this duty the Tribunal probably cannot begin its

work.


It seems to be established by Paragraph 9.2 of the Guidance that the

responsibility for "the preparation of the case against accused

officers" lies with the discipline authority of the Force.     In so far
      as the obtaining of suitable statements can be regarded as "the

      preparation of the case" the decision to cause this action may rest

      with South Yorkshire Police.   In so far as the obtaining of statements

      from those who have not previously been asked to make statements,      the

      obtaining of statements "following an efficient one-to-one interview"

      and the clarification and amplification of versions must all be regarded

      as investigation, the decision to cause this action may rest with West

      Midlands Police and the Police Complaints Authority.



26.   The possibility exists that when it is widely realised that there is
      a need to take further statements to be satisfactory for the purpose

      of the discipline hearing, questions may be asked whether (as the

      investigating officer indicated) they were unsatisfactory for the

      purpose of a criminal prosecution.   Perhaps there will be some who

      might claim that if the statements were unsatisfactory for a criminal

      prosecution they might not have been ideally appropriate for making

      decisions as to criminal culpability.   Far fetched though such
      speculation clearly is, it would be better if it never could surface.



27.   In the unique circumstances of Hillsborough and bearing in mind the

      interpretation that might by some be put on a new investigation

      supplementary to one already carried out and ratified by the Police

      Complaints Authority,   there is clearly advantage in discussion and

      agreement being reached as to the way ahead before any decision is

      made and announced.


                  ^




Superintendent



21 October 1991
RCV   BY:XEROX TELECOPIER 7 0 1 0 ; 3 0 - 1 0 - 9 1   10:07AM J                                 Ar*CT'~l-9A.A . J-1. *-s




                                     Hillsborough Family Support Group

                     fUtBflfl a g L B fflg -    TPESrtRY 2ft*PH OCTOBER 1 M 1 -   1 . 3.0 EK


                                            TO ALL EDITORS/PRODUCERS.



                            RE.- HILLSBOROUGH - DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES




           We are shocked and disappointed at Richard Wells decision to
           retire Mr David Duckenfield on ill-health grounds.
           We have no alternative but to accept the independent medical
           assessment and the inevitable result of that opinion.
           However, we have a deep sense of injustice and that once again
           matters have been left unaddressed.
           Richard Wells said at the conclusion of the inquest "There are
           no winners today" - we echo that sentiment that this is a sad day
           for everyone.
                a)         Mr Duckenfield will have to live the rest of                   his
                            life with this matter hanging over him.

                b)         Many of the families are suffering similar
                            medical and psychological conditions. This
                            will be a severe set back to their prospects
                            of a speedy recovery.
                c)         The PCA, after a lengthy investigation,
                            rejected some of our complaints against other
                            officers. However, they supported our complaints
                            against Messrs Duckenfield and Murray by instructing
                            the South Yorkshire Police to take disciplinary
                            proceedings, despite the soutn Yorjcsnlre Foliceo'
                            protestation. We are therefore entitled to assume that
                            the PCA share our concern and that of Lord Justice
                            Taylor that the conduct of these officers, on tho
                            fell short of what can be reasonably expected*       It
                            would appear these matters are not now to be addressed*




                                                      SECREIAKX                        TREASURER
            CHAIRMAN
                                                      P Hammond                         Mrs J T»|rtor
            THick*
is'wV   £71^ znCJVUzn T   ac.r\ (Kjikj / o u -iu *-‘3 i   iu *u o m   *




                  d) *    We hereby call upon Richard Wells to give us the
                          unequivocal assurance that this decision will not
                          affect the tribunal involving Mr Murray       that he
                          ^ 1 1 proceed forthwith as instructed by the Police
                          Complaints Authority.
                  e)      We thank the Chief constable for his concern and_
                          understanding regarding our anger and dissatisfaction#
                          and stress that this matter should never have ***“?"
                          had Mr Peter Wright and Mr David Duckenfield done the
                          decent thing and resigned forthwith when the totally
                          damning Taylor Enquiry/Interim Report was published.

             There will be the inevitable accusation of double standards - no
             matter how hard the South Yorkshire Police attempt to deny or
             skilfully gift wrap their decision - David Duckenfield •
             retirement will further damage the be 1etgUJrt *          i fdiSa
             Police in Britain.   It will also set back the bridge build g
             process between Merseyside and Sheffield ana once again ttw
             families of the innocent men# women and children who lost their
             lives on that dreadful day are the victims of a totally unjust
             system.




                                               TREVOR HICKS
                                                 CHAIRMAN
                                    HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP
                   ■■
                    IaX«§*
                         :'
                          »0
                           :='™
                              ■»
                               '■
                    m ■2-n.O
                           •'-
                                             policeman once des­
 § cb a a f # -     c'—o         •    cribed now time stood still
■-S.es „ 'c r g o
     O <# -   SC                      for, Ma^at Ihalaawfol
                                      moment
                                        He said: “The « m » |m
                                      in the controlbox, in -       .
                                      crowd of 5G.000. well, you feter'-'id                 A radio malfuncttoa
                                      could hear a pin drop. 1 .'open ill-fated Gale C.   2.40pm,
                                      stood there ana was asked     Ob March 27, 1989. he fusion.



                                       Pore, Sheffield, _had
                                      'one « '| R




                                       1980 -lie was back at -
                                                                                            ii« 8 8 g S l» M
lliit
                                                               SmfM


                                     1 the' time ;witfi Siipf'Roger 'W a n hour yet W t! get Hung whKlt could have*
                                                                                             nreventpd
 October 30,1991 *K             3
  gg'hzt'.y-:.■:•'"§jjB'B 'A




           Hillsborough
^isasler families want ttf -

            JucfenfiiivWii-

ing on medical grounds.


                                            -•At'S&.-i-i
  -yoeiwa sayiSV&4®
 ing from severe depression,
 a«d post-ltaumatk _stress

, 'He will not apgeSr.at a
'.dlscipli*«rrtea«ng^^
 'Hillsborough -next ...March*




  ter victims are looking -*
  taking, private court aetwtf
  against Mr Duckenfidd. .*                                       'private court :actioi*.
    Trevor Hicks, ■ chairman                               against Mr Duckenfieli,          *
  of the Hillsborough Farai-,                                 Trewf -Hicks, ciairaiii . -
  lies Support Group,;'said:                               of the Hillsborough Fami­
  "There are people interested                             lies Support Group, s a ? * -^
    in seeing what other options                           "Thereare peopleinterested - -
    Are open to us, rather thart                           in seen* what other options --■
    seeing the matter rest," •J                            are opa to us, rather than , , :
                                                           -#iag.fc matter rest*--.
     ' Families are also calling?
    on South Yorkshire chiefs                                   Mmslaaghter I . d o n 't' \
    constable Richard Wells m                               tbink ®®h, but some people
    give an “ unequivocal;                                 believe there are other
   .assurance" that the decision-
  ■'         '.nffcM. ♦!»#» hearing                          “f t * we are, two-aad-t-     -
      gainst Mr ivtuiiaj.         *-                       half years on, and despite a
       He was in the control         •                     damnfeg report by Loi^         s
                                                                                          xi
                                                                                           if?
                                                                                             te
                                                                                              d
                                                                                              ;
                                                                                              .
     overlooking the..packed                               Justice Taylor and cos-
 likotMgs Lan«let»cff                                      f e s s i o n b y D a v ii
 I wtere Liverpool fans were
 I .crushed » death; in April'.
  11985>.f.;,,; .' .... . ■.         .'•*
  I    M e M u rray refu sed .to ,
  J comment:'- ■               /:•
  1 :# .-.'Fateful day for-fttltc#
                                                                                                                       A-iAAAAAA
                                                                                                                             ;V4J.
                                                                                           'AA--,.              -■   !A\-
                                                                                                                -■..-■'•A.




    ;”A-A'-;A- ”■•:                 ; ■ ' ■ . ' i >^" ;T.'-"•
          a --'; ■;   ■ :■: -v.                                                                                                                                                                                                              ~;A A-;-
                                                                                                     rt&f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r-.A'.
                                                                                      M M
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ;:aa
■A ■- "■■./•:-•'■■ - ; .            '       '•■   a'Av    ■                                                                                                                                             L-v. :
                                                                                                      m m
"S3®                                                                                           BM M j i
     ■■■■ : ■/ ■ ■■■■■ .■:■'■ ..'       .    ■'" ■. ■■■ ■■ .',■■■ ■ ■.   A
     " A-''^AA.-AA-A A'A^W^A^AA-A. ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ■m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             aaaa-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ■




                                          ASAaAA,;
                                        Aa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A’~A. :

                                            n


               ■        r---


»-7AV aaa                                                                    ,i
■a?Aa -'\;



.a Aa 7A7 a ''A^AAA ;^ A ^ A
                                                                                  'PI?--                    -                                'V
■ a - a a ■;: : :•aA A'AA,'
                     :a a ; -“a■ ^:a -^ A- sa A. v ^ ^ IJv a A A ^
                                             *




          ■~':■ ^a-^a'a''
                        :




                                                                              .   -
                                                                                       a.                                    :AAAaaaAAA
■   a a " A 7 B A a ^ a s a a ; a a : aA A a                                                                                 ®>      r a      aa a       ^^a A a Ja A a A a a s a a B^^                                                    ::
            •■’ ■ A ' i ' A A -;A A - - ' A ; ;AAA A                         ,A~A                                            ^   C    : '’ A “ A A . i ' A A ...n A ' : A - - A A " A' A a A A v A a   a v b   A A - ' •;:   > >' ■■•• ■•• ■>■
AAjAAtsAAA'’' a--aA::?AAaA; :A^
-aaa I I ^ . : ^                                  ,;'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P A G E , 001
                                                                                                                                                                                                        S~TtfV£ .2=1 (lo„Hf




                                               In a statement Mr Wells saM the
                                                                                           Hat the bereaved retmlves and friends           T m w Hick*, dnriman o n h e Hilla-            we          * letter last week that this
                                            officer ltd been examined thoroughly
re lire m medical grounds.                  and the report on life condition: “ Left me    will >* *ngry at my decision since it rotes   borough Fatuities Support Group —
                                            in no doubt that Mr Duckrodeid It loo ill -   out Mr DucfcenfleM’k lnMnhemeirt fo the        whose two daughter* died in the disaster         we understand that HichardWelb asa o
    C W S V D**M Dudtenfieid has                                                          planned disciplinary trilMml for which         — said today: “Weir* not «srpcl»«l —
>**»* off work since soon uttm lie          in continue *«r»ic* as a j» lk t officer.”'                                                                                                   employer has no alternative.” ';
                                                                                          South Ywkslire M e t bat been prepar­          It* m opportunity missed by the South
f r y t y to April t m to which #5 people      He will formally m l re m November         ing for some months."                          Yorkshire police.
'UrWr*                                      10.                                              MOa«M Duckenfield has become the              “Tills is not the first (torn* this has hap­
                                                                                                                                                                                             “It-is totally unpalatable from the
  Disciplinary action was pending              Mr DucJcenfield, sg*rf 45, was dec-                                                                                                        families’ point o f view that once again -
                                                                                          symbolic focus o f much of the anguish -       pened, which is why we h u e been watch-         there is no opportunity for what ta p .
agsiaiiM r Ouckenfierd, but ibis has oo£    nihetf by Mr Well* « “saffertn* fmm           felt by those who were so hurt by the          mg ft very closeJy. If* an escape root*
been mled out, South Yorkshire Chief        se»wr* <ie|K«*slM and port traumatic                                                                                                          penedonthedayto be landed at lhedoor*
                                                                                          iragedy but I must deai with the man, not      that has been «s«f hy senior officers who        step or those twpoasMe. '
Constable Richard W ells s«M this           stress disorder” .                            th e sy m b o l. The fact Is, David            are facing dlsciplBMy action.
                                                                                          Uuckenfield » now too ilf to sem .’*             '-It also fully supports our fears when          Mr DuckenfTeW refused to common* t
                                       'io'PXSWlfcir               P o ^ -j                            WEDNESDAY OCTOBER 30 1991



—Anger as Hillsborough chief is retired      GRIEVING families of the Hillsborough
                                             d isa ste r victim s la st n ig h t reacted                                                  whose service is retained for such but I must deal with the man, not tt
                                                                                                                                          examinations.                                symbol.
                                            .furiously to a decision that the policeman         He also expressed fears that disciplin­
                                             in charge will not face disciplinary ary > charges would now be dropped                         “This unequivocal report left me in no      “The fact is that David Duckenfield
                                             action.                                                                                      doubt that Mr Duckenfield is too ill to now too ill to serve. A decision like th is ;
                                                                                             against Supt Bernard Murray, who was in continue service as a police officer. not             lightly made, the more especially in
                                                Chief Supt David Duckenfleld, 48, is to charge of the ground control room on the
                                             be retired early because he is said to be too day of the disaster, and called for hearings Details of his condition cannot be case of such complexity and pub!:
                                             ill to face a disciplinary tribunal which against him. scheduled for March, td be            disclosed, as I am bound    by the rules of  interest.
                                             would have scrutinised Ms conduct as the held immediately.                                  patient and doctor confidentiality.             “There has been enough sttfferin
                                             commander of the police operation on the          Mr Hicks expressed fears last week that      "But in general terms, he is described already, and I can only hope that time wi
                                                                                                                                                                                      help   to soften the terrible pain.”
                                             day 95 football fans died m Sheffield.          Chief Supt Duckenfield would take early as suffering from severe depression and             Mr H icks w ho lo s t tw o tee n ag
                                                The decision to retire Mm was taken by retirement bn medical grounds. He has post traum atic stress disorder.
                                             the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, been on sick leave for four months and .. . “I quite understand that the bereaved daughters in the disaster, acknowledge
                                             Mr Richard Wells, who admitted that it became eligible for early retirement after . relatives and friends will be angry at my that medical reasons made the ear*
                                             would cause anger among relatives who his 90th day of illness..                             decision, since it rules out Mr Ducken­ retirement
                                                                                                                                                                                      decision
                                                                                                                                                                                                    inevitable but said that th
                                                                                                                                                                                                 would  damage the reputation r
                                             have always held Chief Supt Duckenfield           Mr Wells took his decision yesterday      field's involvement  in  the  planned disci­
                                             responsible for the tragedy.                                                                                                             South    Yorkshire  Police.
                                                                                             and telephoned Mr Hicks before making it plinary tribunal for which South York­             He added: “We are absolutely shocke
                                                News of the early retirement, which public.                                              shire Police have been preparing for some and
                                            becomes effective on November 10, was . A statement from Mr Wells said: “My months.                                                            disappointed, but not surprised. Th;
                                            branded “another dc ”        ‘ ' .........     ■ decision was taken after careful consider­                                               is a sad day all round. Many r.
                                                                                                                                            “David   Duckenfield   has  become   the
C h ie f
                                            the chairman of th e !                           ation of the medical report from the police symbolic focus of much of the anguish felt Continued onare
                                                                                                                                                                                      the  families      still trying to deal wit
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Page 3.
           s u p t daved d u c k en field    Support Group,                                  staff surgeon, an indenendent rihvsririan hv tKftco wrhrt nmno en Jitwf. Kw




                                                                                                 and plead that it is unfair for him to carry

                                                  the same illnesses as Mr Duckenfield, and      to give evidence. We now warft disciplin­
                                                  this will only make those illnesses            ary action against Supt Murray to go
                                                  worse.           •.   ■s ■                     ahead without delay.”
                                                    “Mr Duckenfield will not now have a            Chief, Supt Duckenfield was not avail*
                                                  chance to clear his name, and will have        S leJ ° f comment at his home in Totley,
                                                  what happened hanging over him for the         Sheffield, but made it known via a police’
                                                  rest -of his life. There ■ will also be a      tie mattan         had nothing to say on
                                                  suspicion of double standards by the
                                                                                                   Supt Murray, who is head of the
                                                   “This leaves a dreadfully sour taste in       Rawmarsh police division, also declined
                                                 our mouths. Ninety-five people have died,       to comment.
                                                 and no-one has lost a day’s pay or been           The PCA ruled in July that Chief Supt
                                                 disciplined for what happened. That is          Duckenfield and Su- i            ••- r
                                                 very difficult to accept for thosfe of us who
                                                 have a personal involvement.
                                                 jste'agsssaisass                                               of the dead. Pour other
                                                                                                 officers, two of them superintendents,
                                                 must face the fact.that: the reputation of      were _cleared of any blame.
                                                 his force has been damaged.                       Chief Supt Duckenfield, was promoted
                                                   Mr Hicks a ls o ,n lrtL # » n that Supt,      to his -rank just 19 days before .the
                                                 Bernard Murray ;would: not now face             disaster, on April 15.1989. He was
                                                 disciplinary chargesi a .,                      suspended shortly afterwards and has
                                                   He said: 'Tm afraid fie may turn round        never returned to active service..                SUPT BERNARD MURRAY
TH E TIMES WEDNESDAY OCTOBER 30 199!


                                                                     Decision will renew
  Police chief                                                        discipline debate
  blamed over                                                          /      By Stewart T endler, crimeotrrespoHdent
                                                                     CHIEF Sjipt Opekenfield’s the. ,:,jeiision for 30 years’
                                                                     early retirement with a pen­ sertlfe, the maximum. It will
                                                                     sion comes .at,atime when .the. be i§t|p, linked. . . . . . .

  Hillsborough                                                       Home Office is considering        Qiifcs of the discipline
                                                                     new guidance to chief con­ system say the present regula­
                                                                     stables on discipline proce­ tions allow officers feeing
                                                                     dures for officers'with medical discipline to escape examina­
                                                                     problems. The decision to tion ■ by producing medical

  retires early      By P eter D avenport
                                                                     allow the South Yorkshire evidence. The need for change
                                                                     officer to leave will almost was raised after Scotland Yard
                                                                     certainly renew the debate agreed in 1988 to allow Detec­
                                                                     over the discipline procedure. tive Supt Tony Lundy to
                                                                        The average pension for an resign rather than face a
THE senior officer in charge was too ill to continue as a            officer, of Mr Duckenfield’s discipline hearing.
                                                                     rank in his circumstances         The Home Office has al­
of police at lie Hillsborough police officer. “I quite under­        would be about £23,000 a ready issued some guidance
football stadium when 95. stand that the bereaved rel­               year. He could cash a quarter reminding forces that they can
Liverpool supporters were atives and friends will be                 of his entitlement, giving him review a pension if the officer
killed in a crush on the angry at my decision, since it              a £86,000 lump sum and seems to have recovered. Now
terraces is to be retired from rules out Mr Duckenfield’s            £17,250 a year.                 new guidance is on the way
the force on health grounds, it involvement in the planned              The pension is enhanced which calls for chief con­
was disclosed yesterday. He disciplinary tribunal for which          because Mr Duckenfield is stables to seek a third medical
will not face a planned disci­ South Yorkshire police have           leaving the police through ill opinion beyond the force’s
plinary tribunal.                 been preparing for some
                                                                     health. Although he has chief medical officer and the
   Chief Supt David Duck- months,” he said. “David                   served 28 years he will draw officer’s GP.
enfield, aged 48, who was Duckenfield has become the
criticised for his conduct on symbolic focus of much of the
the day by the official report anguish felt by those who were
into the disaster, was sus­ so hurt by the tragedy, but 1
pended from his post when must deal with the man, not
Lord Justice Taylor’s interim the symbol.”
findings were published in           Mr Wells, who took over
August, 1989, four months the force after the retirement
after the deaths.                 of Peter Wright, the chief
   Relatives of the victims said constable at the time of the
last night that 'they felt yes­ disaster, said that Mr Ducken­
terday’s decision had cheated field was another victim of the
 them of justice.                 Hillsborough tragedy. He said
   Richard Wells, the new that his decision was taken
 chief constable of South York­ after “careful consideration”
 shire police, said that Mr of a report from the police
 Duckenfield was suffering staff surgeon, an independent
 from depression and post- physician.                 '
 traumatic stress disorder and
                                 ■' /Philip Hammond, ..of. the.
                                  Hillsborough Families' -SapS"
                                  port Group, whose son aged
                                   14 was among those who died,
                                  said: “We feel we have been
                                  cheated of justice. David
                                   Duckenfield was the man to
                                  blame because fie" "was in
                                   overall charge. Ho# he could
                                   be suspended at first, and then
                                   only go off sick when disci­
                                   plinary charges were brought,
                                   defeats me.”
                                     The chairman of the group,
                                   Trevor Hicks, whose two
                                   daughters died, echoed the
                                   feeling of injustice, but said
   DnckenfieW: will not face the group had to accept that
     a disciplinary tribunal       Mr Duckenfield was ill.
    Daily Mail, Wednesday, October 30,1991


            Disaster
            officer
            to retire
            THE police officer
            a t the centre of the
            Hillsborough foot­
            ball disaster is to be
            retired.
             Chief Superintend­
           ent David Ducken­
           field, 46, who was in
           charge of crowd con­
           trol, Is suffering from
           ‘severe depression and
           post-traumatic stress
           disorder’.
             H ie decision means             TODAY Wednesday October 30 1991
           he will not face' disci­
           plinary charges which
           were being brought by
           the Police Complaints
           Authority — a move
           police accept will an­
           ger bereaved families.
           Nearly 100 fans died
           a t 'the PA Cup semi­
                                                    Hillsboro
           final between Liver­
           pool and Nottingham
           Forest in April, 1989.

                                                     THE police ©Beer in
                                                     charge of crowd control
                                                     at tie Hillsborough
                                                     football disaster is being
                                                      retired from tie' force.
                                                         The decision means
                                                      that Chief Superinten­
                                                      dent David Duckenfield,
THE SUN, Wednesday, October 30,1991                  46, will escape a disci­
                                                      plinary bearing.
                                                         He is said to be suf­
                                                     fering from “severe de­
        Police boss                                   pression and post-trau­
                                                      matic stress disorder”.
                                                         Mr Dnckenfield has
        in Hillsbro'                                 been suspended since a
                                                      public inquiry into the
                                                      1989 disaster in which
        row quits                                    95 soccer fans died.
                                                         Philip Hammond,
      T H E police officer in                        secretary of the Hills­
         charge o f crow d con­                      borough Families’ Sup­
         trol at th e H il ls­                       port Group, said yester­
         borough       football                      day: *1 feel -we have
         disaster Is to retire
         through illness.                           ...been cheated of pstice.”
      Chief Superintendent
         David Duckenfield, 46, j
        h as “severe depression i
        and      post-traumatic
        stress d isorder,” South i
        Y orkshire police said
        yesterday.
     T he move rules out d is­
        ciplinary      charges
        which were being
        brought against him fay
       th e Police C om plaints
       A uthority.
     N in ety -fiv e fans w ere
       killed.
HILLSBOROUGH families last night claim ed they
had been cheated of justice after it was rew aled
the police chief blam ed for 'the tragedy is to retire
on full pension.                   , .               -
     “If those in authority think this is going to go
away they are wrong, ’
said Phil Hammond, sec­
retary of the disaster
support group. .
  Chief Superintendent
David Duckenfield, who
is leaving the force on
medical grounds with an
estimated £24,000-a-year
p e n sio n ,   w ill  no
longer face disciplinary
proceedings.                     DUCKENFIELD: Row

         Decision             year-old son in the disas­
                              ter in 1989.
  Last week the Daily           South Yorkshire Chief
E xpress exclusively          Constable Richard Wells
revealed the father-or- said 46-year-old M r
two could seek retire­ Duckenfield’s decision to
m ent after subm itting       retire on November 10
four successive sick          had been made on inde­
notes.                        pendent medical advice.
  He w as to have               The long-serving'
appeared before a tribu­ cer, who was in charge of
nal to explain his role in crowd control, was suf­
B ritain’s worst soccer fering from depression
disaster, which claimed and acute stress.
95 lives.                       Mr Duckenfield has
  “We have been cheated been suspended on his
of justice.” said Mr Ham­ annual salary of £34,000
mond, who lost his 14- for two years.
           DAILY MIRROR, Wmdne$day, October 30, 1991




  STOMAS
                                                               \



                                                               \




                     # y JIM OLDFIELD
 A STORM erupted yesterday after the police
 chiefatlie centre ofthe Hillsborough soccer
 disasterquiton heath grounds - and avoided
 disciplinary action.              ■ •
    Doctors say Chief Supt David Duckenfield is" suf­
fering from ' severe depression, anfl post-traumatic
strew disorder. -Bat angry relatives of the 95 victims
c la im th e y h a v e been
“cheated of justice” by a
loophole in the system.
   Philip Hammond, sec­
retary of the Hillsborough
Fam ilies Support group,
said : “ J u s tic e h a s n o t
been done..B at we won’t
le t what happened be for­
gotten.”
         Crushed
    He hit out after it was
 announced Mr Duckeil-
 field will not have to face         STRESS: Duckenfield
 an internal tribunal.            Wells said yesterday: “He
   Mr Duckenfield was in          is now too ill to serve.”
charge at Sheffield               • Mr Hammond, who lost
Wednesday’s st ad iu m            his 14-year-old son Philip
when 95 Liverpool fans            in the disaster, said the
were crushed to death at          loophole left him “in de­
the start of an FA Cup            spair”.
semi-final with N o t­              He added: “ How M r
tingham Forest in 1989.           Duckenfield could be su­
   In the Hillsborough In­        spended at first and then
quiry report, Lord Justice        only go off sick when dis­
Taylor criticised his han­        ciplinary charges were
dling of the operation and        brought defeats me.”
accused him of “freezing”
as the tragedy unfolded.
   F a t h e r - o f - t w o Mr
Duckenfield, 45, was then
suspended on full pay.
   He went sick in July
and S o u t h Yo rkshire
Chief Constable Richard
                                                                                        THE GUARDIAN
                                                                               Wednesday October 30 1991




                                                                                                                                                   retire

                                                                  ity in July, but delayed because     disorder,” he said. Mr Wells,        the authority had no comment            Lord Justice Taylor’s report
                                                                  of his ill health.                   who told the support group pri­      on Mr D uckenfield’s case,           of August 4,1989, which said he
                                                                     The chairman of the Hillsbor­     vately of his decision, said that    which was a matter for South         became paralysed and alleged
                                           POLICE officer in      ough Families Support Group,         he understood their anger but        Yorkshire police.                    that he told untruths about Liv­
                                      charge of crowd control     Trevor Hicks, who lost two           could not avoid the reality that       :MrJ Hicks, who said action        erpool supporters trying to
                                      at Htlisborow# when 95      daughters in the disaster of         Mr Duckenfleld was no longer         should be taken to close the         rush the ground, made him the
                                      Liverpool fans were         April 15,1989, said the decision     able to perform his duties.          “loophole of illness” for avoid­     chief target of the families. He
                              crashed to death is to be retired   to retire Mr Duckenfield, by            “David Duckenfield has be­        ing disciplinary proceedings, is     was also one of several senior
                              early because of persistent de­     South Yorkshire’s Chief Con­         come the symbolic focus of           not supported by all the Hills­      officers whose evidence at the
                              pression and mental stress.         stable, R ichard Wells, was          much of the anguish felt by          borough victims’ families.           inquiry was called “defensive
                                Chief Superintendent David        understandable but wrong. -          those who were so hurt by the           The Superintendents’ Associ­      and evasive” by the judge.
                              Duckenfield, aged 46, has been         "This leaves a bad taste in ev­   tragedy, but I must deal with        ation said last week that his call      A file an Mr Duckenfield was
                              suspended for more than two         erybody’s mouth. It’s a sad day      the man, not the symbol. The         for disciplinary action to go        sent to the Director of Public
                              y ears, since Lord Ju stic e        all round. Many of the families      fact is, David Duckenfield is        ahead without Mr Duckenfield         Prosecutions who ruled last
                              Taylor’s report on the disaster     are trying to deal with the same     now too ill to serve.                if necessary was like “a pack of     summer that no criminal action
                              accused him of “freezing” at        sort of illness as Mr Ducken­         ' “There has been enough suf­       dogs chasing a wounded fox”.         should be taken.
                              the critical moment and of tell­    field and this will only serve to    fering already and I only hope          Mr Duckenfield was a high            The order for disciplinary
                              ing untruths In the immediate        compound that,” he said.            that time will help to soften the    flier in the South Yorkshire         proceedings followed shortly
                              aftermath. ■          ; ■              Mr Wells acted after a medi­      terrible pain felt by the families   force who was promoted to            afterwards.
                                News of his departure on No­       cal briefing from the South         of the Hillsborough victims,         command Sheffield F Division,           A South Yorkshire police
                              vember 10 angered victims’ rel­      Yorkshire forces' staff surgeon.    and will help to heal David          including Sheffield Wednes­          spokesman said yesterday that
                              atives who have Increasingly           “This unequivocal report left     Duckenfleld as well."                day’s H illsborough ground           Mr Duckenfleld, who is mar­
                              comentratei their hop® on dis­       me in no doubt that Mr Ducken­         The Police Complaints Au­         three weeks before the FA Cup        ried, had nothing to say to the
                              ciplinary action against Mr         field is too ill to continue         thority has expressed concern        semi-final between Liverpool         media and had asked that he
                              Ottcteafleli.                        service a# a police officer. In     in the past about the question       and Nottingham Forest.               should not be disturbed at his
                                His retirement automatically       general terms he is described as    of early retirement and avoid­          He had no previous experi­        Sheffield home as "this would
David Duckenfield:            ends proceedings ordered by          suffering from severe depres­       ing disciplinary action. But a       ence of controlling large foot­      be likely to exacerbate his
‘suffering severe depression’ the Police Complaints Author­        sion and post-traumatic stress      spokesman said yesterday that        ball fixtures.                       illness”.
             TH E INDEPENDENT

            Wednesday 30 October 1991                                                                                     Hillsborough
                                                                                                                          police chief
                                                                                                                           is allowed
Top Hillsborough officer                                                                                                    to retire
retires through ill-health                 ________                             vember with
                                                                                vAmtvr with an
                                                                                            an increased pension
                                                                                               increased oeosion
                                                                                                                                  By Nigel Banyan
                                                                                                                            THE police officer in charge
                                                                                                                            of crowd control on the day of
THE SENIOR police officer re                                                    because it is a medical retirement.         th e H illsb o ro u g h so c c e r
sponsible for crowd safety on the               By Terry Kirby
                                            Crime Correspondent                 Mr Wells said that he made the              disaster, in which 96 Liver­
day of the Hillsborough disaster is                                              decision after “careful consider­          pool supporters were crushed
to lake early retirement on medi­                                                ation” of an “uequivocal report”           to death, is to retire on medi-
cal grounds and will not face a dis­    charges against Mr Duckenfield                                                   ; cal grounds.
                                        and Superintendent Bernard               from the police staff surgeon.
ciplinary tribunal.                                                                 He understood the decision                 Chief Supt Duckenfield, 46,
  Richard Wells, Chief Constable        Murray, responsible for the police                                                  who has been suspended on
                                        control room.                            would anger bereaved relatives
of South Yorkshire, said in a state­                                             and friends because Mr Ducken-           ■ full pay since shortly after the
ment that he was in “no doubt”             The new move is likely to anger                                                  disaster on April 15, 1989, is
                                        the authority, already concerned         fieid had become the “symbolic             suffering from severe depres­
that Chief Superintendent David                                                  focus” of some of their anguish.
Duckenfield, said to be suffering       at previous similar retirements.                                                    sio n and p o st-tr a u m a tic
                                        Those have included Tony Lundy,           He added: “There has been                 stress.
from “severe depression and post-                                                 enough suffering already and I               His retirement, which will
traumatic stress disorder” was too       a senior Metropolitan Police de­
                                         tective subjected to allegations         can only hope that time will help         take e ffe ct from N ov 10,
ill to continue serving.                                                          to soften the terrible pain felt by       means that he will not face a ■
    Mr Duckenfield was suspended         concerning a supergrass, and a
                                         Kent uniformed . superintendent          the families of the Hillsborough          disciplinary hearing before
after being criticised in the Taylor                                              victims, and will help to heal Da­        th e P o lic e C o m p la in ts
report into the April 1989 disaster      alleged to have been involved in                                                   Authority. This might have
                                         detection rate rigging. _                vid Duckenfield as well.”
at Sheffield Wednesday’s stadium.                                                    Trevor Hicks, Hillsborough             recommended demotion or
Almost 100 people were killed               Yesterday, an authority spokes­                                              - dismissal.
                                         man said Mr Duckenfield’s retire­        Family Support Group chairman,             , Mr Richard W ells, Chief
when late supporters rushed into                                                  said the decision was understand-
 the FA Cup semi-final between           ment was a matter for South                                                        C onstable of South York- !
                                         Yorkshire Police. ■ ' .*;-t            ■ able but wrong. “This leaves a bad        shire, said in a statement that
 Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.                                                  taste in everybody’s mouth. Many         he had decided to retire Mr
    After an investigation,. South        The tribunal is due to sit in pri­
                                         vate in March. It will be chaired         of the families are trying to deal       Duckenfield after considering
 Yorkshire Police decided no offi­                                                 with the same sort of illness as Mr      a report from the police staff
 cers should be disciplined but it       by John Mewing, Chief Constable
                                                                                   Duckenfield. It is sad for Mr            surgeon. “This unequivocal
 was overruled by the Police Com­        of Derbyshire.                                                                  ' report left me in no doubt that
                                           Mr Duckenfield, 46 and with 28          Duckenfield as. . . he has not had
  plaints Authority, which ordered                                                 an opportunity to clear his name.”       Mr Duckenfield is too ill to
  that a tribunal be held to consider    years service, will retire on 10 No­                                               continue service as a police
                                                                                                                          officer.”
                                                                                                                              Mr Wells said he under­
                                                                                                                           stood th e d ecision would
                                                                                                                           anger relatives and friends of
                                                                                                                           th o se who died at H ills--
                                                                                                                         : brough. “David Duckenfield
                                                                                                                           has becom e the sym bolic
                                                                                                                           focus of much of the anguish
                                                                                                                           felt by those who were so hurt
                                                                                                                           by the tragedy but I must deal
                                                                                                                           with the man, not the symbol.
                                                                                                                           The fact is, David Ducken­
                                                                                                                           field is now too ill to serve.”
                                                                                                                              He added: “There has been
                                                                                                                           enough suffering already and
                                                                                                                           I can only hope that time will
                                                                                                                         . help to soften the terrible
                                                                                                                           pain felt by the families of the
                                                                                                                           H illsborough victim s, and
                                                                                                                           will help to heal David Duck­
                                                                                                                           enfield as w ell.”
                                                                                                                              Relatives of the Hillsbor­
                                                                                                                           ough victim s im m ediately
                                                                                                                           condemned the decision. Mr
                                                                                                                           Trevor Hicks, chairman of the -
                                                                                                                           Hillsborough Families Sup­
                                                                                                                           port Group, said he had to
                                                                                                                           accept both that Mr Ducken­
                                                                                                                           field’s sickness was genuine
                                                                                                                           and that his Chief Constable
                                                                           THE D-11^ TELEGRAP] ;                           had no option but to retire
                                                                                                                           him on medical grounds.
                                                                                                                              But he added: “We are left ;
                                                                       WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 30, 19911;                       with a feeling of injustice.”    ;
                                                                                                                              The d e c is io n w ill be
                                                                                                                           greeted with dismay by mem­
                                                                                                                           bers of the Police Complaints
                                                                                                                           A u th o r ity , w ho in 1988
                                                                                                                           expressed concern about the
                                                                                                                           “few cases” in which officers
                                                                                                                           facing disciplinary proceed­
                                                                                                                           ings resigned or were retired
                                                                                                                           on medical grounds.              ’
                              'io A K S H iR e                                                    WEDNESDAY OCTOBER 30 1991
 *   ,   jfc                       -                                     n                                      .....................................................................   ....   ...   ...




-A nger as Hillsborough chief is retired
                                   GRIEVING families of the Hillsborough
                                   d isa ste r victim s la st n ig h t reacted                     By ANDREW VINE                              whose service is retained for such bat 1 must deal with the man, not tr
                                                                                                                                               examinations.                              symbol.
                                   furiously to a decision that the policeman            He also expressed fears that disciplin­
                                   m charge will not face disciplinary                                                                           “This unequivocal report left me in no     “The fact is that David Duckenfield
                                   action.                                            ary charges would now be dropped                         doubt that Mr Duckenfield is too ill to now too ill to serve. A decision like this :
                                                                                      against Supt Bernard Murray, who was in                  continue service as a police officer. not lightly made, the more especially in
                                      Chief Supt David Duckenfield, 48, is to         charge of the ground control room on the
                                   be retired early because he is said, to be too                                                              Details of Ms condition cannot be case of such complexity and publ!
                                                                                      day of the disaster, and called for hearings            disclosed, as I am bound by the rules of interest.
                                   111 to face a disciplinary tribunal which          against him, scheduled for March, to be
                                   would have scrutinised his conduct as the                                                                  patient and doctor confidentiality.           “There has been enough sufferin
                                                                                      held immediately.                                                                                                                        ; w .
                                   commander of the police operation on the             Mr Hicks expressed fears last week that                  “But in general terms, he is described
                                   day 95 football fans died m Sheffield.'            Chief Supt Duckenfield would take early                 as suffering from severe depression and
                                      The decision to retire Mm was taken by          retirement on medical grounds. He has                    post traumatic stress disorder.                           ,,0v           ? t06H8|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,rs%
                                   the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire,            been on sick leave for four months and                                                             daughters in the disaster, acknowledge
                                                                                                                                             , . “I guite understand that the bereaved that
                                   Mr Richard Wells, who admitted that it             became eligible for early retirement after                                                               medical reasons made the earl
                                                                                                                                               relatives and friends will be angry at my retirement
                                   would cause anger among relatives who              his 90th day of illness..                               decision, since it rules out Mr Ducken- decision       inevitable but said that th
                                   have always held Chief Supt Duckenfield              Mr Wells took Ms decision yesterday                                                                        would damage the reputation c.
                                                                                                                                              field’s involvement in the planned disci­ South Yorkshire
                                   responsible for the tragedy,                       and telephoned Mr Hicks before making it                plinary tribunal for which South York­                        Police.
                                      News of the early retirement, which             public.                                                 shire Police have been preparing for some and He added: “We are absolutely shocke
                                   becomes effective on November 10, was.               A statement from Mr Wells said: "My                   months.                                         disappointed, but not surprised. Thi
                                   branded'"atoot’---- ’ " ' " ‘ ‘ “ ‘              ' decision was taken after careful consider­                                                         is a sad day all round. Many e
                                   the chairman c.                                                                                               “David Duckenfield has become the the families are still trying to Art! wit :
:6 r a iF SUPT DAVID DUCKENFIELD                                                      ation of the medical report from the police             symbolic focus of much of the anguish felt Continued on Page 3.
                                   Support Group,                                     staff surgeon, an independent physician                by those who were so hurt by the tragedy, Editorial Comment — Pam i0„




                                                                                           and plead that itois unfair for Mm to carry .
                                                                                           the.caft.oti Jn|.owte of that he won’t get a
                                                                                           fa lM e am f ifMr DttdcenfleM is not there
                                         the same illnesses as Mr Duckenfield, and         to give evidence. We now want disciplin­
                                        .this will only m a k e : those illnesses          ary action against Supt Murray to go
                                         worse.                ■    ' '                    ahead without delay.” .              '
                                           “Mr Duckenfield will not now have a                Chief.,Supt Duckenfield was not aviiif
                                         chance to clear his name, and will have           SSleJ ° ! ,c<?mment at his home in Totley,
                                         what happened hanging over him for the            Sheffield, but made it known via a police'
                                         rest of his life. There will also be a            sgotesman that he had nothing to say on
                                         suspicion of double standards by the
                                                                                             Supt Murray, who is head of the
                                           “This leaves a dreadfully sour taste in         Rawmarsh police division, also declined
                                         our mouths. Ninety-five piople have died,         to comment.       - .     . -     .
                                         and no-one has lost a day’s pay or been             The PCA ruled in -July th at Chief Supt
                                         disciplined for what happened. That is
                                         very difficult to accept for thosfe of us who                  uiuuuMO.Oiratuiisiuemiga
                                         have a personal involvement.                            -of complaints about their conduct
                                                                                          from families of the dead. Four other
                                        must face the fact thafttie reputation of         officers, two of them superintendents,
                                        his force has been.daftaied.                      were cleared of any blame.
                                          Mr Hicks also.,raided,..fears that Supt           Chief Supt Duckenfield, was promoted
                                        Bernard Murray’                  now face         to his rank just 19 days before .the
                                        disciplinary charges.                             disaster, on April 15.1988, He was
                                          He said: "I'm afraid h i inay turn round        suspended shortly afterwards and hag
                                                                                          never returned to active service.;                                   SUPT BERNARD MURRAY
THE TIM ES WEDNESDAY OCTOBER 30 1991


                                                                    Decision will renew
  Police chief                                                       discipline debate
  blamed over                                                                By Stewart T endler, crimecqrrespoNdent
                                                                    CHIEF Supt Djjckenfietd’s the. ^gension for 30 years'
                                                                    early retirement with a pen­ s e n te , the maximum. It will
                                                                    sion comes ata time when the be           linked.

  Hillsborough                                                      Home Office is considering'       Clificf of the discipline
                                                                    new guidance to chief con­ system say the present regula­
                                                                    stables on discipline proce­ tions ' allow officers facing
                                                                    dures for officers with medical discipline to escape examina­
                                                                    problems. The decision to tion by producing medical

  retires early    By P etek D avenport
                                                                    allow the South Yorkshire evidence. The need for change
                                                                    officer to leave will almost was raised after Scotland Yard
                                                                    certainly renew the debate agreed in 1988 to allow Detec­
                                                                    over the discipline procedure. tive Supt Tony Lundy to
                                                                       The average pension for an resign rather than face a
THE senior officer in chaise   was too ill to continue as a         officer of Mr Duckenfield’s discipline hearing.
of police at the Hillsborough  police officer. “I quite under­      rank in his circumstances         The Home Office has al­
football stadium when 95.      stand that the bereaved rel­         would be about £23,000 a ready issued some guidance
Liverpool supporters were      atives and friends will be           year. He could cash a quarter reminding forces that they can
                               angry at my decision, since it       of his entitlement, giving him review a pension if the officer
killed in a crush on the                                            a £86,000 lump sum and seems to have recovered. Now
terraces is to be retired from rules out Mr Duckenfield’s
                               involvement in the planned           £17,250 a year.                 new guidance is on the way
the force on health grounds, it                                        The pension is enhanced which calls for chief con­
was disclosed yesterday. He    disciplinary tribunal for which
                               South Yorkshire police have          because Mr Duckenfield is stables to seek a third medical
will not face a planned disci­                                      leaving the police through ill opinion beyond the force’s
plinary tribunal.              been preparing for some
                               months,” he said. “David             health. Although he has chief medical officer and the
   Chief Supt David Duck­                                           served 28 years he will draw officer’s GP.
enfield, aged 48, who was      Duckenfield has become the
criticised for his conduct on  symbolic focus of much of the
tie day .by the official reportanguish fell by those who were
into the disaster, was sus­    so hurt by the tragedy, but I
pended from his post when      must deal with the man, not
Lord Justice Taylor’s interim  the symbol.”
findings were published in         Mr Wells, who took over
August, 1989, four months      the force after the retirement
after the deaths.              of Peter Wright, the chief
   Relatives of the victims said
                               constable at the time of the
last night th a t’they felt yes­disaster, said that Mr Ducken­
 terday’s decision had cheated  field was another victim of the
 them of justice.               Hillsborough tragedy. He said
    Richard Wells, the new      that his decision was taken
 chief constable of South York­ after “careful consideration”
 shire police, said that Mr     of a report from the police
 Duckenfield was suffering      staff surgeon, an independent
 from depression and post-      physician.
 traumatic stress disorder and
                                   Philip Hammond, of the.
                                Hillsborough Families ■■-Sup*v-
                                port Group, whose son aged
                                14 was among those who died,
                                said: “We feel we have been
                                cheated of justice. David
                                Duckenfield was .the- man to
                                blame because he was in
                                overall charge. How he could
                                be suspended at first, and then
                                only go off sick when disci­
                                plinary charges were brought,
                                defeats me.”
                                   The chairman of the group,
                                Trevor Hicks, whose two
                                daughters died, _echoed. the
                                feeling of injustice, but said
  Duckenfield: will not face    the group had to accept that
   a disciplinary tribunal      Mr Duckenfield was ill.         ■
    Daily Mail* Wednesday, October 3 0 ,1i91


             Disaster
             officer
             to retire
            THE police officer
            a t the centre of the
            Hillsborough foot­
            ball disaster is to be
            retired.
              Chief Superintend­
            ent David Ducken-
            fieid, 46, who was to
            charge of crowd con-,
            trel, is suffering from
            ‘severe depression and
            post-traumatic stress
            disorder’.
              H ie •decision means             TODAY Wednesday October 30 1991
            he will not face disci­
            plinary charges which
            were being brought by
            the Police Complaints
            Authority — a move
            police accept will an­
            ger bereaved families.
            Nearly 100 fans died
            at the PA Cup semi­
            final between Liver­
            pool and Nottingham
            Forest in April, 1989.

                                                       THE police officer iii
                                                       charge of crowd control
                                                       at the Hillsborough
                                                       football disaster Is being
                                                       retired from the force.
                                                          The decision means
                                                       that Chief Superinten­
                                                       dent David Duckenfield,
THE SUN, Wednesday, October 30,1991                    46, will escape a disci­
                                                       plinary hearing.
                                                          He is said to be suf­
                                                       fering from “severe de­
        Police boss                                    pression and post-trau­
                                                       matic stress disorder”.
                                                          Mr Duckenfield has
        in Hiflsbro'                                   been suspended since a
                                                       public inquiry into the
                                                       1989 disaster in which1
        row quits                                      95 soccer, fans' lied.
                                                         P h ilip Hammond,
      t h e police officer in                          secretary of the Hills-
         charge of crowd con­                         'borough Families’ Sup­
         t r o l a t th e H i l l s ­                  port Group, said yester­
         borough       football                        day: “I feel we have
         disaster is to retire
         through illness.  '                           been cfceatei of justice.”
              , S u p e r in te n d e n t
        David Duckenfield, 46,
       has “severe depression
       and    post-traumatic
       stress disorder,” South
       Yorkshire police said
       yesterday.
     The move rules out d is­
       ciplinary        charges
       w h i c h w e r e b e in g
       brought against him by
       the Police Complaints
       Authority.
     Ninety-five fans w ere
       killed.
3A«LVk^esweciiistmt^tMfHfiC 3#e




      ‘cheated’
  HILLSBOROUGH families last night claimed they
  had been cheated of Justice after it w as revealed
  the police chief Mamed for "the tragedy is to retire
  on n i l pension.                                 -
      “If those in authority think this is going to go
  away they are wrong,
  said Phil Hammond, sec­
  retary o f the disaster
  support group.
    Chief Superintendent
  David Duckenfield, who
  is leaving the force on
  medical grounds with an
  estimated £24,000-a-year
  p e n sio n , w ill   no
  longer face disciplinary
  proceedings.                   DUCKENFIELD: Row
                               year-old son in the disas­
        Decision               ter in 1989.
     Last week the Daily         South Yorkshire Chief
  E xpress ex clu siv ely      Constable Richard Wells
  revealed the father-or-      said 46-year-old Mr
  two could seek retire­       Duckenfield’s decision to
  ment after submitting        retire on November 10
  four su ccessive sick        had been made on inde­
  notes.                       pendent medical advice.
     He w as to have             The long-serving offi­
  appeared before a tribu­     cer, who was in charge of
  nal to explain his role in   crowd control, was suf­
  Britain’s worst soccer       fering from depression
  disaster, which claimed      and acute stress.
  95 lives.                      Mr Duckenfield has
   ' “We have been cheated     been suspended on his
  of justice.” said Mr Ham­    annual salary of £34,000
  mond, who lost his 14-       for two years.
  STORMAS

                       B y JIM OLDFIELD            ''    . ,
 A STORM erupted'yesterday after the police
 chief atlie centre ofthe Hillsborough soccer
 disasterquiton healthgrounds - and avoided
 disciplinary action.                        .     .      1
  , Doctors Say Chief Supt David Duckenfleld is suf­
 fering from severe depression and post-traumatic
 strew disorder. But angry relatives of the 95 victims
 c la im t h e y hav e been
  “cheated of justice” by a
 loophole in the system,
    Philip Hammond, sec­
 retary of the Hillsborough
 Families Support group,
 said: “ J u stic e has n ot
 been done. But we won’t
 let what happened be for­
 gotten.”
          Crushed
    He hit out after it was
 announced Mr Duckeii-
 field will not have to face           STRESS: Duckenfield
 an internal tribunal. •             Wells said yesterday: “He
   Mr Duckenfield was in             is now too ill to serve.”
charge at Sheffield                  ■. Mr Hammond, who lost
W ednesday’s sta dium               -'M» 14-year-old son Philip
when 95 Liverpool fans               in the disaster, said the
were crushed to death at             loophole left him “in de-
the start of an PA Cup               spair”.
se m i - f i n a l w it h N o t ­       He added: “ How Mr
tingham Forest in 1989.              Duckenfield could be su­
   In the Hillsborough In­           spended a t first and then
quiry report, Lord Justice           only go off sick when dis­
Taylor criticised his han­           cip lin a ry ch arges were
dling of the operation and          brought defeats m e.”
accused him of “freezing"
as the tragedy unfolded.
   F a t h e r - o f - t w o Mr
DuckenfJeld, 45, was then
suspended on full pay.
   He went sick in July
and S o u t h Yor ksh ir e
Chief Constable Richard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   m"
          **■




                                                                                       THE GUARDIAN
                                                                              Wednesday October 30 1991




                                                                 ity in July, but delayed because     disorder,” he said. Mr Wells,        the authority had no comment           Lord Justice Taylor's report
                                                                 of his 111health.                    who told the support group pri­      on Mr D uckenfield’s case,           of August 4,1989, which said he
                                                                    The chairman of the Hillsbor­     vately of his decision, said mat     which was a matter for South         became paralysed and alleged
                                      HE POLICE officer in ough Families Support Group,               he understood their anger but        Yorkshire police.                    that he told untruths about Liv­


                                 T    charge of crowd control Trevojr Iflcks, who lost two
                                      at Hfflstorough when 95 daughters in the disaster of
                                      Liverpool fans were April 15,1989, said the decision
                                                                 to retire Mr Duckenfield, by
                                      crushed to death is to be retired
                             early because of persistent de­ South Yorkshire’s Chief Con­
                             pression and mental stress. . stable, R ichard Wells, was
                                                                                                      could not avoid the reality that
                                                                                                      Mr Duckenfleld was no longer
                                                                                                      able to perform his duties. ' :
                                                                                                         “David Duckenfleld has be­
                                                                                                      come the symbolic focus of
                                                                                                      much of the anguish felt by
                                                                                                                                            . Mrf Hicks, who said action
                                                                                                                                           should be taken to close the
                                                                                                                                           “loophole of Illness” for avoid­
                                                                                                                                           ing disciplinary proceedings, is
                                                                                                                                           not supported by all the Hills­
                                                                                                                                           borough victims’ families.
                                                                                                                                                                                erpool supporters trying to
                                                                                                                                                                                rush the ground, made him the
                                                                                                                                                                                chief target of the families. He
                                                                                                                                                                                was also one of several senior
                                                                                                                                                                                officers whose evidence at the
                                                                                                                                                                                inquiry was called “defensive
                               Chief Superintendent David understandable but wrong. -                 those who were so hurt by the           The Superintendents* Associ­      and evasive” by the judge.
                             Duckenfield, aged 46, has been         “This leaves a bad taste in ev­   tragedy, but I must deal with        ation said last week that his call      A file on Mr Duckenfield was
                             suspended for more than two erybody’s mouth. It’s a sad day              the man, not the symbol. The         for disciplinary action to go        sent to the Director of Public
                             y ears, sin ce L ord Ju stic e all round. Many of the families.          fact is, David Duckenfield is        ahead without Mr Duckenfield         Prosecutions who ruled last
                             Taylor’s report on the disaster are trying to deal with the same         now too ill to serve.                if necessary was like “a pack of     summer that no criminal action -
                             accused him of “freezing” at sort of illness as Mr Ducken­                ' “There has been enough suf­       dogs chasing a wounded fox”.         should be taken.
                             the critical moment and of tell­ field and this will only serve to       fering already and I only hope          Mr Duckenfield was a high            The order for disciplinary
                             ing untruths in the immediate compound that," he said.                   that time will help to soften the    flier; in the South Yorkshire        proceedings followed shortly
                             aftermath.                             Mr Wells acted after a medi­      terrible pain felt by the families   force who was promoted to            afterwards.
                               News of his departure on No­ cal briefing from the South               of the Hillsborough victims,         command Sheffield F Division,           A South Yorkshire police
                             vember 10 angered victims' rel­ Yorkshire forces’ staff surgeon.         and will help to heal David          including Sheffield Wednes­          spokesman said yesterday that
                             atives who have increasingly           “This unequivocal report left     Duckenfield as well.”                day’s H illsborough ground           Mr Duckenfteld, who is mar­
                             concentrated their hopes on dis­ me in no doubt that Mr Ducken­             The Police Complaints Au­         three weeks before the FA Cup        ried, had nothing to say to the
                             ciplinary action against Mr field is too 11 to continue                  thority has expressed concern        semi-final between Liverpool         media and had asked that lie
                             Duckenfield.                         service as a police officer. In     in the past about the question       and Nottingham Forest.               should not be disturbed at Ms
                                His retirement automatically general terms he is described as         of early retirement and avoid­          He had no previous experi­        Sheffield home as “this would
David Duckenfield:           ends proceedings ordered by suffering from severe depres­                ing disciplinary action. But a       ence of controlling large foot­      be likely to exacerbate his
‘suffering severedepression’ the Police Complaints Author­ sion and post-traumatic stress             spokesman said yesterday that        ball fixtures.                       illness”.
            .THE INDEPENDENT

            Wednesday 30 October 1991                                                                                       Hillsborough
                                                                                                                            police chief
                                                                                                                             is allowed
Top Hillsborough officer                                                                                                      to retire
retires through ill-health                                 ....       ■          vember tiiifk
                                                                                           with an
                                                                                                nn increased pension
                                                                                                              JVHSiftn
                                                                                                                                 By Nigel Banyan
                                                                                                                            THE police officer in charge
                                                                                                                             of crowd control on the day of
THE SENIOR police officer re­                   By Terry Kirby                   because it is a medical retirement.         th e H illsb o r o u g h s o c c e r
sponsible for crowd safety on the                                                 Mr Wells said that he made the             disaster, in which 96 Liver­
day of lie Hillsborough disaster is         Crime Correspondent
                                                                                  decision after “careful consider­          pool supporters were crushed
to "take early retirement on medi­                                                ation” of an “uequivocal report”           to death, is to retire on medi-
cal grounds and will not face a dis­    charges against Mr Duckenfield
                                        and Superintendent Bernard                from the police staff surgeon.             cal grounds.
ciplinary tribunal.                                                                  He understood the decision             . Chief Supt Duckenfield, 46,
   Richard Weils, Chief Constable       Murray, responsible for the police                                                   who has been suspended on
                                        control room.                             would anger bereaved relatives
of South Yorkshire, said in a state­                                              and friends because Mr Ducken­             full pay since shortly after the
ment that he was in “no doubt”             The new move is likely to anger                                                   disaster on April 15, 1989, is
                                        the authority, already concerned          field had become the “symbolic             suffering from severe depres­
that Chief Superintendent David                                                   focus” of some of their anguish.
Duckenfield, said to be suffering       at previous similar retirements.                                                     s io n and p o st-tr a u m a tic
                                        Those have included Tony Lundy,            He added: “There has been                 stress.
from “severe depression and post-                                                  enough suffering already and I               His retirem ent, which will
traumatic stress disorder” was too       a senior Metropolitan Police de­
                                         tective subjected to allegations          can only hope that time will help         take e ffe c t from Nov 10,
ill to continue serving.                                                           to soften the terrible pain felt by       means that he will not face a
    Mr Duckenfleld was suspended         concerning a supergrass, and a
                                         Kent uniformed superintendent             the families of the Hillsborough          disciplinary hearing before
after being criticised in the Taylor                                               victims, and will help to heal Da­        th e P o lic e C om p la in ts
report into the April 1989 disaster      alleged to have been involved in                                                    Authority. This might have
                                         detection rate rigging.                   vid Duckenfield as well.”
at Sheffield Wednesday’s stadium.                                                     Trevor Hicks, Hillsborough             recommended demotion or
 Almost 100 people were killed              Yesterday, an authority spokes­                                                  dismissal.
                                         man said Mr Duckenfield’s retire­         Family Support Group chairman,             ' Mr Richard Wells, Chief
 when late supporters rushed into                                                  said the decision was understand-
 the FA Cup semi-final between            ment was a matter for South                                                        C onstable of South York­
                                          Yorkshire Police.                      ' able but wrong. “This leaves a bad        shire, said in a statement that
 Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.                                                   taste in everybody’s mouth. Many         he had decided to retire Mr
    After an investigation,. South          The tribunal is due to lit in pri­
                                          vate in March. It will be chaired         of the families are trying to deal       Duckenfield after considering
 Yorkshire Police decided no offi­                                                  with the same sort of illness as Mr'     a report from the police staff
 cers should be disciplined but it        by John Newing, Chief Constable
                                                                                    Duckenfleld. It is sad for Mr            surgeon. “This unequivocal
 was overruled by the Police Com­         of Derbyshire.                                                                   . report left me in no doubt that
                                            Mr Duckenfield, 46 and with 28          Duckenfleld as. . . he has not had
 plaints Authority, which ordered                                                   an opportunity to clear his name.”       Mr Duckenfield is too ill to
  that a tribunal be held to consider     years service, will retire on 10 No­                                               continue service as a police
                                                                                                                            officer.”
                                                                                                                                Mr Wells said he under­
                                                                                                                             stood the decision would
                                                                                                                             anger relatives and friends of
                                                                                                                             th o se who died at H ills-
                                                                                                                             brough. “David Duckenfield
                                                                                                                             has becom e the sym bolic
                                                                                                                             focus of much of the anguish
                                                                                                                             felt by those who were so hurt
                                                                                                                             by the tragedy but I must deal
                                                                                                                             with the man, not the symbol.
                                                                                                                             The fact is, David Ducken­
                                                                                                                             field is now too ill to serve.”
                                                                                                                                He added: “There has been
                                                                                                                             enough suffering already and
                                                                                                                             I can only hope that time will
                                                                                                                           . help to soften the terrible
                                                                                                                             pain felt by the families of the
                                                                                                                             Hillsborough victim s, and
                                                                                                                             will help to heal David Duck-
                                                                                                                           j enfield as well.”
                                                                                                                           ! Relatives of the Hillsbor­
                                                                                                                             ough victim s im m ediately
                                                                                                                             condemned the decision. Mr
                                                                                                                             Trevor Hicks, chairman of the
                                                                                                                             Hillsborough Families Sup­
                                                                                                                             port Group, said he had to
                                                                                                                             accept both that Mr Ducken­
                                                                                                                             field’s sickness was genuine
                                                                            THE D              TELEGRAP]:;                   and that his Chief Constable
                                                                                                                             had no option but to retire
                                                                                                                             him on medical grounds.
                                                                                                                                But he added: “We are left :
                                                                          WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 30, 139i:                       with a feeling of injustice. ” ' j
                                                                                                                                T he d e c is io n w ill be
                                                                                                                             greeted with dismay by mem­
                                                                                                                             bers of the Police Complaints
                                                                                                                             A u th o rity , w ho in 1988
                                                                                                                             expressed concern about the
                                                                                                                             “few cases” in which officers
                                                                                                                             facing disciplinary proceed­
                                                                                                                             ings resigned or were retired
                                                                                                                             on Hied ical ground s.           '
PCA
POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY




HIS HONOUR JUDGE FRANCIS PETRE
Chairman




        G M M o o r e E s q BA
        A s s i s t a n t C h ie f C o n sta b le
        D i s c i p l i n e and C o m p la in ts
        S o u th Y o r k sh ir e P o l i c e
        P o l ic e H ead q u arters
        S n ig H i l l
        SHEFFIELD
        S3 8LY                                                                           18 D e c e m b e r 1 9 9 1




        D e a r Mr M o o r e
    »
        T h a n k y o u f o r y o u r l e t t e r o f D e c e m b e r 12 l a s t .        In i t you r e q u e s t
        th e A u th o r ity t o c o n s id e r e x e r c is in g our pow ers under S e c tio n
        9 3 ( 7 ) o f t h e P o l i c e and C r im in a l E v id e n c e A c t 1984 t o d e c i d e on
        th e m e r it s o f th e c a s e a s t o w h eth er o r n o t p r o c e e d in g s a g a in s t
        S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M urray s h o u l d b e h a l t e d .           I presum e t h a t you r
        r e f e r e n c e t o S e c t i o n 9 3 ( 7 ) s h o u ld r e a d S e c t i o n 9 3 ( 6 ) and t h a t you
        a r e s e e k i n g l e a v e o f t h e A u t h o r i t y u n d e r t h a t s u b s e c t i o n , on
        b e h a l f o f t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r , " n o t t o p r o c e e d w it h c h a r g e s w h ich
        . . . s u b s e c t i o n ( 5 ) a b o v e w o u l d o t h e r w i s e o b l i g e h im t o p r o c e e d " .
        Y ou g i v e y o u r r e a s o n s f o r m a k i n g t h i s r e q u e s t i n p a r a g r a p h 2 o f
        y o u r l e t t e r c o g e n t l y and c l e a r l y .       I f you c o n fir m t h a t t h i s i s
        w h a t y o u w is h u s t o c o n s i d e r we w i l l , o f c o u r s e , d e a l w i t h y o u r
        r e q u e s t w it h c a r e and a s a m a t t e r o f u r g e n c y and w i l l g i v e due
        w e ig h t t o a l l t h e p o i n t s w h ich you s o h e l p f u l l y r a i s e .                     It
        c e r t a i n l y r a i s e s m a t t e r s w h ich r e q u ir e s e r i o u s a t t e n t i o n .

        We a r e c o n s c i o u s o f t h e f a c t t h a t t i m e i s p a s s i n g a n d t h a t t h e
        d a t e f o r t h e h e a r i n g a p p r o a c h e s a n d , a s y e t , a s we u n d e r s t a n d i t ,
        t h e c h a r g e s and t h e s t a t e m e n t s h a v e n o t b een s e r v e d .
W h a te v e r d e c i s i o n we    r e a c h w ith reg a r d t o p r o c e e d in g s w ith th e
charges, i t is v it a l             t h a t i t b e m ade w i t h i n t h e n e x t f e w d a y s .
I w o u ld , t h e r e f o r e ,    b e o b l i g e d i f we c o u l d r e c e i v e y o u r r e p l y
b e f o r e C h r istm a s, s o      t h a t we c a n m ake o u r d e c i s i o n a t an e a r l y
d a te.

                                         Y ours s i n c e r e l y




                                           H IS HONOUR
                                      JUDGE FRANCIS PETRE
                                                           WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
From: C J R ROCHE BA MSc
                                                           h ea d q u a r ter s
      ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                           PO Box 52, Lloyd House
      (Inspectorate)
                                                           Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                           Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                           Telephone:




   G Moore Esq BA
   Assistant Chief Constable
   South Yorkshire Police                                  CJRR/PAB
   Police Headquarters
   Snig Hill                                                20 December 1991
   SHEFFIELD
   S3 SLY




    Thank you for your letter of 12 December 1991. On further consideration
    and after discussing the matter with various people involved in the
    initial enquiry, I feel that these further matters would be best dealt
    with by someone who has already been involved with the Hillsborough
    disaster. To that end, Detective Chief Superintendent Foster has already
    contacted Superintendent Fell and I understand is making arrangements to
    meet the Counsel who is conducting the tribunal.

    I understand these new enquiries should not take longer than a few days
    and if there are any problems, no doubt we can discuss the matter
    further.

    Yours sincerely




    Assistant Chief Constc
    (Inspectorate)




                 3 1 iicC 1391
j 6t>.C /© to.              Hn-lU. l/lMO.              4 u c t \loto         &M1.C. Vivu>.                    diaoL&te.           QuiuzMd &.i                                Acfi*tfjf ioi            oW*2
   , A.1.9.                  yCixi.                       < £ jl -             QM*.                          olofa ^J^IaLL                                                  Co*i\loL. <cbn.           fcVertIa.
  •A <*»                                                                                                                           fo fsUfo*!.              (|i4Cw5.
                                                       PC Bustoo arrlvea
                                                       la Lappings Lane                                      Requests froa
                                                       with Laod Rover.
                                                       VIDEO T.B.2
                                                                                                   IMo       Supt HARSUALL
                                                                                                             for gates to
                                                                                                             be opened.



                                                                                                             EVIDENCEt
                                                                                                   2-^7
                                                                                                               All In control
                                                                                                               box.
                                                        Cate *C* opens
                                                        flrat tlae.         Fan ejected
                                                                            through gate 'C'                                                                                Supt Murray speaks
                                                        VIDEO T.B.2                                ZJA                                                                      to Insp Sewell
                                                                                                                                                                            by phone re
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Guest attempts to
                                                                                                                                                                            deployment of         contact Police
                                                                                                                                                                            5 serials of nea.
                            Caaera paaa to tba * Oate 'C' cloaad                                                                                                            Sewell having
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Control having
                            loft and tben *o   | Duckenfleld                                                 Deaand received
                                                                                                                                                                            heard request on
                                                                                                                                                                                                  seen Gate ’C 1 open
                            the rl|bt            thinka *Thata it'
                                                                                                   2JA       froa Supt MARSHALI
                                                                                                             that gates be                                                  air.
                                                 VIDEO T.B.2
                                                                                                             opened 'Life or

                                                                                                             DUCKENFIELD
                                                                                                             considers it.                                                                        Inspector Sewell
                                                                                                   25 o                                                                                           deploys serials
                                                                                                             The order la then                                                                    froa Gymnasium
                                                                                                             given.
                                                                                               i
                                                                           i Insp.White appears              EVIDENCE -                                                     Sgt. Goddard or
                                                                            on screen and
                                                                                                                                                                            Supt. Murray give
     T.«aa    i n balnf                            i
                                                                            speaks to Sgt.
                                                                            Crawford
                                                                                                   2-5‘          GODDARD
                                                                                                                 HCROBBIE                                                   the order to
                            .
                                                                                                                 BICHARD                                                    open the gates
     •j u m u b c .4 on

     S.V.r.C.      ttanoy                               Gate 'C' opeoa
                                                                                     ■
                                                        Second tiae.
     t | t t w by D.J.                                                                             2.52.
                                                        VIDEO T.B.2

                                                                            Insp* White leaves
                                                       Insp Bennett         concourse thro'
                                                       seen on turnstile    Gate 'C*.
                                                       roof                                        2.53                           PC BUXTON requests
                                                                                                                                  delay m kick off.
                                                                                                                                                       Sgt* HIGGINS
                                                                                                                                                       requests that
                                                        Pull flow tONarda                                                         refuses because      Gate 'A' be opened
     U n r p w l t*u                                    Sate 'C' then                                                             teaas have taken
     U W a to pitch.                                                                                                                                   Approval given        Sgt Goddard
      ■ a n iur i.
                                                        caaera pans to
                                                        'A' Gate area.
                                                                                                   2.5k                           to pitch
                                                                                                                                                       by GODDARD.           refuses PC Buxtons
                                                        VIDEO T.B.2                                                                                                          request
                                                                                                                                  EVIDENCE-GODDARD     HIGGINS thinks
                                                                                                                                                       approval froa
                                                       Insp Bennett seen                                                                               MARSHALL.
                                                                                                                                                                            Sgt Goddard
                                                       using radio on
                                                       turnstile roof
                                                                                                   2.55                                                After altercation    approves Sergeant
                                                                                                                                                       with Gate Han        Higgins' request
                                                                                                                                                       the gate ia opened
                                                   I
                                                   i                                                                                                   EVIDENCEt
                                                                                                   2.56
                                                                                                                                                          HIGGINS
                                                   i                                                                                                      GODDABD
                                                   i
                                                   j



 i
      FU> ROW
      onto track.           . Caaera pans froa
                            I
                                                   !   --------
                                                         Gate 'A' now
                                                   i .open.
                                                                            Gate 'C* Closes
                                                                                                   Z5j


                              Hop to L/Lafi*                                                        2 .58
      UMt MW *.             I Terrace area         |     VIDEO T.B.2                                                                                                        Chief Inspector
                                                                                                                                                                            HcRobbie sent to
                                                                                                                                                                            pitch
      kick   «r»                C/lcxap McRobble
          J.SJ.M                loaves  Coatrol                             i Gate *C' opens
                                Box.
      t u n mw i-

                                                                                                                                                            •
                                VIDEO T.B.1

 h                              C/losp KcRobbie
                                BOH oo pitch.

                                VIDEO T.B.1
                                                                                           •        3 .00.
PCA
POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY


The independent M y established by Act ofParliarHent
to oversee public complaints against jvlict officers.                           NEW S RELEASE




                                                                                                     13 January, 1992



                                                        HILL8BOROP9K gTftPTPM TRAGEDY



              After very careful consideration, the Police Complaints Authority

              have decided that disciplinary charges regarding police operations

              at      Hillsborough                  Football     Stadium      on    15       April   1989   against   a

              Superintendent should be withdrawn.



              The Authority had directed that charges be preferred against both

              the superintendent and his superior officer a Chief Superintendent.
              The retirement of the Chief Superintendent on medical grounds »eans

              that what is, in effect, a joint allegation of neglect of duty

               cannot be fairly heard in the absence of the more senior officer.



               Full details of the Authority’s decision are contained in the

               attached statement.




                                       Further information: Richard M Offer, Press Officer
                           MLLSBOROPGH BT*PHIK fBHSBOf'




charges       of     neglect   of   duty     be   preferred      against     a    Chief




                                                                     :t o p u r s u e t h e




d is c r e tio n ,   in accordance w i t h   Section 9 3 ( 6 )   of the* Police       and,
       13~JAN-1932 ,12=83       FROM    POLICE COMPLAINTS                TO                               P. 04




          5   .    The Authority do not. resils frost their original decision to
          direct that charges .against both officers be heard and considered

          by a disciplinary tribunal*                   We are satisfied that
Wfi.                                to support such charges*             The subsequent retireaent

          of the Chief Superintendent,' on medical grounds has,                                    however,

          substantially altered the; position.



          S.       The charges against the Chief Superintendent covered a n u m b er

          of different matters.                   The Authority directed that




                                                 rt which was opened in order to avert ianplF

          to supporters outside the ground.                                                 ..     ,...            :


              7,   We have made our decision to accede to the South ^Yorkshire

              Police reguests for the following reasons;


                    a.     the background to the alleged failure to control those

                    entering through Gate *Cf involved, i n t e r a l i a ,                      preliminary


                                                             sees fairly at a disciplinary hearing

                    in the          absence      of    the     officer    in    charge      of    the     whole

                    operation;


                                                                         fo r   controlling s p e c t a t o r s
                    b,      the _ _ _ _ _ _
                    e n te r in g     G a te     *c*    d id     not     lie      d ir e c tly    w ith     th e

                    s u p e r in te n d e n tj
13-JAN-1992      12:03        FROM POLICE COMPLAINTS                    TO                                            \0 5




          c.       the
          cannot be a d e q u a t e l y assessed in t h e absence of h i s                                  s u p e rio r

          officer at the t r i b u n a l ?


           #»       what is, in effect




           e,       the s u p e r i n t e n d e n t *s ability to put f o r w a r d h i s                             case

           fully         in     th e   a b sen ce     of    h is    s u p e r io r      o ffic e r         w o u ld     toe

           im p a ir e d ;     and



           f .       it w o u l d      he    an     injustice- t o          tHe Superinttndg^gr

                                                                                        iSSSSgig-




    g.      m     r e a c h i n g what w e h a v e f o u n d t o b e a v e r y d i f f i c u l t d e c i s i o n

    we h a v e t a k e n i n t o a c c o u n t t h e i n t e r e s t s a n d f e e l i n g s o f t h o s e w ho
    fc a v e m ad e c o m p l a i n t s     about th e      p o lic e   co n d u ct,            th e   H ills b o r o u g h

    F a m i l i e s S u p p o r t G r o u p , a l l t h o s e w ho h a v e s u f f e r e d b e r e a v e m e n t a s

    t h e r e s u l t o f t h e t r a g i c e v e n t s and t h e p u b l ic i n t e r e s t oh t h e on e

    h a n d a n d , o n t h e other, j u s t i c e t o         the Superintendent
                                •which w o u l d      r e s u lt   fr o m      c o n tin u in g        th e    p rocess

     a g a i n s t h im a l o n e i n t h e a b s e n c e of h i s          s u p e r io r o f f i c e r .
13-JAN-1992       12:04   FROM    POLICE COMPLAINTS                     TO                           P. 06




  9,         T h e A u t h o r i t y h a v e therefore granted t h e            leave s o u g h t by t h e
  S o u th    Yorkshire Police not to proceed with the charge which we
  d ir e c te d    a g a in s t th e   S u p e r in te n d e n t,




                                        "■7   \ , •.



                                                                    •   .....
. BRIGADIER 1L POWNALL, OBE
Deputy Chairman




  IN CONFIDENCE



  G Moore, Esq                                                        Your Ref: ACC(D<5cC)C3D
  Assistant Chief Constable
  South Yorkshire Police                                              Our Ref: COM 91/131/39
  Snig Hill
  SHEFFIELD                                                                         y   May, 1991
  S3 9LY




                                  HILLSBOROUGH
                                       15 APRIL. I f 89

                                  giip|eted a carefni:,and | i

  tragedy on 15 April, 1989. 'W l I i l T l M s i l i r i d Mr Anderson's memoranda, submitted"to*
  us in accordance with the provisions of Section 90(5) of th e Police and Criminal
       nee A ct|JfS% , and h i s j ^ t e r ^ j p f                                         -
  , , > s a l s ''l i r ^ |r e l ^ ^ l 2 ^ h a f / c & g e s
  subject of complaint and your reasons for these proposals. However, as I told Mr
  Anderson on the telephone, the Authority were disappointed th at he did not explain
  your reasons more fully. We have also taken into account the views expressed by Mr
  Sharp, the investigating officer.

 2. Having considered the evidence relating to the complaints against Police Constable
 Smith, Police Constable Illingworth,, ^Superintendent Marshall or Superintendent Green­
 wood we have concluded th a t the "evidence in resgect of th ese            - - ^ v*
 jl» |% d i ^ j f $ q r ; j $ g g ! ........................... -

 3., ...Jtfe have
 Superintendent* D u ck en field and Superintendent Murray which allege th at they were in
                                                               Ig ^ i m c b i n s o u r vconcJ usi
-w e have borne m mind th e decisions o f the Director of PuSlic Prosecutions as _
 factor amongst others. As you are aware we do not accept that culpable misfeasance
 and neglect of duty are "coterminous nor th at, even if they were, we w ould Be bound <as
 far as discipline Is concerned) by the decision of the Director not to bring criminal
 prosecutions. We have, throughout, borne In mind the definition of n eg lect/o f l u ty set
 out in paragraph k of Schedule 1 of The Police ■ (Discipline) Regiilfie«i»: ■ 1985.
                                                                                                         - ?   -|
                  ^^ll^sppsr-
itssiiSi

                                 -gaafa«g*-‘         m:
       H.  The Incident whicS gave rise to the tragedy a t the Hillsborough ;|^ d i u m on 15
      April, 1989 would not have occurred had sensible and simple steps been taken to secure
      the safety of spectators in Pens 3 and H on the L e p p in g s Lane Terraces. It is clear
      th at the basic cause of the disaster was overcrowding in these f>ens.          We have
      concentrated on this m atter.

       5. In reaching our decisions we have taken into account various m atters which can be
       advanced as arguments for taking no disciplinary action on the grounds th at to take
       such action would be unfair and/or oppressive.. Amongst such m atters we refer briefly
       to the following;

                   a. the passage of time since 15 April, 1989;                              -, -

               **'' b. the various consequences arising from the earlier hearings
                   before Lord Justice Taylor and the Coroner;

                   c. the effect of the extensive media^,.coverage of the incident
                   itself, m atters associated with it and fhe hearings referred to in
                   b. above;

                   d T ^ th e $ # c e p t ! o n t h a t if any officer is charged h e may’*'be
                   as a scapegoat carrying the blame for the acts or omissions of
                   oth ers;

                       ,the recent promotion of Chief S u p e rin te n d e n t uue& enfie! d a n d * *
                    the fact that he 'Wotr over the m atch arrangem ents devised by
                    soroeope , else and his belief t h a t th e


                    f.       the anguish which both Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
                                    ' !pt Murray must hav ^ j?^ ^ p ced^as tf
                                   Unexpected events onl(i J ,'Xpra»

                    g. the effect that disciplinary action against any officer would
                    have on the morale and well-being of the South          Yorkshire
                    Police.              -                   "

       6. Despite these factors it cannot be denied that the police, under the control of Chief
       Superindent D uckenfield, assisted by Superintendent Murray, were d e fact%|f%,€ontr©J of
       t h e ground at the relevant time and had responsibility for the safety of the spectators,
       fa •th e . ©pi§igp#t:fI :  #      !     »      §        f.
       charges on the following grounds!
                         .                                             . ...    ..               .
                    a.' Chief Superintendent D u c k e n fie ld , as the officer in overall
                    command,... Jailed _to address himself properly to., th e
                    involvet:* f ^ 1and the plans for, crowd control even before?
                    spectators arrived;

                    b. failed to monitor the numbers of spectators entering Pens 3
                    and 4;
                                                                               '
                        c. failed to take any action when Pens 3 and 4 became obviously
                        overcrowded}             -   •
                        d. authorised G ate 'C' to be opened and, to g e th e r with
                        Superintendent Murray, failed to take any steps to control the
                        movement o l those who entered the ground through this gate a t a
                        time when it was, or should have been, clear to both of them
                        that Pens 3 and I were, or were likely to become, overcrowded.
                                                                               *



  ? In the'view o! this Authority responsibility for the safety of those in Pens 3 and k
  an d blame for overcrowding in those pens should rest with those in the Police Control
  Box from which the pens could be observed, the deployment of police manpower cmM
  be directed and the lle tfs io n                                                           its attendant re s p o n s iM P
  i t y fo r c o ntrolling th o se who e n te r e d th ro u g h i t        i r a T A u th o r ity a r e conscious of th e
  c o m p le x c irc u m sta n c e s w hich may h a v e c o n tr ib u te d to t h e tr a g e d y , b u t w e do n o t
  a c c e n t t h a t th e f a c t t h a t th e r e may b e others "who*are also in so m e..^a ^lam ew o rth y ,
  should c a u se us to d e c id e a g a in s t th e r e c o m m e n d a tio n o f charges u n d e r ^ f f e R e g u la tio n s
  if a s h e re , th e evidence is a v a ila b le t o su p p o rt su c h c h a r g e s . Y ou will appreciate th e
  A u th o r ity a re concerned solely w ith th e e v id e n c e in r e s p e c t o f th e m a t t e r s w hich a re
  th e s u b je c t o f c o m p lain t a n d n o t w ith m itig a tio n w h ic h w ould o n ly become relevant if a
               o f discipline were to be proved against an officer who is the subject oi<§s#
   c h a rg e .

• ^ t T F < / t h a l W f c i t h o r i t y J-                     ...............      "en d u n d e r Section'
                                                                                       fl o w i n g c h a rg e s be
    9 3 ( 1 ) 0 { th e Police an<j C rim in a l E v id e n c e Act 1989 m a t t f e lollowinj
   b r o u g h F a g a in s t C hief S u p e rin te n d e n t D u c k e n fie ld
                                                                   ■■     .
                                                               fo..pragra« .. . ..          .. .
                         the ■pSSI^ntD isclpn^nP leguIaS ons 1985;iirt th a t I k failed to
                         acquaint h im s e lf w ith t h e p lan n in g a n d problems related ^to .the
                    .                                            -   -   * -       ■   -   -   •   -




                         ii.  N e g le c t o f D uty - c o n tr a r y to p a ra g r a p h 4(a) o f S c h e d u le 1 o f
                         th e "Police (D iscip lin e) R e g u la tio n s 1985 in t h a t h e fa ile d to
                         m onitor crow d n u m b ers in P e n s 3 and U.

                         iii. Ne g le c t o f D uty - c o n tr a r y to p a ra g ra p h 4(a) o f S chedule 1
                         o f the P o lice (D iscipline) R e g u la tio n s 1985 in t h a t h e fa ile d to
                         a c t when Pens 3 and 4 w e re obviously o v e rc r o w d e d .

                         fife- -N e g le c t -Of D i n . - J l l p i i s J f
                                   Polite (Discipline; 'Regulations

                         Gate
    9 .     w e h a v e g i v e n " s e p a rlf f^ tte n tio n ' to t K f ^ f r e e o f re sp w isiE fh ty attributable to
    S u p e rin d e n t M urray. We c o n c lu d e d t h a t in view o f C h ie f S u p e r in te n d e n t D u ck en field s
    v e r y r e c e n t a p p o in tm en t and p r o m o tio n t o h is p o sitio n a s D ivisional C o m m an d e r,
    S u p e rin te n d e n t M urray h ad a s p e c ia l re s p o n s ib ility to a s s is t a n d a d v ise C h ie f S u p er­
    i n te n d e n t D uckenfield p a r tic u la r ly in v iew o f S u p e r in te n d e n t M u rra y 's g r e a t e r e x p e r ­
    ie n c e o f p o licing a t H illsborough. H e w a s a w a re t h a t a u th o r i ty h a d b e e n given t o o p e n
    G a t e ,C f.




       ■
    10. We therefore recommend under Section 93(1) of the. P olice and Criminal Evidence
    Act 1984 that Superintendent Murray also be charged with;

               Neglect of Duty - contrary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of the
               Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in that he failed to control
               the movement of supporters subsequent to the opening of Gate
               'C*.

    II.   We have also carefully considered the allegation                 that Chief Superintendent
    D uckenfield was deceitful and misled senior police officers and members of the public.
 We do not agree- with the investigating officer's conclusions th at this m atter is not
substantiated. It is clear th at Mr Kelly, Mr K irtin and Mr Mackrell were told by Chief
-SuperinteodendUDatfckenfield th at Gate 'C ' had been forced, and that;»<lie-«-r|iad -been an
in-rush of Liveqsool supporters. While we are aware that he did not wish to encourage
a hostile reaction which might impede rescue work we share the opinion of Lord Justice
Taylor that this did not require anyone being told a falsehood.             This misleading
explanation led to serious allegations being made against Liverpool supporters in general
causing grave offence and distress.

    12 We have, therefore, decided to recommend under Section 93(1) of the Police and
    Criminal Evidence 'Act 1984 th at Chief Superintendent Duckenfield also be charged
    with:

                liscreditable Conduct - contrary to p a f l g r a p l t ^ ^ f Schedule 1 of
                    P o1£i^^D lkiplpgL J^egu latio n s 19S5 in t h a t ^ e a c te d in a
               manner likely to                       the reputation of the force or
\              the police service.

    13. 1 would be grateful lor your response t%.pmr recommendations as soon as possible.

14. It^rcHi accept Jhe Authority's jecoromenAttons^vg^shall -be ^minded.' In '«»ftiM ta f if c
etcepfioffal circumstances a f f e c tin g m is ’" 'c a s ^ ^ o a ire c t'' th a t the charges are heard by V
tribunal, in accordance with Section 94(2) of the Police and Crim inal Evidence A ct
1984.

15.    I would particularly request that you maintain the confidentiality- of this
correspondence until such time as the procedures laid down in the Act for determining
the disciplinary charges to be preferred have been completed. This will involve not
informing those against whom we are agreed that no charges should be preferred until
the whole matter has been resolved between us.




3 L PQWNALL
                                           S etiih Yorkshire Police
                                                JCE HEADQUASTERS
                                           S K I S H ILL ,
                                           S H E F F I E L D S3 S LY
                                           T E L E P H O N E CS142I 7 6 '8 5 2 2
                                           T E L E X 6 4 799S




PR n o . 152                                                                       13 J a n u a r y 1992



HILLSBOROUGH TRIBUNAL

Following today's announcement by the Police Complaints Authority that                                     the
disciplinary tribunal against Superintendent Bernard Murray will not                                       now
proceed, the Chief Constable, Mr Richard Wells, says:

"The Authority* s decision   brings   no    rejoicing            among the         ranks of the South
Yorkshire Police service.

"There can be no winners from a disaster which claimed 95                           lives.      There are
certainly losers,

"First and foremost, of course, are the bereaved families who lost their loved
ones that tragic afternoon.    Words alone will never be enough to ease their
pain and anger.   We acknowledge this, though once again feel moved to express
our deep and sincere sorrow to them.

"Many others have been losers, not least members of the police service on
duty that day w h o , faced with the tragedy, attempted to deal with the horror
of the moment.     Some are still fighting that dreadful battle and we count
the cost weekly in ill-health retirements and in the number of men and women
who still need counselling to cope with their memories. This they share with
the families who lost friends and relatives.

"I echo the sentiments of Dr Hapgood who , at the Memorial Service, said that
no disaster was the fault of one organisation alone or of just one human being,
but rather a combination of factors and shared responsibilities.

"That is why I have never been convinced of the appropriateness of the
disciplinary tribunal. My feelings were strengthened by the Director of Public
Presecution's decision on criminal matters, by the findings of the independent
investigating team, the conclusions of the inquest and advice given by leading
counsel. I have never thought that the police alone should be blamed, although
we firmly acknowledged our own responsibilities by the settlement of the civil
actions against u s .

"There were clearly mistakes. These mistakes have had awful human consequences.
The major questions have always been, in law, at which doors these mistakes
should be laid and whether they were culpable mistakes.

"I hold myself personally responsible for the South Yorkshire Police having
advised the Police Complaints Authority to review their decisions about holding
a tribunal and feel relieved that our argument about natural justice has been
so completely agreed.
"Many, many people - police officers and those in the broader community -
will sympathise with the decision to spare Supt. Bernard Murray the further
burden of facing a tribunal alone. We will understand if some of the bereaved
cannot share that view.

"Bernard Murray has thrown himself into his command duties since    the day of
the tragedy with his usual energetic commitment to the community.

"All of us in the South Yorkshire Police service are anxious not to forget
Hillsborough, but to draw strength from its lessons and to move forward,
particularly in the area of ground improvements for crowd safety, which are
the real ways in which we can give some meaning to the awful loss of life
on that afternoon."




P&PRD/GR/AGE/Hilsbro
                                        South Yorkshire P olice
                                        P O LIC E H E A D Q U A R T E R S
                                        S N IQ H I L L
                                        S H E F F I E L D S3 S LY
                                        T E L E P H O N E (0 7 4 2 ) 7 6 8 8 2 2
                                        T E L E X S 479 96




PR no 153                                                                          13 January 1992


STATEMENT OF SUPT. MURRAY



Following   today's   announcement   by   the   Police   Complaints                        Authority,
Superintendent Bernard Murray has issued the following statement:

"I am relieved at the decision that has been made by the Authority that the
charge against me should be withdrawn.     My relief comes not only because I
will not now have to face a t ribunal, but also because many p e o p l e , including
myself, will be spared the painful experience of having to go through the
harrowing details of the tragedy again.

"The decision does not change the sadness that I continue to feel                             and    the
sympathy I have for the relatives and friends of the people who died.

"I know that some people will be disappointed with this decision.                             I fully
understand that but I feel that it was the correct and fair decision.                          It does
not diminish, in any way, the hurt and grief which I constantly feel."




P&PR D/GR/AGE/PR153
PCA
POLICE COMPLAINTS AtJTSOiffHf


The independent body esiablMtei by Act ofPartkmm t
to ommee public am pkm ts against police offk*rs<                                    NEWS RELEASE




                                                                                                              13 January, 1992


                                                     st%   M n o R m e w, s t i p i p i t r a g e d y



             After very careful consideration/ the Police Complaints Authority

             have      d e c id e d ,   ..that* disciplinary., charges regarding police agrnroMmm

             at Hillsborough                     Football           Stadiuai on          15       April        1989      against         a

             Superintendent.
                           ..shoal#.
                                   ..                             withdrawn,


             The Authority h a d directed that charges be preferred against both

             t h e S u p e r in te n d e n t and h i s s u p e r io r o f f i c e r a C h ie f S u p e r in te n d e n t,

             The r e t i r e m e n t o f t h e c h i e f S u p e r in t e n d e n t on m e d ic a l g r o u n d s w eans

             th a t     w hat      is, i n           effect, a j o i n t a l l e g a t i o n            of     n e g le c t    of    d u ty ;

              cannot be f a ir ly               heard        in    t h e a b s e n c e o f t h e m ore s e n i o r o f f i c e r .



              F u ll     d e ta ils       of     th e      A u th o r ity ’s    d e c isio n      are        c o n ta in e d    in    th e

              a tta ch ed       sta tem en t.




                                     Further in fo r m a tio n : Richard M Offer, Press Officer
                                    HILLgBQROPOH 8TADIPM TRAGEDY                                              AMfEX *A'



%.      on 11 July, 1991 t h e Police C o m p l a i n t s Authority directed t h a t

charges          of        neglect         of      d u ty      be     preferred               against          a        Chief
S u p e r i n t e n d e n t and a Superintendent of the S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e ,

in   resp ect o f th e ir               h a n d lin g   o f p o lic e        o p e r a tio n s      a t H illsb o r o u g h

F o o t b a l l S ta d iu m o n 15 A p r i l ,          1989,        T h e A u t h o r i t y w i s h t o m ake i t



w o u ld b e a m a t t e r s o l e l y          fo r th o d is c ip lin a r y            t r ib u n a l h e a r in g th e

charges to            a d ju d ic a te upon.



2.      o n 10 November, 1991 t h e C h i e f Superintendent w a s retired from

t h e F o r c e o n medical g r o u n d s w i t h t h e c o n s e q u e n c e t h a t h e w a s , w i t h

effec t     fr o m t h a t d a t e ,         no lo n g e r s u b j e c t t o          th e P o lic e D is c ip lin e

c o d e and, therefore, t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d i n g s a g a i n s t h im oould

n o t c o n tin u e .



3.      The S o u t h Yorkshire P o l i c e h a v e now s o u g h t t h e leave of this

A u th o r ity        to     w ith d r a w .                                               laid          a g a in s t     th e

S u p e r i n t e n d e n t , who w a s s u b o r d i n a t e t o t h e C h i e f S u p e r in t e n d e n t a t

t h e relevant time*



4.       T h e A u t h o r i t y h a v e c o n s i d e r e d t h e r e q u e s t w i t h great care

c o n c lu d e t h a t      it     w o u l d be _                                                       to   p u r s u e the

charge       a g a in s t        th e   S u p e r in te n d e n t   a lo n e ,      in    th e      ab sen ce      of     h is

s u p e r io r   o ffic e r .            We h a v e         th er e fo r e     d e c id e d        to   e x e r c is e    our
d is c r e tio n ,         in accordance with Section 93(6)                                   of     the police and

 C r im in a l E v id e n c e A c t 1 9 8 4 , t o g i v e t h e F o r c e l e a v e n o t t o p r o c e e d

 w ith th e c h a r g e .
     , 13-JAN-1992           12=83       FROM   POLICE COMPtft INTS                          TO                                         P. 84




             5.       T h e Authority do not resile fro® their o r i g i n a l                                           d e c isio n     to
             direct that charges .against both officers be heard nact considered

             by a disciplinary tribunal.                             We are satisfied th®

W£                           ■            to support such charges.                           The subsequent retirement
fc¥SAOi££-
             of    th e      C h ie f    S u p e r in te n d e n t, on             medical g r o u n d s              h as#    how ever,

             stu b s t a n t i a X l y a lf e e x e e l t h e p o s i t i o n *



             6.       The charges against the Chief Superintendent covered a n u m b er

             of different mutters.                           The A u th o r ity           d ir e c te d     th a t

                                                        mm



                                                                    S T w iiis o p e n e d i n o r d e r t o

                   s u p p o r t e r s o u t s i d e t h e _g r o u n d .



             ?*        We h a v e m a d e o u r          d e c isio n         to    accede        to      th e    S o u th    Y o r k sh ir e

             P o lic e r eq u ests          for t h e f o l l o w i n g r e a s o n s ;


                       a.         th e    background           to     th e     a lle g e d    fa ilu r e         to    co n tro l    th o se

                       e n te r in g      th ro u g h   G a te       *C f i n v o l v e d ,       inter alia, p r e l i m i n a r y



                                                                        s e s s f a i r l y a t a d is c ip lin a r y h e a r in g

                        in       th e    ab sen ce       of      th e        o ffic e r      in     charge            of      th e   w h o le

                        o p e r a tio n ;



                        b,        th e
                                                                                           for controlling spectators

                        e n te r in g       G a te       *C’          did          not       lie       directly               with       tbe

                        s u p e r in te n d e n t;
-JAN-1992 12=03        FROM POLICE COMPLAINTS




        cannot be a d e q u a t e l y assessed in t h e absence of h i s superior

        officer at t h e t r i b u n a l ;




        e.       the     Superintendent's                ability      to    pat      forward his             case

        fully       in    the      absence        of      his    superior          officer          would      be

         impaired#* and


         f.      it w p M         be an injustice 'to t h e                     S u p e r in te n d e n t,




 g,      i n r e a c h in g w h at we h a v e fo u n d t o b e a v e r y d i f f i c u l t d e c i s i o n

 we h a v e t a k e n i n t o a c c o u n t t h e i n t e r e s t s a n d feelings o f t h o s e w ho

 kave     m ad e c o m p l a i n t s   about      th e    p o lic e   co n d u ct,    th e    H illsb o r o u g h

 F a m i l i e s S u p p o r t G r o u p , a l l tho'se'who have suffered'Sereawaent as'

 t h e r e s u l t o f t h e t r a g i c e v e n t s a n d t h e p u b l i c interest o n t h e o n e

 h a n d a n d , on the o t h e r , justice to t h e S u p e r i n t e n d e n t                 _...

                             - \c h    w o u ld    r e s u lt   from       c o n tin u in g    th e     p rocess

  a g a i n s t h im a l o n e   in th e a b sen ce o f h is           s u p e r io r o f f i c e r .
13-JAH-1992   12=84   FROM   POLICE COMPLAINTS           TO                        P. 06




   9,    T h e A u t h o r i t y h a v e therefore granted the leave sought by t h e

  South Yorkshire Police not to proceed w i t h               th e   charge w h i c h we

  directed against t h e s u p e r i n t e n d e n t .
BRIGADIER IL POWNALL, OBE                                                                                     mmf




 IN CONFIDENCE



 G Moore, Esq                                                            Your Ref: ACC(D&C)CJD
 Assistant Chief Constable
 South Yorkshire Police                                                   Our Ref: COM 91/131/39
 Snig Hill
 SHEFFIELD                                                                              y    May, 1991
 S I SLY




                  A v       p f ^


                                    HILLSBOROUt
           ■s m                          15 APRIL; 1989

                     ,,       v completed a c§rjgJ
 and the evidence relatl                                          .  „    _
 tragedy on 15 April, 1989. "'W ellve^colslSered Mr Anderson’s ^ r T K jr a n d a r^ ^ Y tte d ’to^
 us in accordance with the provisions of Section 90(5) of the Police and Criminal
 c..:j_ ~ ce Act,,,l.?S», and his J s t t e f c k M^ I i Apr i l . .   .
"proposals not to prefer disclpiffSPf^W iFJes _0______ #
 subject of complaint and your reasons for these proposals. However, as 1 told Mr
 Anderson on the telephone, the Authority were disappointed th at he did not explain
 your reasons more fully. We have also taken into account the views expressed by Mr
 Sharp, the investigating officer.

 2. Having considered the evidence relating to the complaints against Police Constable
 Smith, Police Constable Illingw ortli^uperintendent Marshall or Superintendent Green­
 wood we have concluded th at the "evidence in respect o f these lo u r officers 'does not"
                   —            -.1"                                ■■ — —        — --     ■- -

3.. ;.We,, have also iPQjO^I^SCI^-                                                      ^ w .v .u tn
Superintendent? Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray which allege th a t'th e y were in
’neglect of duty'. These complaints raise difficult issues. In reaching our conclusic
we have borne m mind the decisions of "'the Director of Public Prosecutions as cL_
factor amongst others. As you are aware we do not accept that culpable misfeasance
and neglect of duty a r e c o te r m in o u s nor that, ev e n if they were, we w o u l d " A b o u n d fas
far as discipline is concerned) by the decision of the Director not to bring criminal
prosecutions. We have, throughout, borne in mind the definition of n e g le c t o f d u ty set ■. ‘
out in paragraph k o f Schedule 1 of The Police (Discipline) Regt3afi€»V:' 1585.
                                              S’'
4. The"lncident which gave rise to the tragedy a t the Hillsborough Stadium on 15
April, 19S9 would not have occurred had sensible and simple s te p s been laSoert to secure'
the safety of spectators in Pens 3 and k on the L e p p in g s Lane Terraces. It Is clear
that the basic cause of the disaster was overcrowding in these 'pens.             We h a v e
concentrated on this matter.

5. In reaching our decisions we have taken into account various m atters which can be
advanced as arguments for taking no disciplinary action on the grounds th at to take
suchaction would be unfair and/or oppressive., Amongst such m atters we refer briefly
to the following;

            a. th e passage of time since 15 April, 1989;
                                   .           ,r   .          .. ....   ..


            b. the various consequences arising from the earlier hearings
            before Lord Justice Taylor and the Coroner;

            c. the effect of the extensive m e djuau*co v e r a g e of the Incident
            Itself, matters associated with it and th e hearings referred to in
            b. above;

            3 ."''‘th e ^ p ^ fee p tio n th at if any officer is charged he m ay b e sllif’4*''
            as a scapegoat carrying the blame for the acts or omissions of
            others;

                the recent promotion of Chief S u p e r in te n d e d
            the fact that he ld o l* o v er the m atch arrangements devised by
            someone .else and his b elief th a t _the_ plaa Ji«lMA&aP£gated.,M»
            successfully-Before?                       ^

            f, the anguish which both Chief Superintendent D u c k e n fie ld and
                rioteoitmt M urray m u s t have.^ experienced
             rap^anTu'nexpectea events on 15 April, 1989^"arid''

            g. the effect that disciplinary action against any officer would
            have on the morale and well-being of th e South         Yorkshire
            Police.

6. Despite these factors it cannot be denied that the police, under the control of Chief
Superindent D uckenfield, assisted by Superintendent Murray, were de faetftjj^,,control of
the ground at the relevant time and had responsibility for the safety of the "spectators.
5 * t h e opinion v i +hh Ac:* ^            U.ere is sufficient evidcr
charges on the following grounds:
                                                                       _ ..
              a. Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, as the officer in overall
              c o m m a n d ,^ fa ile d to address himself properly to th e prohleip^.,
                                                                                        S
              in v o lv e i^ ifa n d the plans for, crowd control even be
              spectators arrived;

           b. failed to monitor the numbers of spectators entering Pens 3
           and %
             c. failed to take any action when P e n s 3 and <* became obviously
             overcrow ded;                  --w

             d.    authorised G ate             to be opened and, to g e th e r with
             S uperintendent Murray, failed to take any steps to control the
             movement of those who entered the ground through this gate a t ,a
             time when it was, or should have been, clear to both of them
             that Pens 3 and ♦ were, or were likely to become, overcrowded.

7. In the view of this Authority responsibility for the safety of those in Pens 3 and k
and blame for overcrowding in those pens, should rest with those in the Police Control
Box from which the pens could be observed, the deployment of police manpower co u ld
be directed and the tfeeislon to open-sGate^C' was ..made with its attendant r e s p 6 iis iM » M * '>'
ity for controlling those who entered through It. Tne Authority are conscious of th e
complex circumstances which may have contributed to the tragedy, but we do not
accept that the fact that there may be others'who. are also in som e...w ay blameworthy,
should cause us to decide against the recommendation of charges under th e Regulations
 if, as here, the evidence is available to support such charges. You will appreciate the
 Authority are concerned solely with the evidence in respect of the m atters which are
 the subject of complaint and not with m itig a tio n w h ic h would only become relevant if a
'b le a c h 'o f discipline were to be proved against an officer who is the su6j«^~®f|fp-
 charge.

       -or tK©SS~ reasons thaflttiSSfcuthority h a v e,d e c ’ ’ *        end under Section
93(1) of the Police andd Criminal Evidence A ^ W f l’l ^ a f ^ ^ T O S o w l n g charges be
b r o u g h t a g a in s t Chief Superintendent Duckenfield:


             th e Police (D isc lp iin ^ lftfe g u latlO T S 1585 th at "'he failed to
             acquaint himself with the planning and problems related to the
                     )I
             ii. Neglect of Duty - contrary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of
             the Police (D iscipline) Regulations 1985 in that he failed to
             monitor crowd numbers in Pens 3 and U.

              iii. Neglect of Duty - contrary to paragraph      a) of Schedule 1
              of th e Police (D iscipline) Regulations 1985 in that he failed to
            . act when Pens 3 and # were ob v iously overcrowded.

              i y , . Neglect ■of Duty - fifp traff to p a r a g r a j* J |i |
              of    th e P olice (D iscipline) Regulations 1985 I n



9, We h a v e* g iv e n 'T e p a rlfl^ tte n tio n to the'"degree of responsibility a tt r ib u t a b le to
Superindent Murray. We concluded that in view of Chief Superintendent D u c k e n fie ld ’s
very recent appointment and promotion to his position as Divisional Commander,
Superintendent Murray had a special responsibility to assist and advise Chief Super­
intendent Duckenfield particularly in view of Superintendent Murray's greater exper­
ience of policing at Hillsborough. He was aware that authority had been given to op en
Gate 'C '.
 10. We therefore recommend under Section 93(1) of th e P o lice and Criminal Evidence
 Act 19S# that Superintendent Murray also be charged with:

               Neglect of Duty - contrary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule I of the
               Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in that he failed to control
               the movement of supporters subsequent to the opening of Gate
                C•

 li.    We have also carefully considered the allegation that Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield was deceitful and misled senior police officers and members of the public.
We do not agree with the investigating officer's conclusions th at this m atter is not
substantiated. It is clear th at Mr Kelly, Mr Kirtin and Mr Mackreil were told by Chief
SuperintTOdgfjl^flpckenfield that Gate 'C* had been forced, and th§t?s|||fef*i?liad-fceen an
in-rush of Liverpool supporters. While we are aware that he did not wish to encourage
a hostile reaction which might Impede rescue work we share the opinion of Lord Justice
Taylor that this did not. require anyone being told a falsehood.          This misleading
explanation led to serious allegations being made against Liverpool supporters in general
causing grave offence and distress.

12 We have, therefore, decided to recommend under Section 93(1) of the Police and
Criminal Evidence Act 198% that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield also be charged
with;                                                                         b

             discreditable Conduct - contrary to paragrj                      rf Schedule,,,! of
                   P o lk ^ f t^ s c ip lin ^ R e g u la tio n s 1985 in that* he acted in a
              manner likely to b rln f^ fecred it on the reputation of th f foro
              the police service                                             lypfci;

13.   1 would be grateful for your response to our recommendations as soon as possible.

1! * .. % i s uta(^cm i J he                          4 f c m s N i         ^                      „   -

exceptional circumstances a ffe c tirig th is case,"to direct that the charges are heard'by a
tribunal, in accordance with Section 94(2) of the Police and Criminal Evidence A c t '
19S4.

15.    1 would particularly request that you maintain the confidentiality, of this
correspondence until such time as the procedures laid down in the Act for determining
the disciplinary charges to be preferred have been completed. This will involve not
informing those against whom we are agreed that no charges should be preferred until
the whole matter has been resolved between us.
                                                             fiit-




3 L POWNALL
THE POLICE DISCIPLINE) REGULATIONS
 1985 PROCEEDINGS DIRECTED AGAINST
 CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT DUCKENFIELD

               AND

       SUPERINTENDENT MURRAY




              ADVICE   4




                           f


THE SOLICITOR ID THE SOUIH YORKSHIRE
POLICE AUTHORITY
BARNSLEY
              THE POLICE (DISCIPLINE) REGULATIONS 1985


                    PROCEEDINGS DIRECTED AGAINST


                  CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT DUCKENFIELD


                                 AND


                        SUPERINTENDENT MURRAY




                               ADVICE




The Archbishop of York preaching at the Hillsborough Memorial Service
on 23 April 1989 said, "Events of the magnitude of Hillsborough don't
usually happen just for one single reason, nor is it usually possible
to pin the blame on one single scapegoat...     Disasters happen because
a whole series of mistakes, misjudgments and mischances happen to come
together in a deadly combination."


In this whole tragic affair with the benefit of commonsense and hindsight
there are many who could have done better or performed differently be
J y   police officers, officials of Sheffield Wednesday FC, structural
engineers, officials of the local council and others, nevertheless it
seems to the writer on consideration of thousands of documents available
both in his preparation and in his actions on the day Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield was not for whatever reason up to the role
of overall match commander at this major sporting event.     Sadly for
Chief Supt Duckenfield, the South Yorkshire Police and those of the
bereaved who seek disciplinary action, Chief Supt Duckenfield's health

appears to have failed and we will never know whether a tribunal would

have found that such various acts or omissions as were found proved
would have amounted to neglect of duty.

                                                                              *

There remains, however, the position of Superintendent Murray.       I
start by adopting observations made in the report of the West Midlands

Police to the Director of Public Prosecutions.      Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield, the overall ma t c h day commander elected to police the event

from the control room in the ground, but according to Supt Murray there
was no confusion in roles.     However,   the adoption of this style of

command must to an extent reduce the overall responsibility held by
Supt Murray because decisions are always likely to be made with the

consent of the present Chief Superintendent.      However, by the very nature

of his rank Supt Murray would accept responsibility.      Furthermore there

is a duty on every police officer to act promptly if the situation

requires it and the presence of a more senior officer should not hinder

or excuse that requirement.


At 1447 Supt Marshall asked the police control box for permission to

open the exit gates, an extraordinary action, but one well justified
given the circumstances prevailing at the time.      Two further requests
were made whilst Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was considering the

position.   At this point Supt Murray addressed Chief Supt Duckenfield
saying words to thfe effect,   "Are we going to open those gates."   Perhaps

this is a good example of Supt Murray, although the junior officer,

making his mark in a situation and at a time he felt it necessary.



Nevertheless the fact remains that the decision to open the gates was

not followed by any direct or indirect orders to deal with the 2000
or so fans who for a period of 5 minutes entered the ground.      There
were no stewards or police officers checking or directing them so the

majority of them made for the tunnel leading to pens 3 and *».
The earlier opening of Gate    ’C* when 180 or so supporters got in did

not alert him to consider how to cope with a deliberate authorised

opening of that gate.


The order given "to open the gates" was directed not to specific police
                                                                             »
officers, but in general.     Bearing in mind the inevitable background

noise close to kick off he could not know who may or may not have heard

the order and who for that matter might be alerted to be prepared to

take action consequent upon that order.


Supt Murray was part of the decision making team employed at the semi

final.   In overall terms he had some responsibility for the control

of matters outside the ground as well as inside.     The use and
availability of the video and communications by radio placed him in

a position of overall authority with Chief Supt Duckenfield.       It can
be argued that he should have recognised the dangers inherent in the
requests being made, especially as he had previous experience of the

1988 semi final and of the ground.     Furthermore if the conclusion drawn

by Lord Justice Taylor that Chief Supt Duckenfield "froze" is fair and

correct then the question can be asked why Supt Murray did not recognise

this and step into the breach.


Whilst the writer accepts that the charge against Supt Murray has some

prospects of success I sun concerned as to whether having regard to all

the circumstances that no w obtain that it is just and fair that Supt

Murray should as it were be seen to face the music alone.     The following

may be worthy of consideration:-


a.   The proceedings might be considered oppressive because of delay.

     There has, of course, been the Taylor Inquiry, the Inquests, and
     the consideration of some of the papers by the Director of Public

     Prosecutions all of which have naturally taken up time.       It is
     now a little over Z\ years since this tragic event, those preparing

     the case for the disciplinary hearing have taken time to get the
matter in order.    There are administrative and evidential

difficulties to overcome.     Time has been expended in thorough

preparation in the hope that this would facilitate in due course

an efficient and thorough presentation of the complaints and keep
the case within reasonable boundaries in the hope that it could

fairly and properly be dealt with both by the presentation and
the defence in a matter of weeks rather than months.         In Chief

Supt Duckenfield's case 5 charges were to be presented ranging

widely over events from when it was first announced that the semi

final would be held at Hillsborough to the time when the match

was stopped as well as later discussions with Mr Kelly and

representatives of the 3 football clubs involved.        It was known

that having regard to the medical information available charges

would not be served upon Chief Supt Duckenfield until his health
improved.   In contrast Mr Murray faces only 1 charge; much of the

preparation time has been consumed b y C hief Supt Duckenfield's

alleged shortcomings rather than those of Supt Murray.



A distinction should perhaps be made between making decisions to
move particular resources and having the ability to move them and

making decisions that cause the need to move resources to arise.

It is open to argument that the role of Supt Murray overseeing

the control room staff was to implement the decisions of others.


The force order entitled,    "Standing instructions for the policing

of football matches" does not identify the responsibilities of

"match control" much less the officer in charge.        Para 10.1 states,

"The officer in charge of match control should not be of less rank
than Sergeant and be aided by at least 1 police constable."             This

might suggest that the officer in charge of match control is not

contemplated as a decision maker next in descent from the overall

commander, but rather as an i m p l e m e n t s able to carry out the

routine tasks to be associated w i t h a first level supervisor.
The above has even greater.force when put in the context of what

was on any view a major departure from the operational plan, an
exceptional course of action taken in exceptional circumstances.



Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, unlike Supt Murray, has never

co-operated with the disciplinary enquiry as of course was his

right.     Chief Supt Duckenfield will not be at the Tribunal hearing.
The Tribunal will not have the opportunity of contrasting the

testimony of the defendants.       Furthermore, Supt Murray will be

deprived of the opportunity of asking questions of Chief Supt

Duckenfield.


Regard might be had to matters of detail or stances that could

be taken by Supt Murray.


 i.      Having been in the control box in question the writer is
         well aware that Supt Murray had a reasonably good view through

         the windows of the Leppings Lane terracing albeit at an angle,
         but would not have been in a good position to view the screen

         monitors, he would have to crane his neck backwards.



ii.      The time Chief Supt Duckenfield took to make the decision

         to open the gate was probably of the order of 3 to 3£ minutes.

         Supt Murray would be entitled to the opinion that Chief Supt
         Duckenfield during this time was thinking about the
         consequences of such a decision and of any follow up

         information or directions to be given consequent upon such

         decision.


         Supt Murray was there to assist, be sounded out or whatever
         if asked, but Chief Supt Duckenfield d i d n ’t ask.   Supt Murray

         reminded him of the need for a decision and it was then taken

         and given out over the radio by PS Goddard.
      Supt Murray had other matters to consider, he was in command

      of the centre of communications for police activity both

      inside and outside the ground, in particular we know at times
      that there was some concern about the behaviour of Liverpool

      fans at the edge of the epion kop which was allocated to
      Notts Forest fans.      He could fairly advance the claim that

      Chief Supt Duckenfield had taken full responsibility for

      this major departure from the plan and would follow it

      through} by for example observing the monitor screen and

      seeing where fans entering the concourse through Gate ’C ’

      went, and taking such further action as may have appeared

      necessary to him.


In terms of moral culpability there is a significant difference

between the respective roles, acts and omissions on the part of
Chief Supt Duckenfield and Supt Murray.      If Chief Supt Duckenfield

is not to be proceeded against then those directing the charge

against Supt Murray may wish to reflect on the situation and seek

to balance justice being seen to be done to Supt M u r r a y , the likely
distress occasioned to some by the inevitable publicity this matter

will attract and the likely outcome.


If Supt Murray is to be seen as a "scapegoat" by the media and

m a n y of the public,   this would not I suspect assist the bereaved

with their grief nor be seen as just action by the police against

one of their number.


If the charge against Murray is found p r o v e d , I anticipate that

any penalty imposed would be seen by many as totally out of
proportion to   96   deaths, 1 person lingering on a life support

machine and m a n y others having endured an horrific experience.
Sentencing would be difficult, the prime miscreant is Ch Supt

Duckenfield who has throughout been suspended from duty, on the
other hand Supt Murray has remained on what might be termed mainline
         police duties and performed them satisfactorily•   A reduction in

         rank in such circumstances may not seem appropriate.   If such
         proposition is correct what would the appropriate sentencing option

          be?




J T Sleightholme
                                                            Po l (        |if h

gdc



                                    O P I N I O N



                               HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY



                         PROPOSED DISCIPLINARY ACTION



                                          INDEX



CHAPTER I                                                       PAGE

      INSTRUCTIONS                                                   1

      CONCLUSIONS                                                    1



CHAPTER I I     -       D I S C I P L I N A R Y PROCEDURE

      SUMMARY OF RULES OF EVIDENCE                                   3

      STANDARD OF PROOF                                              3

      PRIMARY EVIDENCE                                               4

      EXPERT EVIDENCE                                                4

      HEARSAY EVIDENCE                                               4



CHAPTER I I I       -    P R E V IO U S PROCEDURES

      FOUR INVESTIGATIONS                                            6

      UP-TO-DATE POSITION                                            7



CHAPTER I V -           PROPOSED CHARGES GENERAL MATTERS

      THE CHARGES                                                    8

      THE ISSUES re: NEGLECT OF DUTY                                 9

      HAS A CHARGE SUBSTANTIALLY THE

      SAME AS "NEGLECT OF DUTY" BEEN

      REJECTED BY CORONER'S JURY

      AND/OR DPP?                                                    10



                                            -1-
     CORONER'S JURY                               10

     DPP DECISION                                 13

     HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE AS

     APPLIED TO JURY AND DPP

     DECISION                                     14

     COMMENT                                      15



CHAPTER V -    PA R TIC U LA R PROPOSED CHARGES

     INTRODUCTION                                 17

     FIRST CHARGE     (Appendix I)                19

     SECOND CHARGE     (Appendix   II)            21

     COMMENT                                      23

     THIRD CHARGE     (Appendix IV)               25

     FOURTH CHARGE     (Appendix     V)           27

     SIXTH CHARGE                                 31
                   HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY



                         CHAPTER I



INSTRUCTIONS



1.   These are to advise on the merits in fact and law

of the disciplinary charges of neglect of duty and

discreditable conduct recommended by Police Complaints

Authority by letter to Assistant Chief Constable Moore

of South Yorkshire Police dated 7 May 1991.      The

recommendation follows consideration by PCA of evidence ,

and reports by Mr. Leslie Sharpe Chief Constable of

Cumbria Constabulary and a memo by ACC Anderson formerly

of SYP which concluded that complaints of such

disciplinary offences were not substantiated.



2.   The question now asked is whether there is

sufficient evidence to support the proposed charges.



CONCLUSIONS



3.   None of the proposed disciplinary charges has a

realistic chance to succeed.



4.   The findings against the Police in the Taylor L . * > .

Inquiry Interim report have not been supported by any

other independent investigator and should not influence
a decision on discipline.



5.   The best way to review the circumstances is to read

the evidence in the Appendices.   This includes some

repetition which is justified by the jeopardy of

Policemen before this evidence was collected.



6.   The Jury verdict of accident should be accepted as

true and treated as ruling out neglect of duty.



7.   A hearing of the disciplinary charges would be the

5th major investigation of the tragedy and would be

oppressive and unnecessary and fruitless.



8.   The tragedy occurred when there were two

consecutive unprecedented emergencies not foreseen by

anyone and for which no Police duty was prescribed.
                          CHAPTER II



                    DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE



SUMMARY OF RULES OF EVIDENCE



9.    The rules of evidence at a disciplinary hearing are

described in Paragraph 9.23 of the Home Office Guidance

to Chief Officers on Police Complaints and Disciplinary

Procedures 1985 edition.     This states in summary that

the hearing need not be bound by technical rules of

evidence.     It provides for the admission of agreed

evidence and includes a caution against use of hearsay

evidence.



10.   Regulations 18 and 19 of the Police    (Discipline)

Regulations    1985 provide for procedure and evidence by

agreed statements and Annex H of the Home Office

Guidance gives guidance about procedure and conduct of

the hearing.



11.   The above all boils down to the rule that contested

matters have to be proved by admissible evidence and

both sides may call witnesses.



STANDARD OF PROOF



12.   Beyond reasonable doubt,   Regulation 23.
    BODY OF EVIDENCE



    PRIMARY EVIDENCE



    13.       Witness statements and transcripts of unsworn

               evidence to Inquiry by the R t . Hon. Lord

               Justice Taylor     (         w i t n e s s e s ).



              Witness statements and transcripts of sworn



•
               evidence to Coroner's Inquest                       witnesses)



               Bundle of documents used at Taylor Inquiry

               (       documents)



               Bundle of Coroner's exhibits            (            d o c u m e n t s ).



               Video tapes and bundles of p h o t o g r a p h s .



    EXPERT EVIDENCE


#   14.   Reports by engineers Mr. Byrne

    and by expert Police witnesses Assistant Chief Constable

    of Devon and Cornwall Constabulary Mr. Phillips, and

    former Senior Police Officer Mr.        Stalker.



    HEARSAY EVIDENCE



    15.       Taylor Interim and Final Reports.



              Coroner's Summing up.



                                      -4-
    Reports by Chief Constable of Cumbria

    Constabulary.




#




                    -5-
                                       CHAPTER III



                                  PREVIOUS PROCEDURES



FOUR INVESTIGATIONS



16.     Many combinations of the primary witness statements

transcripts and documents have now been considered on

four occasions i.e. by the Taylor Inquiry, Director of

Public Prosecutions,                  Coroner's Inquest, and Chief

Constable of Cumbria.                   Relevant conclusions are as

f o l l o w s :-



(i)                Taylor Interim Report dated 1.8.89:         "Failure

                   to give the order to close the tunnel was a

                   blunder of the first magnitude",          ...   "the main

                   reason for the disaster was the failure of

                   Police control".



(ii)               DPP letter dated 30.8.90:         "Insufficient

                   evidence to justify proceedings against any

                   Officer of SYP or any other person for any

                   o f f e n c e ".



(iii)              Coroner's Jury verdicts 28.3.91: Accidental

                   Deaths.



(iv)               Chief Constable of Cumbria Constabulary

                   accepted and submitted to PCA by SYP 28.3.91:

                   Disciplinary complaints against Police
           un s u b s t a n t i a t e d .



UP-TO-DATE POSITION



17.   From the above it will be seen that with the

exception of the Taylor Inquiry, the conclusions of

those who have made an independent study of the primary

evidence do not attribute blame to any Police Officer.



18.   Because of the time of the sequence of inquiries,

none of the other investigators was able to take account

of the sworn evidence given at the Inquests, or of the

Coroner's summing up.              This applied to PCA which was

also not in a position to be able to interpret the

significance of the verdicts of the Jury.              It was in my

opinion unfortunate that the then Assistant Chief

Constable of SYP did not accept the invitation of PCA by

letter dated 10.4.91 to set out his reasons more fully,

which could have included this important new material.
                          CHAPTER IV



              PROPOSED CHARGES   (GENERAL MATTERS)



THE CHARGES



19.   These are as follows:



      AGAINST CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT DUCKENFIELD



      (i)        NEGLECT OF DUTY - Contrary to Paragraph

                  4(a) of Schedule 1 of the Police

                  (Discipline)   Regulations   1985 in that he

                  failed to acquaint himself with the

                  planning and problems related to the

                  control of the semi-final.



      (ii)       NEGLECT OF DUTY - Contrary to Paragraph

                  4(a) of Schedule 1 of the Police

                  (Discipline)   Regulations 1985 in that he

                  failed to monitor crowd numbers in Pens 3

                 and 4.



      (iii)      NEGLECT OF DUTY - Contrary to Paragraph

                  4(a) of Schedule 1 of the Police

                  (Discipline)   Regulations 1985 in that he

                  failed to act when Pens 3 and 4 were

                  obviously overcrowded.



      (iv)       NEGLECT OF DUTY - Contrary to Paragraph
                           4(a) of Schedule 1 of the Police

                           (Discipline)         Regulations 1985 in that he

                           failed to control movement of supporters

                           subsequent to the opening of Gate         "C".



          (v)              DISCREDITABLE CONDUCT - Contrary to

                           Paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 of the Police

                           (Discipline)         Regulations 1985 in that he

                           acted in a manner likely to bring

                           discredit on the reputation of the Force

#                          or the Police Service.



          A G A IN ST   S U P E R I N T E N D E N T MURRAY




          (i)              NEGLECT OF DUTY - Contrary to Paragraph

                           4(a) of Schedule 1 of the Police

                           (Discipline)         Regulations 1985 in that he

                           failed to control the movement of

                           supporters subsequent to the opening of

                           Gate    "C".



    THE ISSUES re: NEGLECT OF DUTY



    20.   The defenition of this charge in Paragraph 4(a) of

    the Discipline Code is "Where a member of the Police

    Force without good and sufficient cause neglects or

    omits to attend to or carry out with due promptitude and

    diligence anything which it is his duty as a member of a

    Police Force to attend to or carry out".




                                             -9-
21.     In the light of the proposed charges and

particulars,    3 questions arise:



(i)         What is the evidence of the imposition of the

             duty?



(ii)        What is the evidence of the breach of duty?



(iii)       Are the proposed disciplinary offences in

             substance the same as a charge considered and

             rejected by the Coroner's Jury, or Director of

             Public Prosecutions?



If so this will not be an absolute bar to disciplinary

proceedings under Section 104 Police and Criminal

Evidence Act 1984, but account should be taken of such a

decision by the Director, under Home Office Guidance

Paragraph 5.16 and in addition these previous

considerations provide guidance as to the likely outcome

of disciplinary proceedings.



22.     The evidence as to duty and breach will be

considered separately in Chapter V, and the rejection of

previous charges dealt with below.



HAS A CHARGE SUBSTANTIALLY THE SAME AS "NEGLECT OF DUTY"

BEEN REJECTED BY CORONER'S JURY AND/OR DPP?



CORONER'S JURY
23.     3 options were left for the verdict of the Jury:



(i)             Unlawful killing i.e. manslaughter by neglect.



(ii)            Accident.



(iii)           Open.



24.     As to unlawful killing the Coroner directed the

Jury in the terms of the judgment of Watkin L.J.               in R. -

v- West London Coroner ex parte Gray            (1988)    1.Q.B.467 at

page 476G as follows:



        "What the Jury should have been told             was that when

        considering manslaughter by neglect, they would

        have to be satisfied upon the evidence of these

        four ingredients of the offence.



                        A Police Officer had the duty of

                        regarding the health and welfare of

                        Mikkelsen.



        ( 2 )           He failed to do what in the circumstance

                        he ought to have done for the health and

                        welfare of Mikkelsen



        (3)             That his failure was a substantial cause

                        of Mikkelsen's death.



                        That in failing to act for the benefit of



                                     -1 1 -
                   Mikkelsen's health and welfare he acted

                    recklessly.     It should be explained that

                    to act recklessly means that there was an

                    obvious and serious risk to the health

                    and welfare of Mikkelsen to which that

                    Police Officer, having regard to his

                    duty, was indifferent or, recognising

                    that risk to be present, he deliberately

                    chose to run the risk by doing nothing

                    about it.     It should be emphasised

                    however that a failure to appreciate that

                    there was such a risk would not by itself

                    be sufficient to amount to recklessness.



                    Further the Jury should have been

                    directed that they could return a verdict

                    on unlawful killing only if they could

                    attribute those      ingredients to a single

                    Police Officer whom they should on no

                    account name or otherwise identify".



25.   One   ofthe main points in         the Inquest was whether a

risk to health     and welfare was       obvious and serious.



26.   The ingredients of unlawful killing should be

compared with the definition of neglect of duty in

Paragraph 4(a) of the Discipline Code which includes

ingredients      (1) and   (2) but not   (3) and   (4).   However a

trial of these particular disciplinary charges will in

fact entail and be seen to include decisions upon all of
    the 4 ingredients of the criminal offence.



    27.    As to ingredient    (3) this is because if there were

    the neglect of duty charged then it is an inescapable

    consequence that this neglect caused or contributed to

    the d e a t h s .



    28.    As to ingredient    (4) all the Police accept that if

    there were an obvious and serious risk of health and



•
    welfare,     then failure to act would be a breach of duty.



    29.    A common issue of fact in the manslaughter/unlawful

    killing, and the proposed disciplinary offences,          is that

    until it was too late, there was no planning or

    operational duty to take any particular action because

    no risk was obvious to any one in authority at all.           If

    the disciplinary charges proceed,          that the accused will

    undoubtedly re-run the evidence given to the Inquests

    some of which is collected in the Appendices.



    30.    It will be seen above that      "unlawful killing" was a

    live issue and it was rejected by the Jury in favour of

    accident.       Thus the same issues that would arise in the

    disciplinary proceedings have in fact been considered and

    determined by the Jury, giving the result of "accident".



    31.    Note that the above does not apply to proposed

    disciplinary charges      (i) and   (v).



    DPP DECISION



                                   -13-
32.    The DPP ruled out any offences by the Police at

all.    The main potential offence considered must have

been manslaughter by neglect i.e. unlawful killing.         The

decision by DPP was made without having heard the

Inquest evidence,     and was vindicated by the Jury who

heard much more evidence than was available to DPP.



HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE AS APPLIED TO JURY AND DPP

DECISIONS



PARAGRAPHS 5.16     (re; DPP)



33.    The guidance provides that account should be taken

of the DPP's decision where the matters are

substantially the same as above, and where DPP has

decided that there is insufficient evidence.      This works

against disciplinary proceedings.



PARAGRAPHS 5.13-15     (re; VERDICT)



34.    If there had been proceedings for a criminal

offence then whatever the result, disciplinary

proceedings would be ruled out by PACE Section 104 and

HO Guidance 5.13 and 5.14.      The only reason that this

outcome does not apply to the verdict of the Jury,

t h a t 'it was not a conviction or acquittal.



35.    However,   following ex parte Gray the Coroner left

the case to the Jury on the basis that the candidates
for unlawful killing were the Control Room staff          (Day 77

p .105 F - 1 0 8 B ).   If the Jury had returned that verdict it

would undoubtedly have been widely regarded as the

equivalent of a conviction of those men of that criminal

offence.



36.     If the proceedings had in fact been a criminal

trial then the issues for the Jury would have been

exactly the same as those at the Inquest and there is no

reason to think that the result would have been

different i.e. the men would have been acquitted of

unlawful killing,         ruling out disciplinary procedure.



37.     Altogether the effect of the above is twofold.



                Although there is no statutory bar under

                Section 104 to disciplinary proceedings, there

                is a strong indication that such proceedings

                would not now be fair or appropriate under

                Home Office Guidance paragraph 5.16.



(ii)            Disciplinary proceedings if taken are likely

                to follow the same course as previous

                procedures probably with the same result i.e.

                case dismissed.



COMMENT



38.     Finally it may be useful to call to mind the

findings of the Taylor Interim Report that the failure



                                  -15-
to give the order to close the tunnel was a blunder of

the first magnitude and the main reason fot the disaster

was the failure of the Police control.      If these words

are applied to the ingredients of unlawful killing/

manslaughter by neglect, then the offence would be

proved.     However having heard the evidence,   the Jury did

not agree.     Nor did DPP.   Neglect of duty will go the

same way.




                              -16-
                          CHAPTER V



                 PARTICULAR PROPOSED CHARGES



INTRODUCTION



39.   Proof of the proposed charges would depend upon the

evidence called by both sides at the disciplinary

hearings.   Thus consideration of whether the charges

could be substantiated requires an examination of the

primary evidence.



40.   It will be appreciated that the body of evidence

available is huge.    The Taylor Inquiry occupied 31 days

sitting long hours.    The Inquest occupied 4 months

including some duplication of Taylor witnesses plus many

new witnesses.    Much of this material is relevant to the

issues which are outlined above.



41.   Short of a rehearsal of all this evidence, any

analysis is bound to be selective and this comment

applies to what now follows in relation to each

particular proposed charge.



42.   The policy of selection has been to collect the

sworn evidence of witnesses under topics relevant to the

particular charges to enable the reader to form a

judgment of the likely course and outcome of a hearing.

There is no doubt that other selections could be made,

but the cumulative effect of the extracts in the
Appendices is likely to be decisive.



43.   This exercise proceeds on the basis that the reader

is already familiar with the independent reports of

Chief Constable of Cumbria, and his recommendations

against proceedings.   The exercise concentrates on the

sworn evidence and documents given to the Inquests.

Each charge will be dealt with below by stating the

charge, then dealing with the merits and giving a

summary of the evidence which may be read in the

Appendix.
FIRST CHARGE   (Appendix I)



44.   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield:     NEGLECT OF DUTY -

Contrary to Paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of the Police

(Discipline)   Regulations 1985 in that he failed to

acquaint himself with the planning and problems related

to the control of the semi-final.



45.   A request for further particulars of the charge may

be expected i.e. of which aspects of the planning are

referred to, and what were the problems.       Such a request

would expose the weakness of the charge because the

evidence is that before the event no-one was aware that

any p roblem of control existed.      Nor was anyone aware of

any need to plan for the tragedy, and the planning did

not include anything which would have made any

difference to the outcome whether Mr. Duckenfield were

aware of it or n o t .



46.   If an answer could be given to the request for

particulars then in summary the evidence on the charge

is that the ground and procedures used in 1987 and 1988

were believed by everyone to be safe to be used again in

1989 without amendment.       This was the belief of the

Club, Engineer,   Football Association,    City Council,

Officer Working Party, visiting clubs,      spectators, and

Police.   These procedures did not include any

preparation for the tragedy.       Mr. Duckenfield inherited

the situation 19 days before the match,      and briefed

himself by reference to his predecessor Mr. Mole, the
Operational Order which was already in place, and senior

Officers including Mr. Murray,    Chief Inspector Beale,

Inspector Sewell, plus attendance at two matches at the

ground and an inspection of the ground with Inspector

Sewell.   Then he prepared and gave pre-match briefings

to senior and all other Police.



47.   The charge can be tested by asking if the

unforeseen tragedy had not happened, whether anyone

would have even thought of the idea that Mr. Duckenfield

did anything wrong in his preparations.     This test shows

that the charge is with hindsight.     It is no answer to

say that the tragedy brought planning defects and

problems to light, because that comment applies to a

decade of blindness by all the officials listed above,

not 19 days of preparation by Mr. Duckenfield.



48.   The above is illustrated and proved by the evidence

extracted in Appendix I to which the reader is referred.



49.   The trial of this charge would be long, and as it

proceeded,   the evidence would grow stronger against the

charge, which could not be proved.
SECOND CHARGE     (Appendix II)



50.      Against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield:     NEGLECT

OF DUTY - Contrary to Paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of

the Police     (Discipline)    Regulations 1985 in that he

failed to monitor crowd numbers in Pens 3 and 4.



51.      A request for further particulars of this charge

may be expected asking the following q u e s t i o n s :



(i)          Whereabouts was the duty to monitor numbers

              imposed?



(ii)         What were the numbers which had to be

              monitored?



(iii)        How, when and where was anyone in the Police

              ever informed of what numbers were permitted

              in Pens    3 and 4?



(iv)         What was the means of monitoring the numbers

             which ought to have been used?



(v)          If the charge is meant to refer to crowd

             density, what were the means provided to the

             Police to make any reliable judgment of

             density?



(v i )       What training,     or instruction was given
             anywhere,   to any Police Force as to the means

             by which this duty could be performed?



(vii)       Who in the decade before the tragedy ever drew

             attention to any of the above questions?



52.     The questions above are not capable of a sensible

answer, and will paralyse the charge.       If it proceeds

the following will apply.



53.     The evidence is extracted in Appendix II of some of

the witnesses who gave evidence at the Inquest on the

subject of monitoring crowd numbers and density.        This

includes the evidence of experienced football spectators

about football crowd behaviour, and the evidence of

spectators in various parts of the crowd mostly in Pens

3 and 4 about their own perception of the crowd density

at the time of the tragedy.       In summary the points made

are as follows.     (Please note when reading the evidence

that the location of most of the spectators can be found

in the diagram Appendix III).



54.     No safe capacity for Pens   3 and 4 was stated in the

Safety Certificate issued by the local authority

Sheffield City Council, and there was no means of

counting numbers in those Pens.       The guidelines about

Estimation of Safe Ground Capacity in Chapter 16 of the

Green Guide had not been applied by any of the

authorities to the capacity of Pens 3 and 4.
55.   The Police had to rely on visual impression of

overcrowding to react if they became aware of a problem.



56.   There was a wide range of opinions among both

spectators and Police about the stage at which any

particular density became overcrowded.          The Coroner

correctly stated     (Day 77 p . 54-55)   that the vast majority

of witnesses said that the distressing situation did not

occur until the players came out onto the pitch or

later.



57.   The authorities i.e. Police,        Club, Engineer,   City

Council,   believed that the system of "find your own

level" had worked previously and was safe without

intervention without stewards or the Police.          (See also

First Charge Evidence a b o v e ).



58.   It will be appreciated that evidence under the

other charges is also likely to be relevant to the topic

of monitoring crowd n u m b e r s .



COMMENT



59.   The effect of the evidence given at the Inquest

including the above was that the overcrowding was not

seen by anyone in authority until it was too late, and

this applied also to a large number of spectators.            The

evidence of the BBC television personnel, was the same.

If this disciplinary charge proceeds to trial,         then the

evidence called by the accused will probably include the
above with the result that the chance to prove the

charge is very slight.




                          -24-
THIRD CHARGE           (Appendix IV)



60.       Against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield:            NEGLECT

OF DUTY - Contrary to Paragraph 4(a) of Schedule I of

the Police           (Discipline)   Regulations 1985 in that he

failed to act when Pens 3 and 4 were obviously

overcrowded.



61.     There is an overlap between this charge and the

second charge and the same points apply plus the

fo l l o w i n g .



62.     There will be a request for further particulars of

the charge including what is meant by overcrowded, and

how was this to be determined in the surging mass of

uncounted spectators seen on the video film, many of

whom     (see the evidence)         thought the situation was normal

until it was too late.



        Also to whom the overcrowding was obvious and when,

and what was wrong with the Police reaction as soon as

they realised what had gone wrong?              What more or

different could usefully have been done by Mr.

Duckenfield when the tragedy was seen and understood?



63.     The answer to the above requests will be that the

overcrowding was not obvious to anyone in authority or

to most spectators until it was too late.              The reason

was that no-one was expecting overcrowding, and everyone

thought the ground and procedure were safe, and the
surging of massed uncounted spectators was normal.

Criticism is voiced only with hindsight.        These answers

or any similar particulars will make it impracticable to

prove breach of duty by Mr. Duckenfield.



64.   The question of what was obvious and to whom and

when, were issues left to the Inquests Jury under the ex

parte G r a y , in relation to the Control Room personnel

including Mr. Duckenfield.        If the evidence had proved

that the overcrowding was obvious before it was too

late, there can be no doubt that the Jury would have

found unlawful killing.      That was a major point of the

long Inquests.   (See e.g.   the Coroner's summing up on Day

75 p . 54-55 and Day 78 p . 125-127).



65.   Thus the matters for the decision of the Jury

included the point of this charge.        If it proceeds the

outcome is likely to be the same as the verdict i.e.

dismissed.



66.   The relevant evidence includes the extracts in

Appendix II,   III,   IV and V.
FOURTH CHARGE           (Appendix V)



67.      Against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and

Superintendent Murray:           NEGLECT OF DUTY - contrary to

Paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of the Police              (Discipline)

Regulations 1985 in that he failed to control the

movement of supporters subsequent to the opening of Gate

"C " .



68.      The first problem here is to identify the duty.             It

is nowhere stated in the 1989 operational order or any

other operational order.               The opening of Gate "C" was

unprecedented           (see e.g. MacKrell in Appendix I).     The

late arrival of large numbers of pushing spectators was

also unprecedented           (see the summary of evidence below

and Appendix V).            There was nothing in the 1989

operational order to describe the duty of the Police to

control the movement of supporters inside the ground at

all.      The only prescribed duty to have any bearing on

the situation was set out in Paragraph 2.1 of the 1989

operational order viz.



         "It is the intention of the Police to allow this

         match to take place and to ensure public order and

         safety both inside and outside the football

         g r o u n d ..."



69.      The duty to ensure public safety inside the ground

was intended to be performed by compliance with the

operational order, and by reaction by individual Police
Officers when they observed any threat to public order

or safety.               (See e.g. the evidence of Greenwood,

Creaser, Marshall,              Goddard,   Bichard, and Murray in the

A p p e n d i c e s ).



70.      In practice          "reaction" required the use of

individual initiative,and in the end this proposed

offence boils down to the allegation that Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray

neglected their duty by failing to use the right

initiative,outside the terms of the operational order

and planning^ to control the movement of supporters ,

subsequent to their use of the correct initiative to

break the operational order and planning to avert an

unprecedented tragedy at the turnstiles by ordering the

opening of the g a t e s .



71.      Another formulation designed to bring out the true

meaning of this proposed disciplinary charge would be as

follows:         "That whilst using their initiative to react to

an unforeseen life threatening emergency outside the

turnstiles,              the Officers neglected their duty by failing

to use their initiative to improvise a procedure to

prevent another tragedy inside the ground which was

unforeseen by anyone".



72.      It is not likely that any such disciplinary offence

of failing to improvise in a crisis does exist.                 Many

other men in the same situation would have done the

same.       Others may have done better,          but that would not
prove the existence of a duty under this charge.



73.   It is the case that at the Inquests there was

evidence that on previous occasions the entrance to the

tunnel had been closed on the initiative of Police

Officers on the concourse.     However none of the senior

Officers Duckenfield, Murray, Greenwood, Mole, or

Marshall was aware that this had happened, and it was

not reported in any of the de-briefing memoranda that

were discovered, or in the Operational Order.     Such a

procedure had never previously been linked with the

opening of any exit gates.     The result in the crisis was

that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent

Murray were without any precedent or guidance to perform

the duty alleged in the charge.



74.   In support of the contention that the failure to

make the correct improvisation does not amount to a

breach of duty, is the evidence of the junior Officers

in the Control Room Sergeant Goddard and P c . Bichard

that they did not at the time see any danger.     (See

Appendix Iltf) .   The same applies to the Police Officers

on the concourse and also to the gate men who were

knocked over or pushed aside by the entry of the crowd.

(See Appendix V).



75.   Since there was no duty prescribed in the

Operational Order to control the movement of supporters,

the charge means that the duty only arose in the

unprecedented emergency.     For the reasons given above it
is not likely that such a duty exists to support the

disciplinary offence, and breach of such a duty is not

likely to be proved when it did not cross the mind of

anyone at the time.




                          -30-
SIXTH CHARGE



76.   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield: DISCREDITABLE

CONDUCT - contrary to Paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 of the

Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in that he acted in

a manner likely to bring discredit on the reputation of

the Force or the Police Service.



77.   A request for further particulars of the charge may

be expected.   These particulars would have to be based

on evidence which is capable of proof at the hearing,

i.e. what action exactly is complained of and what was

wrong with it and why was it likely to bring discredit

on the Service?



78.   If the charge refers to the statement by Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield that Gate "C" had been

forced, and that there had been an inrush of Liverpool

supporters, then particulars will be needed to explain

why this was likely to bring discredit,when the true

situation was that the order by Mr. Duckenfield to open

the gates had in fact probably saved the lives of

supporters caught in the crush outside the turnstiles.



79.   The topic of this potential charge was considered

in the report by the Chief Constable of Cumbria at

paragraphs R230-R245 in the context of a charge under

Discipline Code paragraph 5 of falsehood or

prevarication^ which on the face of those words appears
to describe what the charge has in mind.       His conclusion

was that there was insufficient evidence to support the

charge and for the reasons given by Mr. Sharpe this may

be expected to be the result of disciplinary

proceedings.



80.   In the context of the other charges, the proposed

charge under this head is subsidiary, and if the other

charges do not proceed for the reasons set out above,

then it is unlikely that it would be fair and

appropriate for the case to proceed on this charge alone

in the light of paragraph 5.16 of the Home Office

Guidance.   One reason is that consideration of the

meaning of this charge would be likely to open up most

of the topics in which proceedings would not be fair and

appropriate as above .




                               RICHARD PAYNE




21.6.1991




                         3Z.
1          9           9         1




            re: HILLSBOROUGH             1
          DISCIPLINARY ACTION            ■

    CHEIF SUPERINTENDENT DUCKENFIELD ■

         SUPERINTENDENT MURRAY




                                         |
                                         t
               0 F I N I 0 N             1
                                         1
                                         ■




                                     •   |




Ref: SW/NJP

               Esq                       1
Solicitor
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters                      ■
Snig Hill
Sheffield
S3 8LY
i)       3 0 —» %»*si»     A?

     ^        *f    *^ c ^ A ,

     ^   ^0              •J-M lA-lC.

                   crffr*^ <r
     Wlc      ^0,               .
ELEMENTS OF THE CASE AGAINST SUPERINTENDENT MURRAY


 (i) In his role as the officer in charge of the Police Control
 Room at the ground he had (ii) a duty to take action to ensure
the.safety of people attending the semi final.        (iii) This duty
was his personally although others had a similar duty, (iv)        He
had the resources to discharge this duty.       (v) People in pens 3
and 4 became endangered by further people entering the ground
via the tunnel.    (vi) This was foreseeable.     (vii) This was
preventable.    (viii) He failed to give advice to Duckenfield of
the consequences if he were to make a decision to open the
gates, which advice might have caused Duckenfield to take
appropriate action before making or announcing his decision.
 (ix) He failed to alert the ground commanders Greenwood,
Creaser, White that the request to open the gate was being
considered.    (x) He failed to alert Lock that the request to
open the gate was being considered.      (xi) He failed to obtain
information from Greenwood, Creaser, White and Lock as to their
view of the likely consequences of the decision.        (xii) He
failed to warn them that they should make preparations to
prevent the crowd from going into pens 3 and 4 via the tunnel,
(xiii)   He failed to deploy manpower for the purpose of
diverting the crowd from entering the tunnel prior to the
decision being taken.    (xiv) He failed to ensure that the ground
commanders had the ability, from their location and the manpower
and barriers at their disposal, to put the diversion into
effect.   (xv) Once the decision had been taken he failed to
delay its promulgation so that there would be time to make
consequential arrangements.    (x v i ) After the decision to open
Gate C had been taken he failed to deploy manpower for the
purpose of diverting the crowd from entering the tunnel.
(xvii) After Gate C had been opened he failed to order Inspector
White to prevent the crowd from entering the tunnel.
PROOF OF THE ELEMENTS OF CASE AGAINST MURRAY


This paper sets out in more detail the factors making up each
element of the evidence.  It details the witnesses who can give
that evidence.  Frequently the admissions by Superintendent Murray
shown in the transcript of his evidence given to the inquest touch
on these factors.  References to the admissions though of extreme
importance to the presentation are not always included in this
paper which was prepared for the assembly of witness statement
evidence.

A comparison of the evidence itemised here for a named witness
with the material contained in the DPP report gives an indication
of the problem facing the presentation.

It is worth mentioning that for each point of evidence the names
of all witnesses who can most obviously prove the point are
included, although in the event it is to be anticipated that often
only one of these witnesses would be relied upon.


(i )    Officer in charge of Police Control Room

        a.    Operational Order                    - Sewell, Mole
        b.    Admissions at Inquest                -
        c.    Admissions at Discipline             - Foster
             Interview


(ii)    A duty to take action to ensure the safety of people
        attending the semi final

        a. Common law duties of constable.
        b. Case Law eg Johnson v Phillips,
           Harris v Sheffield United FC
        c. Operational order                   - Sewell
        d. Briefing                            - Sewell
        e. Admissions at Inquest               -


        f. Admissions at Discipline            - Foster
           Interview


(iii)   This duty was personal although   others had a similar duty

        a. Superintendent rank                     - Foster
        b. Admissions at Inquest
        c. Admissions at Discipline                - Foster
           Interview
(iv)     The resources to discharge this duty

         a. Manpower and facilities of              - Goddard, McRobbie,
            Police Control Box                        Bichard, Ryan
         b. Communication facilities                - Goddard, Bichard,
                                                      Sanderson
         c. Radio functioning sufficiently          - Goddard, Bennett
         d. Information gathering ability           - G u e s t , Lock
         e. Resources available on the              - Benne tt, White
            concourse                                 Crawford
         f. Reserve serials available               - Sewell

(v)      People in Pens 3 and 4 became endangered by further people
         entering the ground via the tunnel

         a. Green Guide.                        - Nicholson
         b. HSE Report                          - Nicholson
         c. The tragedy result                  - McRobbie

(v i )   This was foreseeable

         a. Planned capacity Safety             - Mackrell
             Certificate.
         b. Ticket arrangements                 - Mackrell
         c. Turnstile arrangements              - Mackrell
         d. Count of Leppings Lane end          - Guest, Lock
             available.
         e. Visual assessment of density        - McRobbie
             from Police Control Box.
         f. Visual assessment of crowd          - Goddard, McRobbie,
             needing to enter.                    Guest
         g. Experience of first opening of      - Bichard, Guest,
             Gate 'C'                             McRobbie
         h. Crowd in Leppings Lane not          - Goddard
             under control eg Mounted,
             Tannoy.
         j . Geography of area                  - Lock, Mackrell


(vii)    This was preventable

         a.   Done   in 1988 semi final         -    Higgins T, Crawford
         b.   Done   before                     -    Lock, Crawford
         c.   Done   at Gate A 1989             -    Higgins E.
         d.   Done   at January 19 89 match     -    Sewell, Foster

(viii)   He failed to give advice to Duckenfield of the
         consequences if he were to make a decision to open the
         gates, which advice might have caused Duckenfield to take
         appropriate action before making or announcing his
         decision

         a. Evidence of events in Police        - McRobbie, Goddard,
            Control Box.                          Bichard, Ryan
         b. Admissions at Inquest.
(i x )     He failed to alert the ground commanders Greenwood,
           Creaser and White that the request to open the gates was
           being considered                                 --------

           a. No messages sent                  - Goddard
           b. No message received               - Greenwood, Creaser,
                                                  White, Crawford

(x)           failed to alert Lock that the request to open the gates
           was being considered                   ~

           a. No message sent                   - Goddard
           b. No message received               - Lock, Guest
           c. Knew of stewards                  - Mackrell, Sewell


*X 1 ^     He failed to obtain information from Greenwood, Creaser,
           White and Lock as to their view of the likely
           consequences of the decision

           a. No request made                   - Goddard
           b. No request received               - Greenwood, Creaser,
                                                  White, Crawford,
                                                  Lock

(x i i )   MS failed to warn them that they should make preparations
           to direct the crowd from going into Pens 3 and 4 via the
           tunnel                                        -----------

           a. No warning sent                   - Goddard
           b. No warning received               - Greenwood, Creaser,
                                                  White, Crawford,
                                                  Lock


(xiii)     He failed to deploy manpower for the purpose of
           diverting the crowd from entering the tunnel prior
           to the decision being taken.

           a. No message sent                   - Goddard
           b. No message received               - Sewell
(xiv)        He failed to ensure that the ground commanders had the
             ability, from their location and the manpower and
             barriers at their disposal, to put the diversion into
             effect

             a. Greenwood visible on playing area     Bichard, Greenwood
             b. Creaser whereabouts unknown           Bichard, Creaser
             c. White visible on monitor as           Bichard, White
                behind turnstiles A-G.
             d. No location question sent             Goddard
             e. No location question received         Greenwood, Creaser,
                                                      White, Crawford


(xv)         Once the decision had been taken he failed to delay its
             promulgation so that there would be time to make
             consequential arrangements

             a. Unrestrained action by Police       - Goddard
                Sergeant Goddard


(xvi)        After the decision to open Gate C had been taken he
             failed to deploy manpower for the purpose of
             diverting the crowd from entering the tunnel

             a. No order given                      - Goddard
             b. No order received                   - Sewell


(x v i i )   After Gate C had been opened he failed to order either
             Inspector White or Sergeant Crawford to prevent the
             crowd from entering the tunnel

             a. No order given                      - Goddard
             b. Admission that no order given
             c. No order received                   - White, Crawford
 POSSIBLE LINES OF DEFENCE TO THE CASE AGAINST SUPERINTENDENT



 1.   Where is the duty?

 2.   It was someone else's duty namely Duckenfield's giving an
      exceptional order in exceptional circumstances.
 3.   He could state that he believed that Duckenfield in the
      3 to 3j minutes was considering all the ramifications of
      giving the order and any consequential orders or
      directions.

4.    What occurred was not a foreseeable consequence of the
      order.

5.    He was busy attending to other areas once he had passed
      the request to Duckenfield for Duckenfield's
      consideration.  He was relieving Duckenfield of all other
      matters.

6.    He did not appreciate the likely route Gate      'C' to
      the tunnel.

7.    Is a failure to recognise a problem a neglect of duty?     To
      omit or neglect do you have to know or understand?
8.    Looks up sees steady entrance of fans for    \
                                                  a minute, then
      returns to other matters, looks again, flood of people,
      too late to take action.

9.    Unique occurrence, no previous practical experience or
      instruction to help him deal with it.

10 . Plan to blame.

11 . Others failed who should have used initiative - eg 4
     Policemen stood against the wall on the concourse,
     Inspector White present.

12 . Surprised by the entry of so many through Gate 'C' - no
     visible pressure at Gate 'C' prior to the opening.
13.   No training in how to recognise overcrowding.
14.   View of pens 3 and 4 has its difficulties.
15.   Could he have expected the crowd to turn back if 3 and 4
      pens full, rather than to try and push their way in.
                                                                             HOME OFFICE
                                                                    Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                                           Direct line:
                                                                          Switchboard


Our reference:

Your reference:




The C h ie f O f f i c e r o f       P o lic e                                  2 4 S e p t e m b e r 1 9 91

The C le r k t o       th e P o lic e A u th o rity



D ear S ir

GUIDANCE TO CHIEF OFFICERS ON POLICE COMPLAINTS AND. DISCIPLINE
PROCEDURES

I e n c lo s e a copy o f a               c o m p l e t e u p - t o - d a t e v e r s i o n o f t h e Home
S e c r e t a r y ' s G u id a n ce t o     C h i e f O f f i c e r s on P o l i c e C o m p la in ts and
D is c ip lin e P rocedures.               The e x i s t i n g b in d e r s c a n b e u s e d t o h o ld
t h e r e p r i n t e d G u id a n ce:      p r e v i o u s c o p i e s o f t h e G u i d a n c e c a n now
be c a r e f u lly d isc a r d e d .

The G u id a n ce e n c l o s e d r e p r e s e n t s t h e f i r s t f u l l r e p r i n t o f t h e
docu m en t s i n c e t h e G u id a n ce was r e v i s e d i n a c c o r d a n c e w it h th e
i n t r o d u c t i o n o f t h e P o l i c e and C r im in a l E v id e n c e A ct 1 9 8 4 .             It
w a s t h e n c i r c u l a t e d u n d e r Home O f f i c e C i r c u l a r 3 1 / 8 5 . A m e n d m e n ts
h a v e s u b s e q u e n t l y b e e n i s s u e d u n d e r Home O f f i c e C i r c u l a r s 9 3 / 8 8 ,
2 1 /8 9 and 8 9 / 9 0 .        The a t t a c h e d v e r s i o n i n c o r p o r a t e s a l l o f t h e s e
am en d m en ts.

No n ew a m e n d m e n t s h a v e b e e n i n c l u d e d i n t h e G u i d a n c e w i t h t h i s
r e p r in t.       R e c i p i e n t s may t h e r e f o r e n o t i c e t h a t c e r t a i n p a r t s o f
t h e G u id a n ce s t i l l i n c l u d e s m a t e r i a l w h ic h r e q u i r e s a t t e n t i o n .
A p p r o p r i a t e am end m ents w i l l b e i s s u e d i n d u e c o u r s e .

T h e p a g e n u m b e r i n g s y s t e m o f t h e n ew d o c u m e n t a l l o w s u s t o i s s u e
a l l f u t u r e am en dm en ts b y r e p r i n t i n g t h e p a g e ( s ) on w h ic h t h e y
o c c u r and r e p r o d u c in g t h e r e l e v a n t s e c t i o n o r p a r t o f a s e c t i o n
a c c o r d in g ly .      T hese can th en be in s e r t e d                e a sily     in to     th e
G u id a n ce.

A ny q u e r i e s a b o u t t h e r e p r i n t i n g o f t h e G u i d a n c e s h o u l d b e
a d d r e s s e d t o M i s s I r e n e C o l e i n F 2 D i v i s i o n ( t e l 071 2 7 3 2 4 3 3 ) .




                                                         MRS G I MOODY
                                                         F2 D i v i s i o n
                            HOME OFFICE




                    GUIDANCE TO CHIEF OFFICERS
                       ON POLICE COMPLAINTS

                    AND DISCIPLINE PROCEDURES




1985 Edition, as amended by HOCs 93/88, 21/89 and 89/90
Reprinted September 1991




9/91
                                               S ectio n 1
                                      S ta tu to r y P r o v isio n s

G eneral

C o m p la in ts

D i s c i p l i n e A p p ea ls

R eferen ce to         C h ief O f f ic e r


                                             S ectio n 2
                 R e s p o n s ib ilit y w ith in f o r c e s f o r h a n d lin g o f
                        C o m p la in ts and D i s c i p l i n a r y m a t t e r s

D e le g a tio n to     d ep u ty o f       c e r ta in   fu n c tio n s o f
c h ie f o ffic e r


                                           S ectio n 3
                             A c t io n on R e c e i v in g C o m p la in t

D e fin itio n     o f a C o m p la in t

Im m e d ia te A c t i o n

P r e s e r v a t io n o f E v id e n c e

D e te r m in a tio n o f th e        'A p p r o p r ia te A u t h o r it y '

C o m p la in ts r e c e iv e d by P o l i c e        C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y

The R e c o r d in g o f C o m p la in ts

I te m isa tio n     o f m a t t e r s o f C o m p la in t

S t a t i s t i c a l R etu rn s -     F o r HM C h i e f I n s p e c t o r s R e p o r t

S t a t i s t i c a l R etu rn s -     P o lic e A u th o r itie s

O ffic e r s    n o t on d u ty

S p e c ia l   C o n s ta b le s and P o l i c e      C ad ets

C o m p la in ts b y C i v i l i a n    E m p lo y ee s


                                                S e c tio n   4

In fo rm al R e s o lu tio n        and Form al I n v e s t i g a t i o n

In form al R e s o lu tio n         o f C o m p la in ts

Form al I n v e s t i g a t i o n


9/91
In te g r a tio n       o f C o m p la in t and D i s c i p l i n a r y     In v e stig a tio n        1 6-19

S e le c tio n     of    In v e stig a tin g       O ffic e r                                          2 0-24

C onduct o f t h e           In v e stig a tio n                                                       2 5-27

T im in g o f I n v e s t i g a t i o n s

                 C r im in a l P r o c e e d in g s                                                    28-29

                 C iv il    P r o c e e d in g s                                                             30

R ep orts                                                                                        31

Ill-F o u n d e d       C o m p la in ts                                                                     32

S p e c i a l C l a s s e s o f C o m p la in t

     A.    W ith d ra w n C o m p l a in t s                                                           33-35

     B.     C o m p l a i n t s w h e r e a c t i o n m ay b e w a i v e d
            b y t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y                                                36-37


                                          S ectio n 5
          C o n s id e r a t io n o f and A c t io n on I n v e s t i g a t i o n            R eport

A c tio n by C h ie f O f f ic e r                                                                       1-6

R ep o rt on C a ses n o t a r i s i n g            o u t o f C o m p la in ts                                7

The R o le o f t h e          D ir e c to r o f P u b lic P r o se c u tio n s                          8-11

The R e l a t i o n s h i p     b e tw e e n C r im in a l and D i s c i p l i n a r y
P r o c e e d in g s                                                                                    12

W here C r i m i n a l P r o c e e d i n g s h a v e a l r e a d y t a k e n p l a c e                 13-15

W here t h e D i r e c t o r h a s d e c i d e d t h a t C r im i n a l
P r o c e e d in g s sh o u ld n o t b e b rou gh t                                                    16-18

A t t i t u d e o f C o m p la in a n t                                                                      19

F u r th e r C o n s id e r a t io n s w here C r im in a l P r o c e e d in g s
have been brought                                                                                      2 0-24


                                             S e c tio n 6
                  F u n c tio n s o f t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y

A.          S u p e r v isio n o f I n v e s t ig a t io n s

            M an d atory and D i s c r e t i o n a r y R e f e r r a l                                   1-4
            C o m p la in ts r e c e i v e d b y t h e P o l i c e        C o m p la in ts
            A u th o r ity

9/91
              Matters already the subject of Criminal or
              Disciplinary Proceedings
              A pproval o f I n v e s t ig a t in g        O ffic e r

              C onduct o f I n v e s t i g a t i o n

B.            D i s c i p l i n a r y R o le

              Summ ary o f P r o c e d u r e s

            M emorandum a n d I n f o r m a t i o n t o b e s u b m i t t e d
     to   t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y

            R e q u e s ts b y t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y        fo r
     a d d it io n a l in fo r m a tio n

            Pow ers o f t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y          in    r e la tio n
     to   th e b r in g in g o f ch arges

              A dvan ce w a rn in g o r U r g e n t C a ses

     -The C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y ' s p o w e r t o d i r e c t
      t h a t a m a tter be r e fe r r e d t o th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic
      P r o se c u tio n s

              W ith d r a w a l o f c h a r g e s b e f o r e t h e h e a r i n g

              C o n fid e n tia lity

              C a se s c o v e r i n g m ore th a n o n e m a t t e r o f c o m p la in t

           Pow er o f t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y t o d i r e c t t h a t
     ch a rg es be heard by a d is c ip lin a r y tr ib u n a l

            H e a r in g o f r e l a t e d     ch arges by a d is c ip lin a r y
     tr ib u n a l

          Change o f a d m is s io n o r d e n i a l b e f o r e t h e h e a r in g
     o f charges

              S p e c i a l R e p o r ts b y t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y

           D e le g a tio n      of    f u n c t i o n s o f t h e C o m p la in ts
     A u th o rity

              A ccused o f f i c e r      c e a sin g to    serve


                                                S e c tio n 7
                    I n fo r m a tio n and a s s i s t a n c e f o r c o m p la in a n t
                                   and o f f i c e r c o m p la in e d o f

L e a fle t     f o r m em bers o f t h e p u b l i c

N o tific a tio n        o f t h e ou tcom e o f a c o m p la in t

9/91
             To t h e c o m p la in a n t

             To t h e o f f i c e r     concerned

C o p ies o f      c o m p la in ts

C o n fid e n tia lity       o f D o cu m en ts p r e p a r e d i n    th e C ourse o f
In v e stig a tio n


                                                Section 8


R o l e s o f HM I n s p e c t o r s o f C o n s t a b u l a r y a n d P o l i c e
A u t h o r it ie s in r e l a t i o n t o c o m p la in ts

In form al R e s o lu tio n

D isc lo su r e     and c o n f i d e n t i a l i t y

In fo r m a tio n c o n c e r n in g th e P o lic e         C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y


                                   Section 9
                 Disciplinary arrangements for officers up to
                      and including Chief superintendent
G eneral

D isc ip lin e      Code

   -     D is c r e d ita b le   conduct       (d isc ip lin e     code,    P a r a g r a p h 1)

   -     D iso b e d ie n c e t o     orders     (d isc ip lin e    code,     P a r a g r a p h 3)

   - F a lse h o o d o r P r e v a r ic a tio n         (d isc ip lin e    code,
     P a ra g ra p h 5)

   - R a c i a l l y d is c r im in a t o r y b e h a v io u r     (d isc ip lin e    code,
     P a r a g r a p h 9)

   - L o s s o r dam age t o             P o lic e   P rop erty    (d isc ip lin e    code,
     P a r a g ra p h 12)

   - U n f it n e s s f o r d u ty th ro u g h d r in k           (d isc ip lin e    code,
     P a r a g r a p h 13)

   - A lte r n a tiv e       charges

   -     S c h e d u le 2 t o    th e P o lic e R e g u la tio n s     1979

D isc ip lin a r y      P r o c e e d in g s

   - R e sp o n sib ility           fo r a rra n g in g th e h e a r in g

   -     D is c ip lin a r y h ea rin g

9 /9 1
    - H e a r in g b e f o r e        a d isc ip lin a r y     tr ib u n a l                        2 0-21

S ta n d a rd o f P r o o f                                                                             22

E v id e n c e                                                                                 23-24

R e h a b ilita tio n       o f O ffe n d e r s A ct 1974                                               25

P u n ish m e n t                                                                                   26-28

    -   P u n ish m e n t i n     'r e m itte d '     cases                                         29-30

C r im in a l C ond u ct:        T im in g o f D i s c i p l i n a r y H e a r in g                     31

New T e n a n c i e s w h i l e        a w a it in g D i s c i p l i n a r y H e a r in g               32

M e d ic a l T rea tm en t                                                                          33-34

I n f o r m a tio n t o t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y a s t o         th e
O u tcom e o f D i s c i p l i n a r y P r o c e e d i n g s                                            35

Suspended O f f i c e r s                                                                           36-37

P r o b a tio n e rs                                                                                  38

R ecords o f P o lic e O ffic e r s '               F in g e r P r in ts                                39


                                                 S ectio n     10

C o m p la in ts and d i s c i p l i n e a r r a n g e m e n ts f o r S e n io r O f f i c e r s
(ab ove t h e rank o f C h ie f S u p e r in te n d e n t)                                             1-3

A c tio n    on     r e c e i p t o f a C o m p la in t                                               4-5
The I n v e s t i g a t i o n o f C o m p la in ts and o t h e r m a t t e r s
in v o lv in g S e n io r O f f ic e r s                                                              6-7

C onduct o f I n v e s t i g a t i o n s                                                              8-9

In v e stig a tin g        O f f ic e r 's R eport                                                      10

A c tio n    on     r e c e iv in g    in v e stig a tin g o f f ic e r 's     report               11-15

R ig h ts o f       th e   accused o f f ic e r                                                     1 6-18

R e sp o n sib ility        f o r a r r a n g in g th e h e a r in g                                    19
H e a rin g b y a t r i b u n a l         (R e g u la tio n   12)                                      20

P rocedure a t h ea rin g                                                                           21-22

E v id e n c e                                                                                 23

S tan d ard o f P r o o f                                                                              24


9/91
A d jou rn m en ts                                                                                           25

C o n c lu sio n o f h e a r in g                                                                          26-27

M e d ic a l T rea tm en t                                                                                 28-29

S u sp e n sio n   (R eg u la tio n s         23 a n d 2 4 )                                               30-32


                                                  S e c tio n   11

D is c i p l i n a r y A p p e a ls                                                                               1

N o tic e o f A ppeal                                                                                        2 -5

N o tific a tio n        to     o ffic e r    con cerned o f r ig h t t o A ppeal                                  6

W ith d r a w a l and am endm ent o f n o t i c e                o f A p p e a l ETC                         7-8

R espondent

            S e n io r O f f ic e r s                                                                              9

            O th er o f f i c e r s                                                                        10-12

A ppeal T r ib u n a ls

            R e m i s s i o n o f C a s e s b y Home S e c r e t a r y                                     13-14

            On W r i t t e n o r O r a l E v i d e n c e                                                   15-16

D o cu m en ta tio n t o b e s e n t t o A p p ea l T r ib u n a l                                         17-18

S ta tem en ts      in    lie u      o f O ral E v id e n c e                                                 19

G iv in g o f R eason s                                                                                       20

T a x in g o f A p p e lla n t s C o s ts                                                                     21


A nnex A       -              N o t e s o n P a r t IX o f t h e P o l i c e       and C r im in a l
                               E v id e n c e A ct 1984

A nnex B       -              N o te s on     th e P o lic e      (D isc ip lin e )     R e g u la tio n s
                               1985

A nnex C -                    N o te s on th e P o l ic e         (C o m p la in ts)     (G e n e r a l)
                               R e g u la t io n s 1985

A nnex D -                    N o te s on t h e (C o m p la in ts)          (M an d atory R e f e r r a l s
                               e t c ) R e g u la tio n s 1985

A nnex E       -              N o t e s o n t h e P o l i c e (A non ym ou s,          R e p e titio u s     etc
                               C o m p la in ts) R e g u la t io n s 1985

A nnex F       -              T im in g o f I n v e s t i g a t i o n s   o f a C o m p la in t w h ere

 9/91
             there are pending Criminal Proceedings
A nnex G -   D i s c i p l i n a r y P r o c e d u r e in c a s e s w here C r im in a l
             P r o c e e d in g s a r e t o be i n s t i t u t e d a g a in s t th e
             P o lic e O ffic e r


A nnex H -   N o te s on d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r in g s b e f o r e t h e    C h ief
             O f f i c e r and b e f o r e a t r i b u n a l

A nnex J -   Form a n d n o t e s f o r a n n u a l r e t u r n o f s t a t i s t i c s
             on c o m p l a i n t s , d i s c i p l i n e and c o m m e n d a tio n s

A nnex K -   Form a n d n o t e s     fo r s t a t i s t i c a l   retu rn to       P o lic e
             A u th o r itie s

A nnex L -   L e a fle t   'C o m p la in ts a g a i n s t t h e P o l i c e '




9/91
                                               SECTION 1

                                      STATUTORY PROVISION

GENERAL

1 .1          P r o v is io n f o r th e h a n d lin g o f c o m p la in ts , fo r
d i s c i p l i n a r y m a t t e r s an d f o r a p p e a l s i s m ade i n t h e f o l l o w i n g
le g is la tio n :

The P o l i c e     and C r im in a l E v id e n c e A c t 1984            ( P a r t IX )
The P o l i c e     ( D is c ip lin e ) R e g u la tio n s 1985
The P o l i c e     ( D is c ip li n e ) (S e n io r O f f ic e r s ) R e g u la tio n s 1985
The P o l i c e     (C o m p la in ts) (I n fo r m a l R e s o lu t io n ) R e g u la t io n s 1985
The P o l i c e     (C o m p la in ts)      (M an d atory R e f e r r a l s E tc ) R e g u l a t i o n s
1985
The P o l i c e     (C o m p la in ts) (G e n e r a l) R e g u la t io n s 1985
The P o l i c e     (A non ym ou s, R e p e t i t i o u s E t c C o m p l a i n t s )      R e g u la tio n s
1985
The P o l i c e     (A p p ea ls)    R u les   1985

1 .2      E x p la n a t o r y n o t e s on t h e P o l i c e and C r im in a l E v id e n c e A ct
1 9 8 4 an d on t h e R e g u l a t i o n s m ade u n d e r i t a r e a t A n n e x e s A t o E.

COMPLAINTS

1 .3         W here a c h i e f o f f i c e r r e c e i v e s a c o m p l a i n t a g a i n s t an
o f f i c e r o f h i s f o r c e w ho i s o f t h e r a n k o f c h i e f s u p e r i n t e n d e n t
o r b e lo w , h e i s r e q u ir e d b y s e c t i o n 85 o f t h e 1984 A c t t o r e c o r d
i t and t o a r r a n g e f o r i t e i t h e r t o b e r e s o l v e d in f o r m a l ly o r , i f
it      i s n o t s u i t a b l e f o r in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n ,       t o be fo r m a lly
in v e stig a te d .      W here t h e c o m p l a i n t i s a g a i n s t a s e n i o r o f f i c e r ,
t h e r e l e v a n t p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y a r e r e q u i r e d b y s e c t i o n 86 o f t h e
A ct t o r e c o r d i t and i n v e s t i g a t e i t , th o u g h i f t h e y a r e s a t i s f i e d
t h a t t h e c o n d u c t c o m p la in e d o f , e v e n i f p r o v e d , w o u ld n o t j u s t i f y
a c r i m i n a l o r d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e t h e y may d e a l w i t h i t a c c o r d i n g
to th e ir d isc r e tio n .

1 .4            The      1984 A ct        a b o lish e d    th e    P o lic e    C o m p la in ts      Board
e s t a b l i s h e d u n d e r t h e P o l i c e A c t 1976 and s e t up i n i t s p l a c e a
new P o l i c e C o m p l a in t s A u t h o r i t y .      The A u t h o r i t y a r e r e q u ir e d t o
s u p e r v i s e t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f t h e m o s t s e r i o u s c a s e s a n d may
a l s o , o f t h e i r own v o l i t i o n , s u p e r v i s e t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f a n y
o th er        c o m p la in t c a s e     w here th e y        c o n sid e r th a t       in d e p e n d e n t
s u p e r v is io n o f th e in v e s t ig a t io n i s d e s ir a b le in th e p u b lic
in te r e st.             S u b ject     to     c e r ta in    sp e c ifie d     e x c e p tio n s,       th e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y r e c e i v e and c o n s id e r t h e r e p o r t o f t h e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n i n t o a c o m p la in t a g a i n s t a p o l i c e o f f i c e r up t o t h e
rank o f c h i e f s u p e r in te n d e n t, w h eth er o r n o t th e y h ave s u p e r v is e d
t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n , t o g e t h e r w i t h a m em orandum i n d i c a t i n g t h e
ou tcom e o f t h e c o n s i d e r a t i o n g i v e n t o t h e r e p o r t by t h e o f f i c e r
t o whom a c h i e f o f f i c e r ' s f u n c t i o n s u n d e r P a r t IX o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t
have been d e le g a te d .                 W h ere t h a t o f f i c e r c o n s i d e r s t h a t n o
d is c ip lin a r y        c h a r g e s sh o u ld b e b rou gh t a g a in s t th e o f f i c e r
c o n c e r n e d i n r e s p e c t o f t h e c o n d u c t c o m p la in e d o f , t h e A u t h o r it y ,
i f t h e y d i s a g r e e , a r e em pow ered t o recom m end, and i n t h e l a s t

9/91                                                101
r e s o r t d i r e c t , t h a t su ch c h a r g e s sh o u ld b e b r o u g h t.       The c a s e o f
a n o f f i c e r w ho i s t h e s u b j e c t o f d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s a n d w ho
d e n i e s th em w i l l b e h e a r d b y a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l w h e r e t h e
A u th o r ity have u sed t h e i r pow ers t o d ir e c t th e b r in g in g o f
c h a r g e s o r w here th e A u th o r ity c o n s id e r t h a t a t r ib u n a l h e a r in g
w o u ld b e d e s i r a b l e b e c a u s e o f e x c e p t i o n a l c ir c u m s t a n c e s .   The
t r i b u n a l w i l l c o n s i s t o f t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r , a s c h a ir m a n , and tw o
m em bers o f t h e A u t h o r i t y n o t p r e v i o u s l y c o n c e r n e d w i t h t h e c a s e .

1 .5      S e c t i o n 95 o f t h e 1984 A c t r e q u i r e s p o l i c e a u t h o r i t i e s and
HM I n s p e c t o r s o f C o n s t a b u l a r y t o k e e p t h e m s e l v e s i n f o r m e d a s t o
t h e m an ner i n w h ic h c o m p l a i n t s from m em bers o f t h e p u b l i c a r e
d e a lt w ith .

D IS C IP L IN E AND APPEALS

1 .6          D is c ip lin a r y p roced u res are governed by th e D is c ip lin e
R e g u l a t i o n s w h i c h a r e m ade u n d e r s e c t i o n 3 3 o f t h e P o l i c e A c t
1964 and s e c t i o n 101 o f t h e 1984 A c t .                    A r ig h t o f appeal to th e
S e c r e ta r y o f S t a t e a g a in s t th e d e c is io n o f th e c h ie f o f f i c e r in
d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d i n g s i s p r o v i d e d b y s e c t i o n 37 o f t h e 1 9 6 4
A c t ( a s am ended b y s e c t i o n 1 0 3 ( 1 ) o f t h e 1984 A c t) and t h e
p r o c e d u r e s a r e g o v e r n e d b y S c h e d u le 5 t o t h e 19 6 4 A c t ( a s am ended
by s e c t i o n 1 0 3 (2 ) o f t h e 1984 A ct) and b y t h e A p p e a ls R u le s .

REFERENCE TO "CHIEF OFFICER”

1 .7          For e a s e o f r e f e r e n c e , th e t e x t o f th e g u id a n c e r e f e r s
th ro u g h o u t t o th e c h ie f o f f i c e r .     T hese r e f e r e n c e s sh o u ld be read
w ith due regard t o th e p r o v is io n s in th e v a r io u s R e g u la tio n s fo r
d e l e g a t i o n o f t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r ' s f u n c t i o n s i n c o m p la in t s and
d i s c i p l i n e m a tte r s t o th e d ep u ty c h i e f c o n s t a b le o r a s s i s t a n t
c h ie f c o n sta b le or to s im ila r p r o v is io n s in r e la t io n to th e
M e t r o p o l it a n and C it y o f London f o r c e s .




9/91                                              102
                                                SECTION 2
R ESPONSIBILITY WITHIN                   FORCES       FOR      HANDLING         OF    COMPLAINTS           AND
DISCIPLINARY MATTERS

DELEGATION TO DEPUTY OF CERTAIN FUNCTIONS OF CHIEF OFFICER

2 .1          As p e r m it t e d by s e c t i o n 100 o f t h e P o l i c e and C r im in a l
E v id e n c e A c t 1 9 8 4 , R e g u l a t i o n 16 o f t h e P o l i c e                   (D isc ip lin e )
R e g u la tio n s        1985      p r o v id e s      fo r     a    c h ie f    c o n sta b le     at     h is
d is c r e t io n , t o d e le g a te h is fu n c tio n s in r e l a t io n t o h ea rin g
d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s t o a d ep u ty c h i e f c o n s t a b le o r e q u iv a le n t .
M a t t e r s w h i c h m ay b e d e l e g a t e d i n c l u d e j o i n t l y t h e c o n d u c t o f t h e
h e a r in g , t h e d e te r m in a tio n o f g u i l t o r in n o c e n c e and, w here
a p p r o p r ia t e and s u b j e c t t o c e r t a i n l i m i t a t i o n s , t h e im p o s it io n
o f a p u n ish m en t.          R e g u l a t i o n 15 o f t h e sam e i R e g u l a t i o n s p r o v i d e s
f o r t h e d e l e g a t i o n o f t h e d u t y o f d e c i d i n g w h e t h e r a m em b er o f
a p o l i c e f o r c e sh o u ld be ch arged w ith a d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e t o
a d e p u ty o r an a s s i s t a n t c h i e f c o n s t a b le .                       It    is    c le a r ly
d e sir a b le        th a t,    in     th e       great       m a jo r ity     of    cases       in    w h ich
d isc ip lin a r y         charges          are       e v e n tu a lly     b ro u g h t,     th e    o ffic e r
p r e s i d i n g a t t h e h e a r in g o f t h e c h a r g e s s h o u ld h a v e no k n o w led g e
o f t h e c a s e p r io r t o th e form al h e a r in g . A c c o r d in g ly , d e le g a t io n
o f t h e c o n d u c t o f t h e h e a r i n g t o a d e p u t y c h i e f c o n s t a b l e may
ta k e      p la c e     o n ly     w here         th e     fu n c tio n     of     d e c id in g    th a t    a
d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s h o u ld b e b r o u g h t h a s b e e n d e l e g a t e d t o an
a s s is t a n t c h ie f c o n sta b le .

2.2a          W h ere      a     d ep u ty    c h ie f     co n sta b le       has     a     d e le g a te d
r e s p o n s i b i l i t y f o r h e a r in g a d i s c i p l i n e c h a r g e and a f i n d i n g o f
g u i l t i s rea c h e d , th e R e g u la tio n s p r o v id e , a s r e q u ir e d by s e c t io n
101 o f t h e 1984 A c t, t h a t t h e o n ly p u n ish m en ts a v a i l a b l e a r e a
r e d u c t i o n i n t h e r a t e o f p a y , a f i n e , a rep rim a n d o r a c a u t i o n .
A c c o r d i n g l y , a n a s s i s t a n t c h i e f c o n s t a b l e w ho c o n s i d e r s t h a t a
d i s c i p l i n e c h a r g e s h o u ld b e b r o u g h t a g a i n s t an o f f i c e r m u st a l s o
c o n s i d e r w h e th e r , i f t h e f a c t s a l l e g e d i n t h e c h a r g e a r e fou n d
t o b e p r o v e d , t h e o f f e n c e c o u ld m e r it a p u n ish m en t w h ich a d e p u ty
c h i e f c o n s t a b l e d o e s n o t h a v e t h e pow er t o im p o se , i n w h ich c a s e
th e a s s i s t a n t c h i e f c o n s ta b le sh o u ld d ir e c t th e ch a rg e t o be
heard b efo re th e c h ie f c o n sta b le .                     In r e a c h in g h i s d e c is io n ,
w h i c h s h o u l d n o r m a l l y b e m ade p e r s o n a l l y b y t h e a s s i s t a n t c h i e f
c o n s t a b le , (b u t s e e a l s o p aragrap h 2 .4 b e lo w ), h e w i l l w ish t o
h a v e r e g a r d t o t h e n a t u r e and c i r c u m s t a n c e s o f t h e o f f e n c e a s
r e v e a le d in t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r ' s r e p o r t and t o t h e l e v e l
o f p u n ish m e n ts aw arded w it h in h i s f o r c e i n t h e p a s t f o r s i m i l a r
co n d u ct.

2.2b         I f d u r in g th e c o u r s e o f a h e a r in g b e f o r e a d e p u ty c h i e f
c o n s t a b l e , e v id e n c e i s d i s c l o s e d w h ich w o u ld , in t h e o p in io n o f
t h e o f f i c e r c o n d u c t in g t h e h e a r i n g , s u g g e s t t h a t a p e n a l t y w h ich
i t i s n o t w i t h i n h i s pow er t o im p o se m ig h t b e c a l l e d f o r , h e
sh o u ld im m e d ia te ly b r in g t h e p r o c e e d in g s t o a h a l t and r e f e r t h e
c a s e t o a h e a r in g b e fo r e th e c h ie f o f f i c e r (R e g u la tio n 1 4 ) .           The
f a c t t h a t an a s s i s t a n t         c h ie f     co n sta b le     o r a d ep u ty c h ie f
c o n s t a b l e m ig h t d e c id e t h a t a c h a r g e s h o u ld b e h e a r d b e f o r e th e
c h i e f c o n s t a b l e i n no way f e t t e r s t h e l a t t e r ' s c o n s i d e r a t i o n o f

9/91                                                201
t h e a p p r o p r ia t e p u n ish m en t s h o u ld t h e c h a r g e b e p r o v e d .   In such
c ir c u m s t a n c e s , i t rem a in s f o r th e c h i e f c o n s t a b l e a lo n e t o d e c id e
t h e a p p r o p r i a t e form o f p u n ish m e n t a f t e r c o n s i d e r i n g t h e f u l l
c ircu m sta n ce s        of    th e    o ffen ce,     m itig a tin g        fa cto rs     and     th e
o f f ic e r 's record o f p o lic e se r v ic e .

2 .3         W h ere a n o f f i c e r h a s b e e n d e a l t w i t h b y a d e p u t y c h i e f
c o n s t a b l e f o r a n o f f e n c e a g a i n s t d i s c i p l i n e , t h e o f f i c e r m ay
a p p e a l t o t h e c h i e f c o n s t a b l e a g a in s t t h e f i n d i n g and p u n ish m en t
im p o se d , o r p u n ish m e n t o n l y , and on s u c h an a p p e a l, t h e c h i e f
c o n s t a b l e may n o t i m p o s e a p u n i s h m e n t g r e a t e r t h a n t h a t i m p o s e d
by th e d ep u ty c h i e f c o n s t a b le (R e g u la tio n 2 6 ) .

REFERENCES WHERE OFFICER CONDUCTING HEARING HAS KNOWLEDGE OF CASE

2 .4         I t i s r e c o g n ise d th a t in c e r t a in circu m sta n ce s th e c h ie f
c o n s t a b l e w i l l o f n e c e s s i t y h a v e a t l e a s t som e k n o w le d g e o f a
c a se w h ile i t i s s t i l l under c o n s id e r a tio n .             F or ex a m p le , w h ere
t h e m a t t e r s r a i s e d a r e p r im a f a c i e s e r i o u s and w o u ld am ount t o
a s u b s t a n t ia l c r i t i c i s m o f th e fo r c e o r w here o f f i c e r s o f h ig h e r
rank a re in v o lv e d ,              th e c h i e f c o n s ta b le sh o u ld keep h im s e lf
in fo r m e d o f t h e p r o g r e s s o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n .     T h e r e m ay a l s o
b e o t h e r c a s e s w h e r e a d e p u t y o r a s s i s t a n t c h i e f c o n s t a b l e may
w ish t o c o n s id e r s e e k in g t h e v ie w s o f h i s c h i e f c o n s t a b le , f o r
e x a m p le ,    w here he i s c o n s id e r in g c a l l i n g f o r an i n v e s t i g a t i n g
o ffic e r        from a n o t h e r f o r c e (p a r a g r a p h 4 . 2 1 ) ,      o ri f he i s in
d is a g r e e m e n t w it h t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y a b o u t t h e b r in g i n g o f
d isc ip lin a r y charges               (p aragrap h 6 . 3 0 ) ,    t h e r e f e r e n c e o f n ew
m a t e r ia l t o t h e D ir e c t o r (p aragrap h 6 . 3 2 )            o r th e h o ld in g o f a
t r ib u n a l (p aragrap h s 6 . 3 7 t o 6 . 3 9 ) .

2.5           W h ere a c h i e f c o n s t a b l e h a s b e e n i n v o l v e d i n a c a s e i n a n y
o f t h e s e c ir c u m s t a n c e s and a d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r in g i s t h e r e a f t e r
t o b e h e ld , h e w i l l no d ou b t w ish t o c o n s id e r a v a i l i n g h im s e lf
of       th e     p r o v isio n s    of    R e g u la tio n    14(7)        of    th e   D isc ip lin e
R e g u l a t i o n s w h i c h e n a b l e h im ( w h e r e h e i s n o t h i m s e l f a m a t e r i a l
w itn e ss)         to    r e fe r th e c a se t o an oth er c h ie f c o n s ta b le fo r
h e a r i n g , f o r d e c i s i o n on f i n d i n g and f o r reco m m en d a tio n a s t o t h e
p u n ish m en t w h ere t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r i s fou n d g u i l t y .               (T h is
R e g u la tio n c o u ld a ls o be u sed t o p r o v id e fo r a s i n g l e h e a r in g
w hen o f f i c e r s from m ore t h a n o n e f o r c e , e g m em bers o f a c r im e
squad,          are      jo in tly     ch arged ).          R e g u la tio n     14(7)     is   to     be
d i s t i n g u i s h e d from R e g u l a t i o n 1 4 ( 2 ) w h ic h p r o v i d e s t h a t a c a s e
in w h ich a c h i e f c o n s t a b l e i s i n t e r e s t e d o t h e r w is e th a n in h i s
c a p a city as c h ie f c o n sta b le ,              o r in w h ich h e i s            a m a te r ia l
w i t n e s s , m u s t b e r e f e r r e d t o a n o t h e r c h i e f c o n s t a b l e , who w i l l
be in every se n se th e d is c ip lin a r y a u th o r ity fo r th a t c a s e .

 2.5a       R e g u l a t i o n 1 4 ( 2 ) (a) o f t h e D i s c i p l i n e R e g u l a t i o n s p r o v i d e s
 f o r a c h i e f o f f i c e r , w here he i s in t e r e s t e d in th e c a s e o th e r w is e
 th an in h is c a p a c ity a s c h ie f o f f i c e r , t o r em it a c a s e t o a n o th er
 c h ie f o f f i c e r fo r h e a r in g .      I n s u c h a c a s e , t h e o f f i c e r t o whom
 t h e c a s e i s r e m i t t e d w i l l im p o se p u n ish m e n t i n t h e e v e n t o f a
 fin d in g       of      g u ilt.          The    R e g u la tio n s      do      not       d e fin e      th e
 c ir c u m s t a n c e s t h a t w o u ld r e q u i r e r e m i s s i o n u n d e r t h i s p r o v i s i o n .
 They w o u ld , h o w e v er, t y p i c a l l y a r i s e w h ere t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r h a s

 9/91                                                 202
a c o n n e c t io n w it h t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r o r w it h som eone c o n n e c te d
w it h t h e c a s e w h ich g o e s s o f a r b eyon d t h e p u r e ly p r o f e s s i o n a l
t h a t s u s p i c i o n o f b i a s m ig h t a r i s e .      A fa m ily or c lo s e , ou t o f
o f f i c e , s o c i a l r e l a t i o n s h i p a r e ex a m p le s o f s u c h a c o n n e c t io n .

2 .6          I n t h e sam e w a y , c i r c u m s t a n c e s m ig h t a r i s e i n w h ic h a
d e p u t y c h i e f c o n s t a b l e w ho w o u l d n o r m a l l y b e e x p e c t e d t o h e a r a
d i s c i p l i n e c h a r g e a g a i n s t an o f f i c e r w h ere d e l e g a t i o n o f su ch
m a tters         has     ta k en      p la c e ,   has     h im se lf      had      som e      p rev io u s
in v o lv em en t w ith th e c a s e .            W h ere t h i s h a p p e n s t h e c h a r g e s h o u l d
b e h e a r d b y t h e c h i e f c o n s t a b l e and i f h e i s i n t h e sam e p o s i t i o n
a s th e d ep u ty c h i e f c o n s t a b le , th e c h i e f c o n s t a b le sh o u ld re m it
i t t o a n o t h e r c h i e f c o n s t a b l e i n t h e n o rm a l way u n d e r R e g u l a t i o n
14(2).




9/91                                               203
                                             SECTION 3
                            ACTION ON RECEIVING COMPLAINT

DEFINITION OF A COMPLAINT

3. la         F o r t h e p u r p o s e o f t h e p r o c e d u r e s s e t o u t i n P a r t IX o f
t h e P o l i c e and C r im in a l E v id e n c e A ct 1 9 8 4 , s e c t i o n 8 4 ( 4 ) o f t h e
A c t d e f i n e s ' c o m p l a i n t ' a s a n y c o m p l a i n t m ade a b o u t t h e c o n d u c t
o f a p o l i c e o f f i c e r w h i c h i s s u b m i t t e d e i t h e r b y a m em b er o f t h e
p u b l i c o r o n b e h a l f o f t h e m em b er o f t h e p u b l i c a n d w i t h h i s
w r itte n         co n sen t.          It    is   th erefo re       not necessary           fo r   th e
c o m p la in a n t t o r e g i s t e r t h e c o m p la in t p e r s o n a lly w ith t h e f o r c e
concerned.                I t m ay b e r e f e r r e d t o t h e f o r c e b y a t h i r d p a r t y
i n c l u d i n g , f o r e x a m p l e , a C i t i z e n s A d v i c e B u r e a u o r a M em ber o f
P a r lia m e n t o r by any o th e r in d iv id u a l o r o r g a n is a t io n .             No f o r m
o f c o n s e n t i s p r e s c r i b e d and any w ord s w h ich ca n b e r e a s o n a b ly
ta k en       as       in d ic a tin g     th e  c o m p la in a n t's w illin g n e s s     fo r h is
c o m p la in t t o b e p a s s e d on sh o u ld b e ta k e n a s s u f f i c i e n t f o r t h e
purpose.              D is c r e t io n sh o u ld be e x e r c is e d b e fo r e a sk in g a t h ir d
p a r ty f o r e v id e n c e o f th e o r ig in a l c o m p la in a n t's w r it t e n co n sen t
t o h i s p a s s in g on a c o m p la in t.           In p a r t ic u la r , w here a s o l i c i t o r
 i n d i c a t e s i n f o r w a r d in g a c o m p la i n t t h a t h e i s d o in g s o on
 i n s t r u c t i o n s from a c l i e n t , t h e c o m p l a i n t s h o u l d b e t r e a t e d
w i t h o u t c h a l l e n g e a s h a v i n g b e e n m ade b y t h e c l i e n t d i r e c t t o t h e
 c h ie f o ffic e r .

3.1b S e c tio n 84(5) o f th e A ct s t a t e s t h a t , fo r th e p u rp oses o f
P a r t IX o f t h e A c t , t h e d e f i n i t i o n o f a c o m p l a i n t d o e s n o t e x t e n d
t o c o m p la in ts r e l a t i n g t o th e d ir e c t io n or c o n t r o l o f a p o li c e
fo rce       by     its     c h ie f  o ffic e r     or th e     person        p erfo rm in g h i s
fu n c tio n s.        M oreover, by v ir t u e o f s e c t io n 84(6) none o f th e
p r o c e d u r e s s e t o u t i n o r u n d e r P a r t IX a p p l y t o a n y c o n d u c t w h i c h
form s t h e w h o le o r a p a r t o f a c o m p la in t w h ere t h a t c o m p la in t h a s
a lr e a d y b een th e s u b je c t o f c r im in a l or d is c ip lin a r y p r o c e e d in g s.

3 .2         W here t h e C o m p l a in t s A u t h o r i t y e x p r e s s a v i e w on w h e t h e r
a p a r t i c u l a r m a t t e r w h ich com es t o t h e i r a t t e n t i o n in t h e r e p o r t
o f an i n v e s t i g a t i o n      sh o u ld o r sh o u ld n o t b e t r e a t e d a s a
c o m p l a i n t a s d e f i n e d b y s e c t i o n 84 o f t h e 1984 A c t , c h i e f
o f f i c e r s w i l l , no d o u b t, h ave reg a rd t o t h i s .            S u b j e c t t o any
d e te r m in a tio n by t h e c o u r t s , th e d e c i s i o n re m a in s, h ow ever, one
fo r th e c h ie f o f f ic e r concerned.

IMMEDIATE ACTION

3 .3    The f o l l o w i n g im m e d ia te        step s     are    r e q u ir e d   to   be   ta k en
upon r e c e i p t o f a c o m p la in t:

    a.     p r e se r v a tio n   o f e v id e n c e -   s e e paragraph        3.4;

    b.     d e te r m in a tio n o f th e a p p r o p r ia te a u th o r ity - s e e paragraph
           3.5;

    c.     r e c o r d in g o f th e c o m p la in t -     s e e paragraph 3 .7 ;


9/91                                              301
    d.     d e te r m in a tio n w h eth er th e          c o m p la in t i s r e q u ir e d t o be
           referred         to   th e   P o lic e         C o m p la in ts   A u th o r ity  -   see
           paragraphs 6 . 1 - 6 . 6 .

PRESERVATION OF EVIDENCE

3 .4          S e c t i o n 8 4 ( 1 ) o f t h e 1984 A ct p l a c e s on c h i e f o f f i c e r s t h e
d u ty t o ta k e w h a tev er p r e lim in a r y s t e p s a re n e c e s s a r y t o o b ta in
or p r e se r v e e v id e n c e .        T h is d u ty m ust b e c a r r i e d o u t w h e th e r o r
not       th e      c o m p la in t    appears         p rim a    fa c ie     one     of    w h ich     th e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n sh o u ld e v e n t u a lly b e s u p e r v is e d by th e P o lic e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y and w h e th e r o r n o t i t a p p e a r s t h a t t h e c h i e f
o f f i c e r w i l l be th e a p p r o p r ia te a u th o r ity in r e s p e c t o f th e
co m p la in t.           The d u ty t o p r e s e r v e e v i d e n c e s h o u ld b e b r o a d ly
d e fin e d to            in c lu d e  f o r e x a m p le ,      any im m ed ia te s e a r c h e s o r
o b s e r v a t i o n s w h i c h m ay b e n e c e s s a r y . W h e r e t h e r e m i g h t b e a l o n g
d e l a y , f o r e x a m p le i n a c a s e w h ic h i s su b j u d i c e , c o n s i d e r a t i o n
s h o u ld b e g iv e n t o t h e n eed t o p r e s e r v e r e l e v a n t r e c o r d s w h ich
m ig h t o t h e r w is e b e d e s t r o y e d a s a m a t te r o f f o r c e r o u t i n e .        (T he
d u ty t o o b ta in o r p r e s e r v e e v id e n c e e x i s t s w h eth er o r n o t th e
c o m p la in t i s c o n s id e r e d sub j u d ic e w it h in t h e g u i d e l i n e s s e t o u t
i n A nnex F ) .            W h ere t h e a l l e g a t i o n i s o n e o f a s s a u l t b y a p o l i c e
o f f i c e r i t i s a d v i s a b l e t o m ak e i m m e d i a t e a r r a n g e m e n t s t o h a v e
th e v ic tim             and t h e o f f i c e r m e d ic a lly          ex a m in ed , w it h t h e i r
co n sen t.          The e x a m in a t io n s h o u ld , w h e n e v e r p o s s i b l e , b e c a r r i e d
o u t by a p o l i c e su rg eo n o r a t a h o s p i t a l i f m e d ic a l a t t e n t i o n i s
r e q u ir e d u r g e n tly .        I n a d d i t i o n , a n o t e s h o u l d b e m ade o f t h e
g e n e r a l c o n d i t i o n o f t h e v i c t i m and t h e o f f i c e r and t h i s s h o u ld
in c lu d e r e f e r e n c e s t o any v i s i b l e s ig n s o f in ju r y o r d is c o m fo r t.
P h o tograp h s o f b o th p a r t i e s can a ls o b e u s e f u l .

DETERMINATION OF THE "APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY"

3 .5         The A c t and t h e r e l e v a n t R e g u la t io n s p l a c e c e r t a i n d u t i e s
o n t h e " a p p r o p r i a t e a u t h o r i t y " f o r a n o f f i c e r a g a i n s t whom a
c o m p la in t i s m ade.            T h ese d u t i e s a r e d is c u s s e d f u l l y b e lo w .
A f te r ta k in g any a c t io n n e c e s s a r y t o p r e s e r v e e v id e n c e , th e c h i e f
o f f i c e r w ho h a s r e c e i v e d a c o m p l a i n t s h o u l d d e t e r m i n e w h e t h e r h e
is      th e     a p p r o p r ia te  a u th o r ity    in    r e la tio n       to     th e    o ffic e r
concerned.             The d e t e r m i n a t i o n o f t h e a p p r o p r ia t e a u t h o r i t y i s
m ad e b y r e f e r e n c e t o t h e r a n k o f t h e o f f i c e r a g a i n s t whom t h e
c o m p la in t h a s b e e n m ade.         E xcept in th e c a s e o f o f f i c e r s o f th e
M e t r o p o l it a n P o l i c e , w h ere t h e C o m m issio n e r o f P o l i c e o f t h e
M e tr o p o lis i s in v a r ia b ly th e a p p r o p r ia te a u th o r ity , i f he i s
above th e rank o f c h ie f su p e r in te n d e n t th e a p p r o p r ia te a u th o r ity
w ill be th e p o lic e a u th o r ity fo r th e o f f i c e r ' s p aren t fo r c e .                   In
a l l o th e r c a s e s , th e a p p r o p r ia te a u th o r ity w i l l be th e c h ie f
o f f ic e r o f th e parent fo rce .

COMPLAINTS RECEIVED BY POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY

3 .6        W here t h e C o m p l a in t s A u t h o r i t y r e c e i v e a c o m p l a i n t w h ic h
h as n o t b een su b m itte d t o th e a p p r o p r ia te a u t h o r it y , th e y a re
r e q u ir e d b y R e g u la t io n 3 ( 1 ) o f t h e P o l i c e (C o m p la in ts) (G e n e r a l)
R e g u la tio n s 1985 t o tr a n s m it i t t o t h a t a u t h o r it y , u n le s s th e
c o m p la in a n t d o e s n o t w ish i t          to be tr a n sm itte d .               W here a

9/91                                                302
c o m p la in a n t h a s in d ic a t e d t h a t he d o e s n o t w ish h i s c o m p la in t t o
b e t r a n s m it t e d t o t h e a p p r o p r ia t e a u t h o r i t y , t h e C o m p la in ts
A u t h o r i t y w i l l e x p l a i n t o h im t h a t t h i s w o u l d p r e v e n t i t f r o m
b e in g i n v e s t i g a t e d , and t h a t t h e A u t h o r it y w o u ld c o n s e q u e n t l y b e
u n a b le      to    e x e r c ise    th e ir     power o f      s u p e r v isio n .      It       w ill
n e v e r t h e le s s be open t o th e A u th o r ity , w here th e y a re s a t i s f i e d
t h a t t h e p u b lic i n t e r e s t so r e q u ir e s , t o tr a n s m it th e c o m p la in t
t o th e a p p r o p r ia te a u th o r ity under R e g u la tio n 3(2) even i f th e
c o m p la in a n t d o e s n o t w ish i t t o b e t r a n s m it t e d .               W here t h e
a p p r o p r ia te     a u th o r ity    r e c e iv e s a c o m p la i n t b y way o f               th e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y , i t s h o u ld b e t r e a t e d a s i f i t had b een
r e c e iv e d      by      th e    a p p r o p r ia te  a u th o r ity      d ir e c t   from        th e
c o m p la in a n t.

THE RECORDING OF COMPLAINTS

3 .7         The a p p r o p r ia t e a u t h o r i t y i n r e l a t i o n t o t h e c o m p la in t
s h o u ld r e c o r d th e c o m p la in t a s soon a s p o s s i b l e a f t e r i t i s
r e c e iv e d .    An e n t r y s h o u l d b e m a d e i n a g e n e r a l r e g i s t e r o f
c o m p la in t s , w h ich s h o u ld b e k e p t u n d er t h e f o l l o w i n g h e a d in g s :

    i.            d a te , tim e      and p la c e     c o m p la in t was r e c e iv e d ,     and by
                  w hom ;

    ii.          n am e a n d a d d r e s s o f c o m p l a i n a n t ;

    iii.         d a te , tim e , p la c e      and n a t u r e      of   in c id e n t or conduct
                  c o m p la in e d o f ;

    iv .         p a r tic u la r s   of o ffic e r      c o m p la in e d o f ;

    v.           nam e o f    i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r o r a p p o in te d o f f i c e r
                  in a c a s e d is p o se d o f by in fo r m a l r e s o lu t io n ;

    v i.         d a te o f in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n    and d e t a i l s   o f o u tcom e;

    vii.         d ate o f       any r e f e r r a l s t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y
                  u n d e r s e c t i o n 87 o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t an d w h e t h e r r e f e r r e d
                  u n d e r su b s e c t i o n 1 ( a ) ( i ) o r 1 ( a ) ( i i ) o r 1( b) o r 2;

    v iii.       d a t e o f any r e f e r e n c e t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u th o r it y
                  under          R e g u la tio n   3     of     th e    P o lic e       (A nonym ous,
                  R e p e titio u s         E tc    C o m p la in ts)     R e g u la tio n s    1985,
                  sp e c ify in g        w h eth er   th e    c o m p la in t   was       anonym ous,
                  r e p e t i t i o u s o r in c a p a b le o f in v e s t ig a t i o n ;

    ix .         w h eth er       in v e s tig a tio n      s u p e r v ise d   by    C o m p la in ts
                 A u t h o r i t y u n d e r s e c t i o n 89 o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t a n d , i f s o ,
                 w h e th e r s u p e r v i s i o n was u n d er sub s e c t i o n 1 o r 2;

    x.           d a t e on w h ich i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r ' s r e p o r t s u b m itte d
                 to      th e  c h ie f   o ffic e r /p o lic e          a u th o r ity /C o m p la in ts
                 A u th o r ity ;

    x i.         (for o ffic e r s        o th e r th an        se n io r o f f ic e r s )   d a te   on
                 w h ich  c h ie f         officer's            m em orandum        sen t     to      th e

9/91                                              303
                  C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y u n d er t h e p r o v i s i o n s       o f s e c tio n
                  90 o f t h e 1984 A c t;

    xii.          r e su lt       of     d isp o sa l       of    c o m p la in t      (w h ere    fo r m a lly
                  i n v e s t i g a t e d ) , i n c l u d i n g p a r t i c u l a r s o f an y p u n ish m en t
                  aw arded;

    xiii.         m eans b y w h ic h c o m p la in a n t h a s b e e n t o l d              of r e su lt.
                  (In m ost c a s e s t h i s w i l l be done by th e                        C o m p la in ts
                  A u th o r ity - s e e paragraph 7 . 3 ) .

W here i n f o r m a t i o n c o m e s t o l i g h t w h ic h i n d i c a t e s t h a t t h e n a t u r e
o f a c o m p l a i n t i s d i f f e r e n t from t h a t r e c o r d e d i n t h e r e g i s t e r
 (eg i f t h e in j u r y s u f f e r e d by t h e c o m p la in a n t t u r n s o u t t o be
m ore o r l e s s s e r i o u s t h a n w as f i r s t t h o u g h t ) an a p p r o p r i a t e
a d d i t i o n s h o u l d b e m ad e t o t h e r e g i s t e r a s s o o n a s p o s s i b l e .
C h ie f o f f i c e r s w i l l p r o b a b ly f in d i t m ost c o n v e n ie n t t o k eep th e
r e c o r d c e n t r a l l y , b u t t h e y w i l l n o d o u b t w i s h t o c o n s i d e r h ow f a r
i t w i l l b e u s e f u l t o k eep c o r r e s p o n d in g r e c o r d s on a d i v i s i o n a l
b a sis.

3 .8         S e c t i o n 85 o f t h e 1984 A c t p r o v id e s f o r c o m p la in t s a g a i n s t
o f f i c e r s o t h e r th a n s e n i o r o f f i c e r s t o b e d e a l t w i t h b y m eans o f
in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n , w here t h i s i s a p p r o p r ia te .         In f u l f i l l i n g
t h e i r d u ty under s e c t io n              95 o f t h e A c t t o k eep t h e m s e lv e s
in fo r m e d a s t o t h e m anner i n w h ic h c o m p la in t s a r e d e a l t w it h
p o l i c e a u t h o r i t i e s and t h e I n s p e c t o r a t e o f C o n s t a b u la r y w i l l b e
e x p e c te d t o pay p a r t ic u l a r a t t e n t io n t o th e in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n
procedures.               I t w i l l n o t be t h e ir fu n c tio n to in t e r f e r e in c a s e s
a lr e a d y b e in g d e a l t w ith o r c o m p le te d .        They s h o u ld , h o w e v e r , b e
a b l e t o form a v ie w o f t h e a p p r o p r i a t e n e s s o f in f o r m a l r e s o l u t i o n
f o r t h e c o m p la in t in q u e s t i o n and o f t h e m eans b y w h ic h i t w as
co n d u cted .          I t i s im p o rta n t, t h e r e f o r e , t h a t c a s e s d e a lt w ith
u n d e r t h o s e p r o c e d u r e s s h o u ld b e e a s i l y fo u n d i n t h e r e g i s t e r and
t h a t t h e r e g i s t e r sh o u ld b e c o m p le te enough t o e n a b le a p e r so n
i n s p e c t i n g i t t o form a v i e w on s u c h m a t t e r s .

3 .9         I t i s n o t a lw a y s i m m e d i a t e ly c l e a r from i n i t i a l c o n t a c t
b y a m em b er o f t h e p u b l i c w i t h t h e p o l i c e w h e t h e r t h e m a t t e r o f
c o n c e r n a m o u n t s t o a c o m p l a i n t f o r t h e p u r p o s e s o f P a r t IX o f t h e
1984 A ct ( s e e p aragrap h 3 . 1 ) .               I n t h e s e c i r c u m s t a n c e s i t m ay b e
a p p r o p r i a t e f o r h im t o b e s e e n b y a s u p e r v i s o r y o f f i c e r f o r
p urposes o f c la r if ic a t io n .          W h ere a s a r e s u l t i t i s a p p a r e n t t h a t
a c o m p l a i n t w i t h i n t h e m e a n in g o f s e c t i o n 84 w as i n t e n d e d b u t
t h a t t h e c o m p la in a n t w is h e s t o w ith d r a w i t o r d o e s n o t w ant i t
t o b e p u r s u e d t h e c o m p l a i n t s h o u l d s t i l l b e r e c o r d e d an d b e show n
a s h a v in g b e e n w ith d r a w n o r n o t p r o c e e d e d w i t h .          Paragraph 4 .3 4
draw s a t t e n t i o n t o t h e n eed f o r a s ig n e d w r i t t e n s t a t e m e n t by a
c o m p la in a n t b e f o r e a c o m p la in t c a n b e r e g a r d e d a s w ith d r a w n .

3.10        R e g u l a t i o n 29 o f t h e P o l i c e        (D isc ip lin e )       R e g u la tio n s
r e q u ir e s a reco rd to be k ep t a t fo r c e h ea d q u a rters o f ev ery
fo r m a l d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e a g a i n s t an o f f i c e r and t h e r e s u l t .
T h is r e c o r d sh o u ld in c lu d e , b u t n eed n o t d i s t i n g u i s h b etw een ,
b o t h t h e c h a r g e s b r o u g h t a s a r e s u l t o f a c o m p l a i n t f r o m a m em ber
o f t h e p u b l i c and c h a r g e s a r i s i n g from p u r e l y i n t e r n a l f o r c e

9/91                                                304
procedures.
3 .1 1        T he S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e i s a w a re t h a t som e c h i e f o f f i c e r s
fin d i t u s e f u l to keep d iv i s i o n a l d i s c i p l i n e b ook s.                T h is i s a
l o n g e s t a b l i s h e d p r a c t i c e w h ic h h a s som e a d v a n t a g e i n t h a t i t
e n a b le s     m in o r     m a tters      to    be    d isp o se d      of    w ith o u t       form al
d isc ip lin a r y        h e a r in g s   and    th at    c o m p a r a tiv e   in fo rm a tio n        is
p r o v id e d t o t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r and t o H er M a j e s t y ' s I n s p e c t o r s
about th e o p e r a tio n o f d if f e r e n t d iv is io n s in a p a r tic u la r fo r c e .
I f a d iv i s i o n a l d i s c i p l i n e book i s k ep t, how ever, th e S e c r e ta r y
o f S t a t e c o n s i d e r s t h a t a n o f f i c e r a b o u t whom a n e n t r y i s m ad e
s h o u ld b e in fo rm ed a t t h e tim e o f w hat t h a t e n t r y w i l l b e .                   A ny
su ch book sh o u ld be d is t in g u is h e d                   from      (a)   th e      c o m p la in ts
r e g i s t e r c o n ta in in g th e r e c o r d s r e q u ir e d t o be k ep t under s e c t io n
85 o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t an d (b) t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r ' s d i s c i p l i n e b o o k
r e q u i r e d t o b e k e p t a t f o r c e h e a d q u a r t e r s u n d e r R e g u l a t i o n 29 o f
th e D is c ip lin e R e g u la tio n s.

ITEMISATION OF MATTERS OF COMPLAINT

3 .1 2      I t i s d e sir a b le th a t,   so fa r as p o s s ib le ,          c o m p la in ts
s h o u l d b e r e c o r d e d o n a common b a s i s i n a l l f o r c e s f o r t w o m a i n
reasons.

    a.      S i g n i f i c a n c e i s a t t a c h e d in P a r lia m e n t and e ls e w h e r e t o
            t h e p u b lis h e d f i g u r e s on c o m p la in t s .        I t i s o b v io u sly
            d e sir a b le to ensure th a t th e se fig u r e s , p a r tic u la r ly th o se
            r e la tin g        to   su b sta n tia te d   c o m p la in ts,    are  a c c u r a te ly
            c o m p ile d .

    b.     The p o w e rs o f t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y i n r e l a t i o n t o t h e
           b r i n g i n g o f d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s , w hen a c o m p l a i n t s c a s e
           i s r e f e r r e d t o th em , o p e r a t e i n r e s p e c t o f " th e c o n d u c t
           w h ich was t h e s u b j e c t o f t h e                  in v e s tig a tio n " .      W h ere
           d is c ip lin a r y ch arges have n o t been brought in r e s p e c t o f
           any p a r t i c u l a r m a tte r (w h e th er t h i s r e p r e s e n t s t h e w h o le
           o r o n l y p a r t o f a c o m p l a i n t ) , t h e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y may
           recom m end t h a t c h a r g e s s h o u l d b e b r o u g h t .               I t i s th u s
           d e s ir a b le to d is tin g u is h , to th e e x te n t p o s s ib le , th e
           i n d i v i d u a l m a t t e r s o f c o m p la in t r e f e r r e d t o t h e C o m p la in ts
           A u th o r ity .

3 .1 3        W h eth er a c o m p la in t i s s u b s t a n t i a t e d o r u n s u b s t a n t i a t e d
d o e s n o t d ep en d on p r o c e e d in g s b e in g t a k e n a g a i n s t an o f f i c e r o r
t h e ou tcom e o f any su c h p r o c e e d in g s , b u t on t h e e x t e n t t o w h ich
e v id e n c e h a s b een fo r th c o m in g t o              su p p o rt th e co m p la in a n t's
a lle g a tio n .       T h ere w i l l b e c ir c u m s ta n c e s i n w h ich a c o m p la in t i s
show n t o h a v e b e e n j u s t i f i e d b u t d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d i n g s a r e n o t
p o s s i b l e ( b e c a u s e , f o r e x a m p le , t h e c o n d u c t c o m p la in e d o f c a n n o t
be a ttr ib u te d to a p a r tic u la r o f f ic e r or o f f ic e r s , or th e o f f ic e r
con cern ed h as l e f t th e fo r c e ) or a re in a p p r o p r ia te (b eca u se, fo r
e x a m p le , t h e c o n d u c t c o m p la in e d o f i s n o t s u f f i c i e n t l y s e r i o u s
to      w arrant        form al p r o c e e d in g s ,      or     th e    o ffic e r 's      you th     or
i n e x p e r i e n c e o r o t h e r e x t e n u a t in g c ir c u m s t a n c e s m akes a d v ic e a
m ore s u i t a b l e c o u r s e ) .       In su ch c a s e s t h e c o m p la in t sh o u ld be
r e c o r d e d a s s u b s t a n t i a t e d an d show n w i t h i n t h a t c a t e g o r y i n

9/91                                               305
s t a t i s t i c a l r e t u r n s a s h a v in g b een d e a l t          w ith     o th er     th an     by
c r im in a l or d is c ip lin a r y p r o c e e d in g s.

3 .1 4      I n d e c i d i n g h ow m a n y m a t t e r s o f c o m p l a i n t s h o u l d b e
r e c o r d e d i n c a s e s o f d o u b t, and i n c o n s i d e r i n g w h at m a t t e r s h a v e
b een c o m p la in e d o f in any p a r t i c u l a r s i t u a t i o n , i t i s s u g g e s t e d
th a t      c h ie f   o ffic e r s   sh o u ld  have     regard          to   th e    fo llo w in g
p r in c ip le s:

    a.   W here a c o m p l a i n a n t m a k e s , o n o n e o c c a s i o n o r i n o n e
          le tte r ,         several         c o m p la in ts       of     d iffe r e n t     k in d s    (fo r
          e x a m p le t h a t an o f f i c e r a s s a u l t e d h im an d w a s a t t h e
          sam e t i m e           u n c iv il)     th is       sh o u ld     be     recorded         as    tw o
         m atters              of       c o m p la in t.              The        m a in      o b ject       of
          d i s t i n g u i s h i n g and s e p a r a t e l y r e c o r d in g d i f f e r e n t
         m atters            in     th is     way       is     to    e n a b le     th e    fig u r e s    fo r
          su b sta n tia te d           and      u n su b sta n tia te d         c o m p la in ts      to   be
         p ro p erly g iv e n .            I f i t w ere e s t a b lis h e d t h a t a p o lic e
          o ffic e r          was        u n c iv il       but        d id      not       a ssa u lt       th e
          c o m p l a i n a n t , t h i s w o u ld m ake o n e s u b s t a n t i a t e d a n d o n e
          u n s u b s t a n t ia t e d c o m p la in t: i f th e m a tte r s o f c o m p la in t
         w ere         not        recorded          s e p a r a te ly ,      th ere      w o u ld     be    no
          sa tisfa c to r y           way        of       a r r iv in g      at      th e     num ber       of
          s u b s t a n t ia t e d c o m p la in ts.

    b.   W h ere a p e r s o n c o m p l a i n s o f a s e r i e s o f l i k e a c t i o n s ,
         w h e th e r o r n o t i n v o l v i n g m ore t h a n o n e o f f i c e r , i n t h e
          c o u r s e o f on e c o n t in u in g in c i d e n t ( f o r e x a m p le , a s s a u l t
          on a r r e s t and a g a in           i n t h e c a r on t h e way t o               th e
          s t a t io n ) t h i s sh o u ld be rec o rd ed a s a s i n g l e c o m p la in t,
          w h ich        w ill     be        recorded        as       s u b sta n tia te d      if
          in v e s t ig a t io n e s t a b lis h e s t h a t any one o f th e a lle g e d
          a c tio n s in f a c t to o k p la c e .

    c.   W h ere a g r o u p o f p e o p l e m a k e s i m i l a r c o m p l a i n t s o f t h e
          treatm en t th ey have r e c e iv e d ,                on a s i n g l e      o c c a sio n ,
          ( f o r e x a m p le , w h e r e a num ber o f p e r s o n s a r e a r r e s t e d i n
          a sin g le         o p e r a t i o n and s e v e r a l  of   th em s u b s e q u e n t l y
          co m p la in       se p a r a te ly th a t   th ey      w ere a s s a u l t e d ) ,   each
          p e r so n 's      c o m p la in t sh o u ld    berecord ed      and        co u n ted
          se p a r a te ly .

    d.     W h e r e s e v e r a l c o m p l a i n t s a r e m ad e b y d i f f e r e n t p e o p l e
           about one in c id e n t            ( f o r ex a m p le ,       in a d d itio n to th e
           v ic tim ,      w itn e sse s    may       in d e p e n d e n tly m ak e    c o m p la in ts
           r e g a r d in g an a s s a u l t by a p o l i c e o f f i c e r ) t h i s sh o u ld be
           r e c o r d e d and c o u n te d a s on e m a tte r o f c o m p la in t , s i n c e
           o n ly o n e a c t i o n i s c o m p la in e d a b o u t.

    e.   W h ere a c o m p l a i n t i s c o u c h e d i n g e n e r a l t e r m s , a n d t h e
          s u b s e q u e n t i n v e s t i g a t i o n r e v e a l s a num ber o f b r e a c h e s o f
          d i s c i p l i n e , a l l s u c h b r e a c h e s w h ic h a r o s e d i r e c t l y from
          t h e i n c i d e n t w h ich g a v e r i s e t o t h e c o m p la in t , and w h ich
          a f f e c t e d t h e c o m p la in a n t, sh o u ld b e t r e a t e d a s s e p a r a te
          ite m s o f          c o m p la in t and s o r e c o r d e d and d e a l t w it h ,
          r e g a r d le s s o f w h eth er th e y h ave b een i d e n t i f i e d by th e

9/91                                                306
           c o m p la in a n t in t h e c o n t e x t o f h i s c o m p la in t, u n le s s th e
           c o m p la in a n t h a s s p e c i f i c a l l y   e x p r e sse d w ish e s t o th e
           co n tra ry .        Any o t h e r a n c i l l a r y m a t t e r s a n d b r e a c h e s o f
           d i s c i p l i n e a r i s i n g from t h e i n c i d e n t w h ic h d id n o t a f f e c t
           t h e c o m p la in a n t and a r e d is c o v e r e d d u r in g t h e c o u r s e o f
           th e in v e s t ig a t io n need n ot be record ed .

3 .1 5      N one o f t h i s i m p l i e s t h a t a num ber o f m a t t e r s c o m p la in e d
o f ca n n o t be d e a lt w ith to g e th e r so fa r a s in v e s t ig a t i o n ,
c o n s id e r a t i o n o f d i s c i p l i n a r y o r c r im in a l a c t i o n and r e f e r e n c e
t o t h e D i r e c t o r o f P u b li c P r o s e c u t i o n s o r t o t h e C o m p la in ts
A u t h o r it y a r e c o n c e r n e d , b u t i f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n and o th e r
a c t i o n r e l a t e t o a num ber o f s e p a r a t e m a t t e r s c o m p la i n e d o f , i t
i s d e s i r a b l e t h a t t h e d ocu m en ts s e n t t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u th o r ity
s h o u l d m ake t h i s c l e a r .         F or ex a m p le , t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y
w i l l n e e d t o know ( s e e s e c t i o n 90 o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t ) w h e t h e r o r n o t
d is c ip lin a r y ch arges have been p r e fe r r e d in r e s p e c t o f each o f
t h e m a t t e r s c o m p la in e d o f .            The g u id a n c e i n p a r a g r a p h 3 . 7
p r o v id e s t h a t t h e ou tcom e o f e a c h c o m p la in t s h o u ld b e r e c o r d e d
se p a r a te ly .

STATISTICAL RETURNS

F o r HM C h i e f I n s p e c t o r 1s R e p o r t

3 .1 6      C h i e f o f f i c e r s a r e a s k e d t o m ake a n a n n u a l s t a t i s t i c a l
r e t u r n o f c o m p l a i n t s , d i s c i p l i n e and co m m e n d a tio n s f o r t h e a n n u a l
r e p o r t o f HM C h i e f I n s p e c t o r o f C o n s t a b u l a r y a n d f o r o t h e r
p u rp oses.        The form t o b e u s e d f o r t h i s i s a t A nnex J t o g e t h e r
w ith n o t e s o f g u id a n c e on i t s c o m p le tio n .

To P o l i c e A u t h o r i t i e s

3 .1 7        I n a d d i t i o n , a s t a t i s t i c a l r e t u r n o f a l l c o m p l a i n t s from
m em bers o f t h e p u b l i c a g a i n s t m em bers o f t h e f o r c e c o n c e r n e d
i n d i c a t i n g how t h e y h a v e b e e n d e a l t w i t h , i n c l u d i n g r e f e r e n c e t o
an a c t i o n by t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y , s h o u ld b e p la c e d
b e f o r e t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y a t t h e i r m e e t i n g . A s u g g e s t e d form ,
w i t h n o t e s , i s a t A n n e x K.         (F or o t h e r in f o r m a t io n t o b e s u p p li e d
to th e p o lic e a u th o r ity , se e a ls o paragraphs 0 .3 - 8 .5 ) .

OFFICERS NOT ON DUTY

3 .1 8        The m ere f a c t t h a t t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f an i n c i d e n t , eg
a t r a f f i c a c c i d e n t , r e p o r t e d b y a m em b er o f t h e p u b l i c s h o w s t h a t
t h e o t h e r p e r s o n in v o lv e d i s a p o l i c e o f f i c e r w i l l n o t n o r m a lly
be a s u f f i c i e n t rea so n t o j u s t i f y th e m a tter b e in g reco rd ed as
a c o m p l a i n t a g a i n s t a m em b er o f a p o l i c e f o r c e .          W h eth er s u c h a
m a t t e r s h o u l d b e s o r e c o r d e d w i l l b e v e r y m uch a m a t t e r o f
ju d g em en t in t h e l i g h t o f t h e c ir c u m s ta n c e s o f t h e p a r t i c u l a r
c a s e , t h e m o r e r e l e v a n t c o n s i d e r a t i o n s b e i n g w h a t m ay a p p e a r t o
b e t h e p u r p o s e o f t h e m em b er o f t h e p u b l i c i n r e p o r t i n g t h e
i n c i d e n t and t h e n a tu r e and s u b s ta n c e o f h i s r e p o r t .              U su a lly
su ch a r e p o r t r e l a t i n g t o o f f d u ty co n d u ct w i l l n eed t o be
r e c o r d e d a s ' a g a i n s t a m em b er o f a p o l i c e f o r c e ' o n l y i f t h e f a c t
o f b e in g a p o li c e o f f i c e r i s e s s e n t i a l t o th e burden o f th e

9/91                                               307
c o m p la in t.

3 .1 9        T h ere w i l l b e o t h e r c a s e s w h ich do n o t i n v o l v e any
a l l e g a t i o n o f a c r i m in a l o f f e n c e n o r a r i s e o u t o f an o f f i c e r ' s
d u t y , e g c o m p l a i n t s a r i s i n g from d o m e s t i c q u a r r e l s , m a t r im o n i a l
d i f f i c u l t i e s , d i s p u t e s b e tw e e n la n d lo r d and t e n a n t and o t h e r
c i v i l d i s p u t e s , b u t w h i c h m ay f a l l w i t h i n t h e p r o v i s i o n s o f P a r t
IX o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t .             The p r o c e d u r e s e t o u t i n t h e D i s c i p l i n e
R e g u l a t i o n s , h o w e v e r , a p p l i e s o n l y t o c o m p la i n t s 'fr o m w h ic h i t
a p p e a r s t h a t a m em b er o f a p o l i c e f o r c e m ay h a v e c o m m i t t e d a n
o f f e n c e ' ; and i t s h o u ld n o t n o r m a lly b e fou n d n e c e s s a r y t o in v o k e
t h i s p ro ced u re t o d e a l w ith c o m p la in ts a r i s i n g o u t o f c i v i l
d isp u te s.


SPECIAL CONSTABLES AND POLICE CADETS

3 .2 0        C o m p la in ts a g a i n s t s p e c i a l c o n s t a b l e s and c a d e t s do n o t
c o m e w i t h i n P a r t IX o f t h e P o l i c e A c t 1 9 8 4 s i n c e t h e y a r e n o t
m em bers o f a p o l i c e f o r c e .             H o w e v e r , c h i e f o f f i c e r s m ay w e l l
c o n s id e r i t a p p r o p r ia te t o in v e s t i g a t e c o m p la in ts a g a in s t s p e c ia l
c o n s t a b l e s a s i f t h e y w e r e s e c t i o n 84 c o m p l a i n t s .           In a c a se
w h e re a c o m p la i n t c o n t a i n i n g a l l e g a t i o n s a g a i n s t a r e g u l a r and
a s p e c i a l c o n s t a b l e j o i n t l y , o r a g a i n s t a p o l i c e o f f i c e r and a
c a d e t j o i n t l y , h a s t o b e r e f e r r e d t o th em , i t i s recom m ended t h a t
t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y s h o u ld b e s e n t t h e w h o le o f t h e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n r e p o r t ev en th ou gh t h a t p a r t o f i t d e a lin g w ith th e
conduct o f th e s p e c ia l c o n sta b le or ca d et i s n ot t h e ir d ir e c t
concern.

COMPLAINTS BY C IV IL IA N EMPLOYEES

3 .2 1        W h eth er a c o m p la i n t b y a c i v i l i a n e m p lo y e e s h o u l d b e
t r e a t e d a s a s e c t i o n 84 c o m p l a i n t w i l l d e p e n d l a r g e l y u p o n i t s
n a tu r e and c ir c u m s t a n c e s .         T h e r e m ay b e o c c a s i o n s o n w h i c h t h e
s t a t u s o f a c i v i l i a n e m p lo y e e i s i r r e l e v a n t t o t h e s u b j e c t m a t t e r
o f t h e c o m p la in t and t h i s w i l l a p p ly p a r t i c u l a r l y w here t h e
c o m p la in t a r i s e s from an a l l e g e d i n c i d e n t w h ic h o c c u r r e d o u t s i d e
w ork.         C o n v e r s e l y , an a l l e g a t i o n a r i s i n g from e v e r y d a y w o r k in g
r e l a t i o n s h i p s b e tw e e n c i v i l i a n e m p lo y e e s and p o l i c e o f f i c e r s
s h o u ld n o r m a lly b e t r e a t e d a s an i n t e r n a l m a t t e r (and f r e q u e n t l y
one fo r           re so lu tio n      b y m anagem ent and i n d u s t r i a l              r e la tio n s
t e c h n i q u e s ) s i n c e t h e c i v i l i a n i s n o t t h e n i n t h e sam e p o s i t i o n
a s a m em b er o f t h e p u b l i c b u t i s o n e e m p l o y e e a m on g o t h e r s .

3 .2 2        I t i s em p h a sise d t h a t t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f any m a tte r s
draw n t o t h e a t t e n t i o n o f t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r i s n o t p r e c l u d e d by
t h e m ere f a c t t h a t t h e y do n o t f a l l t o b e r e c o r d e d a s c o m p la in t s
m ade u n d e r s e c t i o n 85 o f t h e A c t . T he D i s c i p l i n e R e g u l a t i o n s
 (R e g u la tio n     6)     set   o u t arran gem en ts               fo r in q u ir y in to  any
a l l e g a t i o n o r r e p o r t, w h a tev er th e s o u r c e , w here such in q u ir y
seem s a p p r o p r ia te .        F u r t h e r m o r e , s e c t i o n 88 o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t
p e r m it s t h e r e f e r e n c e o f su c h m a t t e r s t o t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts
A u t h o r i t y a t t h e d i s c r e t i o n o f t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r f o r th em t o
c o n s id e r s u p e r v is in g th e in v e s t ig a t i o n (s e e a ls o paragrap h 6 .1 ) .


9/91                                               308
                                                SECTION 4

                INFORMAL RESOLUTION AND FORMAL INVESTIGATION

4 .1        T h is    se c tio n    sets  out th e     sta n d a rd p roced u re to           be
f o llo w e d w here an o f f i c e r o f t h e rank o f c h i e f s u p e r in t e n d e n t o r
b e lo w i s       th e s u b je c t o f a c o m p la in t,    rep ort or a lle g a tio n
r e q u ir in g in v e s t ig a t io n . For th e p ro ced u re in r e s p e c t o f s e n io r
o f f ic e r s , se e s e c tio n 10.

4 .2         R e g u la t io n 6 o f t h e P o l i c e ( D i s c i p l i n e ) R e g u la t io n s 1985
p r o v id e s t h a t in th e c a s e o f any c o m p la in t, r e p o r t o r a l l e g a t i o n
f r o m w h i c h i t a p p e a r s t h a t a m em b er o f a p o l i c e f o r c e m ay h a v e
c o m m itte d an o f f e n c e a g a i n s t d i s c i p l i n e , an o f f i c e r s h a l l b e
a p p o in t e d t o i n v e s t i g a t e t h e m a t t e r . Even w h ere an i n v e s t i g a t i o n
i t s e l f h a s t o b e d e la y e d , t h e a p p o in tm e n t o f t h a t o f f i c e r ,
h e r e a f t e r c a l l e d t h e ' i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r ' , s h o u l d b e m ade a s
s o o n a s p r a c t i c a b l e ( i n som e c a s e s s u b j e c t t o t h e a p p r o v a l o f t h e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y - s e e p a ra g ra p h 4 .1 5 ) s o t h a t t h e a c c u s e d
o ffic e r       m ay b e        a ffo rd ed      th e      sa feg u a rd s      la id    d ow n i n        th e
D is c ip lin e R e g u la tio n s.           As a p r e lim in a r y s t e p , h ow ever, i t h as
t o b e b o r n e i n m in d t h a t t h e l e s s s e r i o u s c o m p l a i n t s m i g h t b e
s u i t a b l e f o r in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n . S e c t i o n 85 o f t h e A c t p r o v id e s
th a t th e f ir s t            s te p t o be ta k en a f t e r th e r e c o r d in g o f a
c o m p la in t i s t o c o n s id e r w h e th e r in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n m ig h t be
a p p r o p r i a t e , a n d t h a t c h i e f o f f i c e r s may a p p o i n t a n o f f i c e r ( o f
n o t l e s s th a n c h i e f i n s p e c t o r rank) t o a s s i s t them i n d e t e r m in in g
t h a t q u e s t i o n . C h i e f o f f i c e r s may t h e r e f o r e c a r e t o c o n s i d e r t h e
a p p o in tm e n t o f an o f f i c e r o r o f f i c e r s a t t h a t ra n k o r a b o v e,
w hose t a s k i t w i l l b e , o n ce c o m p la in ts h ave b een r e c o r d e d , t o
a d d r e s s t h e i s s u e o f in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n .           C o m p la in ts a r e o n ly
s u i t a b l e f o r in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n i f t h e c o n d u c t c o m p la in e d o f ,
e v e n i f p r o v e d , w o u ld n o t j u s t i f y a c r i m i n a l o r d i s c i p l i n a r y
c h a r g e , and i f t h e c o m p la in a n t i s c o n t e n t f o r t h e c a s e t o be
h a n d le d in t h i s w ay. I f t h e o f f i c e r d ep u ted t o c o n s id e r t h e c a s e
th in k s th a t          in fo rm a l r e s o l u t i o n      is   a p o ss ib ility ,           he w ill
t h e r e f o r e h a v e t o s e e t h e c o m p la in a n t t o e s t a b l i s h t h e l a t t e r ' s
v ie w s.       When t h e d e c i s i o n i s t a k e n t h a t i n f o r m a l r e s o l u t i o n i s
a p p r o p r ia t e , t h e c a s e m ig h t b e r e f e r r e d t o a n o th e r o f f i c e r t o
u n d e r ta k e i t ( i e t o a c t a s t h e " a p p o in te d o f f i c e r " a s d e f in e d in
th e R e g u la t io n s ) , o r th e o f f i c e r i n i t i a l l y d ep u ted t o h a n d le th e
q u e s t i o n m ig h t h i m s e l f a c t a s a p p o in t e d o f f i c e r and s e e k an
in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n .      T h e l a t t e r c o u r s e m ay i n m ay c a s e s p r o v e
t h e s i m p l e r and m ore s t r a i g h t f o r w a r d way t o p r o c e e d .            S e c t i o n 85
p r o v i d e s t h a t a n o f f i c e r w ho h a s s t a r t e d t o a c t a s a p p o i n t e d
o f f i c e r m ay n o t s u b s e q u e n t l y u n d e r t a k e t h e f o r m a l i n v e s t i g a t i o n
o f t h e c a s e i f t h a t s h o u ld becom e n e c e s s a r y ; b u t t h e r e i s n o th in g
t o p r e v e n t a n o f f i c e r w ho h a s b e e n i n v o l v e d i n t h e p r e l i m i n a r y
s t a g e s s h o r t o f b e c o m in g t h e a p p o in t e d o f f i c e r , from a c t i n g a s
in v e stig a tin g o ffic e r la te r .

4 .3       A c o m p l a i n t may n o t n e e d t o b e d e a l t w i t h u n d e r e i t h e r o f
t h e a b o v e m e n tio n e d p r o c e d u r e s w here:

    a.      i t i s c le a r ly d ir e c te d a t th e a d m in istr a tiv e p rocedures
            or in s tr u c tio n s o f th e fo r c e (se e paragraph 3 .1 ) ; or

9/91                                                 401
    b.     it   appears    to     be                 anonymous            or      r e p e titiv e         (see
           paragraphs 4 .3 6 -4 .3 7 ).

P r e l i m i n a r y e n q u i r i e s m ay b e o f a s s i s t a n c e i n d e t e r m i n i n g w h e t h e r
a c o m p la in t f a l l s in t o any o f t h e s e c a t e g o r ie s .

INFORMAL RESOLUTION OF COMPLAINTS

4 .4          I n f o r m a l r e s o l u t i o n i s in t e n d e d t o p r o v i d e a f l e x i b l e and
s im p le p r o c e d u r e f o r d e a l i n g w it h c o m p la in t s o f a m in o r n a t u r e
w h ic h w o u ld o t h e r w i s e a t t r a c t t h e f u l l l e n g t h and f o r m a l i t y o f
th e in v e s tig a tio n p ro c ess.                The p r o c e d u r e i s a p p r o p r i a t e w h e r e
i t i s c l e a r from t h e o u t s e t t h a t a n y a l l e g e d c r i m i n a l b e h a v io u r
o r b r e a c h o f t h e d i s c i p l i n e co d e i s on e w h ich i f p r o v e d t o h a v e
o c c u r r e d w o u ld p r o b a b ly b e d e a l t w it h n o t by c r i m i n a l o r fo r m a l
d i s c i p l i n e c h a r g e s b u t by an in fo r m a l w a rn in g o r by a d v ic e ; o r
w h ere p r e lim in a r y i n v e s t i g a t i o n r e v e a l s t h a t t h e c o n d u c t was b o th
la w f u l and r e a s o n a b le .               E x a m p le s o f c o m p l a i n t s o f c r i m i n a l
b e h a v io u r t o w h ich t h e in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n p r o c e d u r e s m ig h t b e
c o n sid e r e d       a p p r o p r ia te     are th ose         a lle g in g    tr iv ia l    o ffen ces
i n v o l v i n g t h e u s e o f m otor v e h i c l e s and t r i v i a l n o n - t r a f f i c
c a s e s , su ch a s t h e u s e o f o b sc e n e la n g u a g e o r t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y
o f f e n c e o f i n c i v i l i t y , o r an a s s a u l t i n t h e n a t u r e o f a m ere p u sh
w i t h o u t a g g r a v a t i n g f e a t u r e s s u c h a s an e n d e a v o u r t o o b t a i n an
a d m issio n .         In such c a s e s i f a c i v i l i a n in s im ila r c ir c u m sta n c e s
w o u ld n o t b e p r o c e e d e d a g a i n s t o r t h e a p p r o p r i a t e a c t i o n w o u ld
be w ords o f a d v ic e a d m in is te r e d a t th e tim e th e n in fo rm a l
r e s o l u t i o n w o u ld g e n e r a l l y b e a c c e p t a b l e .        B ecause f l e x i b i l i t y
i s d e s i r a b l e i n t h e in f o r m a l r e s o l u t i o n p r o c e d u r e s , i t w o u ld b e
in a p p r o p r ia te to s e t o u t d e t a ile d p ro ced u res e it h e r in t h i s
g u i d a n c e o r i n r e g u l a t i o n s m ad e b y S t a t u t o r y I n s t r u m e n t .         The
fo llo w in g paragraphs o u tlin e th e r e le v a n t s ta tu to r y p r o v is io n s
and r e q u ir e m e n ts .

4 .5          R e g u la tio n 3(3)          o f th e P o lic e      (C o m p la in ts)    (In fo rm a l
R e so lu tio n )        R e g u la tio n s p r o v id e s t h a t ,    w h ere t h e C o m p la in ts
A u th o rity          are     r e q u ir e d ,  or     d e term in e ,     to    su p e r v ise   th e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f a c o m p la in t, t h a t c o m p la in t sh o u ld n o t b e d e a l t
w i t h b y way o f i n f o r m a l r e s o l u t i o n .       W here, w h i l s t a t t e m p t s a t
in f o r m a l r e s o l u t i o n a r e b e i n g m ade, t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y
d e c id e t o s u p e r v is e th e in v e s t ig a t io n o f th e co m p la in t, th e
in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n p r o c e d u r e sh o u ld be d is c o n t in u e d fo r t h w it h
and t h e p r o c e d u r e s e t o u t in p a ra g ra p h s 4 . 1 4 - 4 . 3 2 b e lo w s h o u ld
be fo llo w e d .

4 .6         R e g u la tio n 4(1)         o f th e P o lic e       (C o m p la in ts)     (In fo rm a l
R e so lu tio n ) R e g u la tio n s r e q u ir e s t h a t , a s soon a s p r a c t ic a b le
a f t e r th e d e c i s i o n t o a tte m p t t o r e s o lv e a c o m p la in t in fo r m a lly ,
th e     a p p o in te d    o ffic e r      sh o u ld _ s e e k  th e   v ie w s    of    b oth    th e
c o m p l a i n a n t a n d t h e o f f i c e r a g a i n s t whom t h e c o m p l a i n t h a s b e e n
m a d e . He may a t t h e s a m e t i m e o r t h e r e a f t e r t a k e a n y s t e p s w h i c h
a p p e a r t o h im t o b e a p p r o p r i a t e t o r e s o l v e t h e c o m p l a i n t .       It
sh o u ld b e n o te d t h a t t h e a p p o in te d o f f i c e r ' s t a s k i s t o a c h ie v e
a p o sitio n          in w h ich t h e c o m p la in a n t i s          sa tisfie d       th a t h is
c o m p la in t h a s b een d e a l t w ith in an a p p r o p r ia te m anner.                    T h is

9/91                                                 402
w i l l n o t n e c e s s a r i l y r e q u ir e an a p o lo g y on b e h a l f o f e i t h e r t h e
fo rce or th e o ffic e r concerned.                        I n som e i n s t a n c e s i t w i l l b e
s u f f i c i e n t t o e x p l a i n t h e la w o r t h e p r o c e d u r e s u n d e r w h ich t h e
o f f i c e r w as o p e r a t in g a t t h e tim e o f t h e i n c i d e n t w h ich g a v e r i s e
t o th e c o m p la in t.             In y e t o th e r s i t w i l l be c le a r t o th e
a p p o in te d o f f i c e r t h a t t h e r e i s an i r r e c o n c i l a b l e d i f f e r e n c e in
t h e c o m p la in a n t 's and t h e o f f i c e r ' s d e s c r i p t i o n o f t h e i n c i d e n t
w h ich g a v e r i s e t o t h e c o m p la in t.              I n s u c h a c a s e i t m ay b e
s u f f i c i e n t t o e x p l a i n t h e p o s i t i o n t o t h e c o m p la in a n t and i n v i t e
h im t o a c c e p t t h a t n o t h i n g f u r t h e r c a n b e d o n e .       The o n ly l i m i t
p la c e d      on t h e a p p o in te d o f f i c e r ' s       freed om t o         approach th e
r e s o l u t i o n o f t h e c o m p la i n t i n t h e m o st a p p r o p r i a t e way i s fo u n d
in R e g u la tio n 4 ( 2 ) .          T h is p r o v id e s t h a t t h e a p p o in te d o f f i c e r
s h a l l n o t r e n d e r any a p o lo g y on b e h a lf o f t h e o f f i c e r co n cern ed
u n l e s s t h a t o f f i c e r h a s a d m itte d t h e c o n d u c t c o m p la in e d o f .

4 .7         S tep s      sh o u ld      be     ta k en     to       ensure        th a t    an    o ffic e r
v o lu n t e e r in g an o r a l o r w r it t e n               s ta te m e n t t o t h e a p p o in te d
o f f i c e r i s aw are o f t h e e f f e c t o f t h e p r o v is io n s o f s e c t i o n s
1 0 4 ( 3 ) and (4) o f t h e 1984 A c t .               S e c t io n 1 0 4 (3 ) p r o v id e s t h a t any
s t a t e m e n t made f o r t h e p u r p o s e o f i n f o r m a l r e s o l u t i o n w i l l n o t
be a d m issib le in su b seq u en t c r im in a l, c i v i l or d is c ip lin a r y
p r o c e e d in g s.      S e c t i o n 1 0 4 ( 4 ) , h o w e v e r , e x e m p ts from t h e e f f e c t
o f s e c t i o n 1 0 4 ( 3 ) an y m a t e r i a l w h ic h c o n s i s t s o f o r i n c l u d e s an
a d m is s io n r e l a t i n g t o a m a tt e r w h ich d o e s n o t f a l l t o b e r e s o l v e d
in fo r m a lly .       I t t h u s f o l l o w s t h a t i f an o f f i c e r o r a c o m p la in a n t
m akes an y s t a t e m e n t i n t h e c o u r s e o f an a tte m p t t o r e s o l v e a
c o m p la in t     in fo r m a lly       th en ,     w h eth er o r n o t th e              a ttem p t     is
su c c e ssfu l,        p r o v id e d    th e      statem en t        c o n ta in s    o n ly    m a te r ia l
c o n c e r n e d w i t h m a t t e r s w h i c h may b e r e s o l v e d i n f o r m a l l y , n o u s e
m ay s u b s e q u e n t l y b e m a d e o f t h a t s t a t e m e n t b y e i t h e r p a r t y i n
c r im in a l, c i v i l or d is c ip lin a r y p r o c e e d in g s.               I f th e attem p t a t
in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n f a i l s and a fo rm a l i n v e s t i g a t i o n t a k e s p la c e ,
f r e s h s t a t e m e n t s m ust b e ta k e n s p e c i f i c a l l y f o r t h e p u r p o se o f
t h e f o r m a l i n v e s t i g a t i o n i f t h e y may e v e n t u a l l y b e r e q u i r e d f o r
c r im in a l, c i v i l or d is c ip lin a r y p ro cee d in g s.               I f , how ever, in th e
course          o f an a tte m p t t o             r e so lv e     a c o m p la in t      in fo r m a lly a
s t a t e m e n t i s m ade w h ic h c o n s i s t s o f a n a d m i s s i o n r e l a t i n g t o a n y
m a t t e r w h ic h d o e s n o t f a l l t o b e r e s o l v e d i n f o r m a l l y ( f o r ex a m p le
b eca u se i t f a l l s w ith in th e p r o v is io n s o f R e g u la tio n 3 (3 ) o f th e
P o l i c e (C o m p la in ts) (I n fo r m a l R e s o lu t io n ) R e g u la t io n s ) o r m e r e ly
i n c l u d e s s u c h an a d m is s io n , t h e n t h a t s t a t e m e n t i s a d m i s s i b l e in
su b seq u en t p r o c e e d in g s.

4 .8          R e g u la tio n 4 (1 )       o f th e P o lic e      (C o m p la in ts)       (In fo rm al
R e s o l u t i o n ) R e g u l a t i o n s c o n t a i n s an im p o r ta n t p r o v i s i o n w h ich
a llo w s a s u p e r v is o r y o f f i c e r o f w h a tever rank t o d e a l s p e e d ily
w i t h a c o m p l a i n t i f i t a p p e a r s t o h im t h a t i t c a n b e r e s o l v e d
i n f o r m a l l y a t t h e t im e i t i s m ade.             The R e g u l a t i o n w i l l , f o r
ex a m p le , p e r m it t h e s u p e r v is o r y o f f i c e r t o r e c e i v e a c o m p la in t
and, i f t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d i s p r e s e n t and w i l l i n g t o e x p la in
h i s u n d e r s t a n d in g o f t h e i n c i d e n t w h ich h a s g iv e n r i s e t o t h e
c o m p la in t, t o d e a l w ith i t a t t h e tim e i f t h e c o m p la in a n t a c c e p t s
th e e x p la n a tio n o r , i f a p p r o p r ia te , th e a p o lo g y a s a s a t i s f a c t o r y
ou tcom e.           (W h ere t h i s i s d o n e , t h e g e n e r a l g u i d a n c e s e t o u t i n
p a r a g r a p h 4 . 9 b e l o w s h o u l d b e b o r n e i n m in d b y t h e s u p e r v i s o r y

9/91                                                403
o f f i c e r ) . In a c a s e h a n d led in t h i s w ay, t h e s u p e r v is o r y o f f i c e r
s h o u l d r e p o r t t h e m a t t e r t o t h e o f f i c e r t o whom t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r
h a s d e le g a te d h i s fu n c tio n s under R e g u la tio n 13(3 ) o f th e P o lic e
(C o m p la in ts)       (G e n e r a l) R e g u la t io n s 1 9 8 5 .     I f th a t o ffic e r is
s a t i s f i e d w i t h t h e h a n d l i n g o f t h e c o m p l a i n t , h e m ay m a k e a
r e c o r d i n t h e c o m p la in t s r e g i s t e r and w r i t e t o t h e c o m p la in a n t
r e c o r d i n g b r i e f l y h i s u n d e r s t a n d in g o f t h e way i n w h ic h t h e
c o m p la in t w as h a n d le d and i n d i c a t i n g h i s i n t e n t i o n o f r e c o r d in g
i t a s h a v in g b een in fo r m a lly r e s o lv e d .              I t i s recom m ended t h a t
c r i t e r i a sh o u ld be e s t a b lis h e d in each f o r c e a s t o th e e x t e n t t o
w h i c h j u n i o r o f f i c e r s m ay d e a l w i t h c o m p l a i n t s i n t h i s m a n n e r .

4 .9          W h ere i t      appears to           th e    a p p o in te d o f f i c e r    th a t th e
r e s o l u t i o n o f a c o m p la in t i s l i k e l y t o b e a s s i s t e d by a m e e tin g
b e tw e e n t h e c o m p la in a n t and t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d - o r b e tw e e n
th o se        persons        to g eth er      w ith     any      o th er    person        c o n sid e r e d
a p p r o p r i a t e - a r r a n g e m e n t s may b e m a d e .          The a c c u s e d o f f i c e r
s h a l l , how ever, n o t be o b lig e d t o a tte n d such a m eetin g .                                A
m e e t i n g m ay p r o v i d e a n o p p o r t u n i t y f o r t h e c o m p l a i n a n t a n d t h e
accused           o ffic e r     to    exchange         p o in ts     of    v ie w     and     fo r    any
m isu n d e r sta n d in g s t o b e c le a r e d up.             I t w i l l a llo w th e accu sed
o f f i c e r , w h ere h e a d m its t h e c o n d u c t co m p la in e d o f , t o a p o l o g i s e
f o r i t , o r g iv e an e x p la n a t io n o f i t , t o t h e c o m p la in a n t in
p e r so n i f he w is h e s t o do s o .           I f th e o f f ic e r concerned c o n sid e r s
t h a t h i s co n d u ct was r e a s o n a b le in a l l t h e c ir c u m s ta n c e s , a
m e e t i n g w i l l a l l o w h im t o s t a t e h i s c a s e t o t h e c o m p l a i n a n t . The
a p p o in te d o f f i c e r s h o u ld do h i s b e s t t o e n s u r e t h a t a m e e tin g i s
c o n d u c te d in a c i v i l and o r d e r l y m anner.               The p a r t i e s c o n c e r n e d
m ay f i n d i t r e a s s u r i n g t o h a v e a l a y p e r s o n o r a ' f r i e n d ' p r e s e n t
a t t h e m e e tin g a s an in d e p e n d e n t p r e s e n c e and t h i s s h o u ld n o t be
d isc o u r a g e d .         W h ilst      th ere      can    be      no     o b je c tio n    to     th e
c o m p l a i n a n t ' s b e i n g a c c o m p a n ie d b y a s o l i c i t o r ,       th e o f f ic e r
c o n c e r n e d s h o u l d n o r m a l l y b e a d v i s e d o f t h i s i f i t i s known i n
advance o f th e m eetin g .                In such a c a s e c a r e sh o u ld be ta k e n t h a t
t h e m e e t i n g d o e s n o t becom e o v e r - f o r m a l i s e d i n a way w h ic h m ig h t
 i n h i b i t th e r e s o l u t i o n o f th e c o m p la in t.

4 .1 0        I f in th e c o u r s e o f th e in fo rm a l r e s o l u t i o n p ro ced u re
(w h e th e r b y r e a s o n o f a f r e s h a l l e g a t i o n b y t h e c o m p la in a n t , an
a d m i s s i o n b y t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d , o r som e o t h e r m ean s) e v i d e n c e
com es t o l i g h t o f a m ore s e r i o u s c o m p la in t w h ic h m ig h t r e q u i r e
a fo rm a l i n v e s t i g a t i o n ,      th e p ro ced u res sh o u ld be te r m in a te d
fo r th w ith        and    th e      m a tter       rep orted      to    th e     c h ie f  o ffic e r
im m e d ia te ly .

4 .1 1       W h ere i t a p p e a r s t o t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r , a f t e r a t t e m p t s h a v e
b e e n m ade t o r e s o l v e a c o m p l a i n t i n f o r m a l l y ,           t h a t in fo rm a l
r e s o l u t i o n i s im p o s s ib le , o r t h a t th e c o m p la in t i s f o r any o th e r
r e a s o n n o t s u i t a b l e f o r in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n , h e m ust a r r a n g e f o r
i t t o be fo r m a lly in v e s t ig a t e d .

4 .1 2      U nder R e g u la t io n 5 o f t h e P o l i c e (C o m p la in ts) (I n fo r m a l
R e s o lu tio n ) R e g u la t io n s a co m p la in a n t i s e n t i t l e d t o o b t a in a
copy o f th e r e c o r d r e l a t i n g t o th e c o m p la in t i f h e a p p lie s f o r
o n e w i t h i n 3 m on th s o f t h e d a t e on w h ic h e i t h e r i t w as r e s o l v e d
o r i t c e a s e d f o r a n y o t h e r r e a s o n t o b e d e a l t w i t h b y way o f

 9/91                                              404
in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n . The c o m p la in a n t s h o u ld b e in fo r m e d o f t h a t
r i g h t a t t h e c o n c lu s io n o f t h e in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n p r o c e d u r e .
I t i s recom m ended t h a t t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d i n t h e c o m p la in t
sh o u ld , i f he w is h e s , be g iv e n a copy o f any r e c o r d handed t o th e
co m p la in a n t u n d er t h e R e g u la t io n .

4 .1 3       No e n t r y r e l a t i n g t o t h e a t t e m p t e d o r s u c c e s s f u l i n f o r m a l
r e s o l u t i o n o f a c o m p l a i n t s h o u l d b e m ade i n t h e p e r s o n a l r e c o r d
o f th e o f f ic e r concerned.

FORMAL INVESTIGATION

4 .1 4              W here t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r h a s d e c i d e d t h a t a c o m p l a i n t -
  o r , i n d e e d , a n y m a t t e r w h i c h i n d i c a t e s t h a t a p o l i c e o f f i c e r may
h a v e c o m m itte d a c r i m in a l o r d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e - s h o u ld be
fo r m a lly in v e s t ig a t e d , he sh o u ld f i r s t c o n s id e r w h eth er i t i s
n e c e s s a r y o r d e s i r a b l e f o r r e f e r e n c e t o b e m ade t o t h e P o l i c e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y f o r s u p e r v i s i o n o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n .     The
c r i t e r i a f o r r e f e r r a l and t h e g u i d e l i n e s t o b e o b s e r v e d in c a s e s
su p e r v ise d by th e A u th o r ity a re s e t o u t in p aragrap h s 6 .1 - 6 .1 1 .

4 .1 5       I f t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y s u p e r v i s e t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n
o f a c o m p l a i n t , t h e y m ay c h o o s e t o e x e r c i s e t h e i r r i g h t t o
a p p ro v e t h e a p p o in tm e n t o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r . T h e r e fo r e ,
in r e f e r r i n g a c a s e t o t h e A u th o r ity , th e c h i e f o f f i c e r sh o u ld
i n d i c a t e t h e nam e o f t h e o f f i c e r whom h e p r o p o s e s t o a p p o i n t ,
g i v i n g t h e l a t t e r ' s ran k and t h e f o r c e in w h ich h e s e r v e s .            W h ere
t h i s in fo r m a tio n i s n o t im m e d ia te ly a v a i l a b l e , t h e A u th o r ity
sh o u ld b e t o l d t h a t i t w i l l f o llo w a s soon a s p o s s i b l e .                I f th e
a p p o in t m e n t h a s a l r e a d y b e e n m ade ( e g b e c a u s e o f t h e n e e d t o
b e g in t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n u r g e n t ly ) and t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y
a r e n o t s a t i s f i e d w i t h t h a t a p p o i n t m e n t , t h e y m ay a s k t h e c h i e f
o f f i c e r t o p r o p o s e t h e a p p o in tm e n t o f a n o th e r o f f i c e r .   The c h i e f
o f f i c e r i s o b l i g e d t o c o m p ly w i t h s u c h a r e q u e s t and h e s h o u ld
n o t f o r m a l l y m ake t h e new a p p o i n t m e n t u n t i l t h e C o m p l a i n t s
A u th o r ity h ave approved i t .

INTEGRATION OF COMPLAINT AND DISCIPLINARY INVESTIGATION

4 .1 6       S in c e a lm o s t an y w e l l fo u n d ed c o m p la in t w h ich i s t h e
s u b j e c t o f fo rm a l i n v e s t i g a t i o n         c o u ld le a d t o d is c ip l in a r y
p r o c e e d in g s , i t i s d e s i r a b l e t h a t t h e o f f i c e r co n c e r n e d sh o u ld
h a v e an e a r l y o p p o r t u n i t y o f co m m en tin g on i t .             The D i s c i p l i n a r y
R e g u l a t i o n s , t h e r e f o r e , l a y d ow n p r o c e d u r e s w h i c h w i l l s a f e g u a r d
t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d b u t w h ic h w i l l n o t i n h i b i t h im s h o u l d h e
s o d e s i r e f r o m m a k i n g a c a n d i d s t a t e m e n t w h i c h m ay e s t a b l i s h t h a t
t h e c o m p la in t i s u n fo u n d ed o r e x a g g e r a t e d .        The c o u r t s h a v e rea d
R e g u l a t i o n 7 a s c o n f e r r i n g an im p o r t a n t s a f e g u a r d i n g i v i n g an
o f f i c e r an o p p o r t u n it y t o c o l l e c t e v id e n c e and p r e p a r e h i s
d e f e n c e a t a s e a r l y a s t a g e a s p o s s i b l e , n o t m e r e l y t o m ake a
ca n d id s ta te m e n t t o r e f u t e t h e c o m p la in t o r d e m o n str a te t h a t i t
was e x a g g e r a te d .        W h ere a c o m p l a i n t r e c e i v e d a n d r e c o r d e d u n d e r
s e c t i o n 85 i s f o r m a lly i n v e s t i g a t e d u n d e r R e g u la t io n 6 , t h e
o f f i c e r c o n cer n e d s h o u ld , s u b j e c t t o w hat i s s a id b e lo w , a s soon
a s p r a c t i c a b l e b e s e r v e d w it h a fo rm a l n o t i c e w h ich c o m p lie s w ith
R e g u l a t i o n 7 t e l l i n g h im i n w r i t i n g o f i t s n a t u r e a n d i n v i t i n g

9/91                                                 405
h im t o m a k e a s t a t e m e n t .           The s t a t e m e n t w i l l b e v o l u n t a r y and
w i l l b e a d m is s ib le in e v id e n c e sh o u ld th e r e b e any d i s c i p l i n a r y
p r o c e e d i n g s a r i s i n g from t h e c o m p l a i n t .     I t m u st b e m ade c l e a r
t o t h e o f f i c e r w hen h e i s i n v i t e d t o m ake t h e s t a t e m e n t t h a t h e
is     n ot o b lig e d to             do s o and t h a t          it   m ay b e u s e d        in   any
d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d i n g s w h ich a r i s e from t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f
t h e c o m p l a i n t ( f o r s t a t e m e n t s m ade i n t h e c o u r s e o f t h e i n f o r m a l
r e s o lu t io n p roced u re - s e e paragraph 4 . 7 ) .                   An o f f i c e r h a s t h e
r ig h t to c o n su lt a 'fr ie n d ' a t a l l s ta g e s o f th e in v e s tig a tio n .
He s h o u l d b e t o l d o f t h a t r i g h t a t t h e t i m e a n o t i c e u n d e r
R e g u l a t i o n 7 i n f o r m s h im o f t h e c o m p l a i n t t h a t h a s b e e n m a d e
a g a i n s t h im .        The r i g h t t o b e in fo r m e d o f t h e n a t u r e o f t h e
c o m p la in t i s s u b j e c t o n ly t o th e n eed t o a v o id p r e j u d ic in g th e
in v e stig a tio n i t s e l f .

The n o t i c e u n d e r R e g u la t io n 7 s h o u ld b e s e r v e d on t h e o f f i c e r a s
soon a s p r a c t i c a b le s u b j e c t o n ly t o th e p r o v is o s e t o u t in th e
R e g u la tio n t h a t s e r v i c e o f th e n o t ic e sh o u ld n o t p r e ju d ic e th e
I n v e s t i g a t i n g O f f i c e r ' s e n q u ir y o r any o th e r i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f th e
m a tter.        I t i s r e c o g n i s e d t h a t t h e p rim a r y r e s p o n s i b i l i t y f o r t h e
tim in g o f th e s e r v ic e o f th e n o t ic e under R e g u la tio n 7 i s a
m a tte r f o r t h e I n v e s t i g a t i n g O f f i c e r and i t i s t h e I n v e s t i g a t i n g
O f f i c e r w ho may b e a s k e d t o a c c o u n t a s m ay b e a p p r o p r i a t e t o t h e
C row n P r o s e c u t i o n S e r v i c e ( H e a d q u a r t e r s ) , t h e c r i m i n a l c o u r t s o r
a d is c ip lin a r y a u th o r ity fo r th e tim in g o f th e s e r v ic e o f th e
n o tic e .       T h e r e m ay b e o c c a s i o n s w h e r e i t i s n o t p r a c t i c a b l e t o
se r v e th e R e g u la tio n 7 N o tic e a t th e s t a r t o f th e in v e s t ig a t i o n
o r w h ere s e r v i c e m ig h t p r e j u d ic e t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n .             In th e s e
c ir c u m s t a n c e s t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e c o n s i d e r s t h a t i t w o u ld b e
a d v i s a b l e f o r e a c h f o r c e t o h a v e c l e a r a r r a n g e m e n ts u n d er w h ich
s e r v i c e in su c h c ir c u m s t a n c e s i s s u b j e c t t o s c r u t i n y and r e v ie w
in o rd er t o a v o id undue d e la y .

4 .1 6 a     I t i s n o t e s s e n t i a l t o c o l l e c t and c o n s id e r a l l t h e
e v id e n c e b e f o r e s e r v i c e o f t h e R e g u la t io n 7 N o t i c e , and i t w i l l
so m e tim e s b e a n t i c i p a t e d      a t th e tim e o f          se r v ic e   th a t th e
d e s c r i p t i o n o f t h e c o m p la in t, a l l e g a t i o n o r r e p o r t m ig h t l a t e r
b e m a d e m o r e s p e c i f i c o r m ay o t h e r w i s e c h a n g e ( f o r e x a m p l e ,
b e c a u s e t h e c o m p la in a n t o r o th e r m a t e r ia l w it n e s s h a s y e t t o be
in te r v ie w e d ) .        In su ch a c a s e th e r e i s no o b j e c t io n t o th e
s u b s e q u e n t s e r v i c e o f a f u r t h e r o r am ended R e g u l a t i o n 7 N o t i c e
when t h e n e c e s s a r y i n f o r m a t i o n i s t o h a n d .

4 .1 6 b A lth o u g h i n t e r p    r e t a t io n o f th e R e g u la tio n i s a m a tter fo r
th e co u rts, i t is th e              v ie w o f t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e t h a t th e
n o t ic e i s r e q u ir e d t o     be serv ed p e r s o n a lly by th e I n v e s t ig a t in g
O f f i c e r , b y a m em b er       o f t h e I n v e s t i g a t i n g T ea m , o r b y a n o t h e r
d e sig n a te d o f f i c e r o f     a p p r o p r ia te rank on h i s b e h a lf .

4 .1 7        N o th in g in t h e R e g u la tio n s o r in t h e p r e c e d in g p aragrap h
i s in te n d e d t o ch an ge th e p r a c t i c e w hereby i f an o f f i c e r i s th e
s u b j e c t o f i n f o r m a t i o n c o m in g t o a t t e n t i o n b y way o f c o m p l a i n t
o r o t h e r w i s e w h i c h s u g g e s t s t h a t h e may h a v e c o m m i t t e d a c r i m i n a l
o f f e n c e , a norm al c r im in a l i n v e s t i g a t i o n w i l l ta k e p l a c e .            In
su ch c a s e s , t h e o f f i c e r n eed n o t im m e d ia te ly b e in fo rm ed o f t h e
a l l e g a t i o n s i f t h i s m ig h t im p e d e i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f t h e a l l e g e d

9/91                                                406
c r im in a l o ffe n c e .     W here i n t h e c o u r s e o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n t h e
o f f i c e r h a s b e e n c a u t io n e d i n t h e c u sto m a r y m anner ( i e u n d e r t h e
Code o f P r a c t i c e f o r t h e D e t e n t i o n , T r e a tm e n t and Q u e s t i o n i n g o f
P e r s o n s b y P o l i c e O f f i c e r s ) , a n y s t a t e m e n t m ad e u n d e r c a u t i o n
w i l l be a d m is s ib le in e v id e n c e in any d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s
a r i s i n g from t h e c o m p l a i n t ( a s w e l l a s i n c r i m i n a l p r o c e e d i n g s ) .

4 .1 8       W h erever an o          ffic e r      is   a lle g e d to    have           co m m itte d a
c r im in a l o ffe n c e i t i s      e s s e n t ia l th a t, as in d ic a te d        in paragraphs
4 .1 6 and 4 .1 7 a b o v e ,          h e sh o u ld b e c a u tio n e d o r            se r v e d w ith a
R e g u la tio n 7 n o t ic e ,        a s m ay b e a p p r o p r i a t e , a t          th e e a r lie s t
p o s s i b l e m om en t.   The       o f f i c e r sh o u ld n o t in such            circu m sta n ce s
b e r e q u i r e d t o m ake a        d u ty s ta te m e n t.

4 .1 9        R e g u la t io n 6 o f t h e D i s c i p l i n e R e g u la t io n s w h ich d e a ls
w it h t h e a p p o in tm e n t o f an i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r         (w h o m ay b e
a p p o in t e d from a n o t h e r f o r c e ) m akes i t c l e a r t h a t t h e p r o c e d u r e
l a i d d ow n i n t h e R e g u l a t i o n i s a p p l i c a b l e t o a c o m p l a i n t w h i c h
h a s b e e n r e c o r d e d u n d e r s e c t i o n 85 o f t h e 1984 A c t an d w h ic h
s u g g e s t s t h a t an o f f e n c e h a s b e e n c o m m itte d w h ic h m ig h t l e a d t o
d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s , a s w e ll a s t o any o th e r r e p o r t or
a l l e g a t i o n f r o m w h i c h i t a p p e a r s t h a t a m em b er o f t h e p o l i c e
f o r c e may h a v e c o m m i t t e d a n o f f e n c e a g a i n s t d i s c i p l i n e .

SELECTION OF INVESTIGATING OFFICER

4.20          The i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f a c o m p la in t s h o u ld b e c l e a r l y s e e n
to be a b s o lu te ly im p a r tia l.               I t i s im p o r ta n t t o e n s u r e n o t o n ly
t h a t an i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r          o f t h e a p p r o p r ia t e ra n k and
e x p e r ie n c e      is    a lw a y s a p p o in te d and t h a t h e h a s a th o r o u g h
k n o w led g e o f t h e r e l e v a n t R e g u la t io n s and t h e g u id a n c e t h e r e o n
but        a lso       th a t    th e      in v e stig a tin g     o ffic e r       sh o u ld       have    no
o p e r a tio n a l r e s p o n s i b ili t y fo r o r c o n n e c tio n w ith th e o f f i c e r s
a g a i n s t whom t h e c o m p l a i n t s a r e d i r e c t e d .        U nder R e g u la t io n 6 (5 )
o f t h e D i s c i p l i n e R e g u la t io n s t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r m ust be
s e r v i n g i n a d i f f e r e n t s u b - d i v i s i o n o r b r a n c h from t h e o f f i c e r
c o m p la in e d a g a i n s t .      M oreover, i t i s c l e a r l y in th e i n t e r e s t s o f
fa ir n e ss          th a t      c h ie f      o ffic e r s,     h a v in g       regard           to    any
r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s m ade b y t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d , s h o u l d e n s u r e t h a t
t h e r e a r e no o t h e r g r o u n d s, f o r e x a m p le , r e c e n t s e r v i c e i n t h e
sam e s u b - d i v i s i o n o r b r a n c h o r p r e v i o u s c o n n e c t i o n w i t h t h e
c o m p la in a n t, on w h ich t h e i m p a r t i a l i t y o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g
o f f i c e r m ig h t b e c p e s t io n e d th o u g h t h e r e i s no o b j e c t i o n t o one
i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r d e a l i n g w i t h s u c c e s s i v e c o m p l a i n t s from a
p e r s i s t e n t c o m p la in a n t.

4.21         W h eth er o r n o t an i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r h a s b e e n a p p o in t e d
under th e D is c ip lin e R e g u la tio n s, th e c h ie f o f f i c e r                     (or th e
P o l i c e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y ) may r e q u e s t t h a t a n o f f i c e r f r o m
a n o th e r p o l i c e f o r c e sh o u ld co n d u ct th e i n v e s t i g a t i o n .   I t i s th e
S e c r e ta r y o f S t a t e ' s v ie w t h a t t h i s power sh o u ld b e e x e r c is e d in
a p p r o p r ia t e c a s e s and h e h o p e s t h a t c h i e f o f f i c e r s w i l l h a v e no
d iffic u lty        in m e e tin g such r e q u e s ts in a cco rd a n ce w ith th e
r e q u ir e m e n ts o f s e c t io n 85(7) o f th e 1984 A c t.                  In c o n sid e r in g
w h e t h e r t o c a l l i n an o f f i c e r from a n o t h e r f o r c e , t h e c h i e f
o f f i c e r sh o u ld ta k e in t o a c c o u n t, n o t o n ly th e s e r io u s n e s s o f th e

9/91                                                407
a l l e g a t i o n s a n d t h e r a n k o f t h e o f f i c e r o r o f f i c e r s a g a i n s t whom
t h e y a r e m ade, b u t a l s o t h e e x t e n t t o w h ic h t h e i n c i d e n t g i v i n g
r ise      to      t h e c o m p l a i n t h a s b e e n o r m ay b e t h e               su b ject of
p u b lic ity .         The p r o c e d u r e m ig h t b e a p p r o p r ia t e e s p e c i a l l y w h ere
a num ber o f c o m p l a i n t s a l l e g e w i d e s p r e a d m a l p r a c t i c e o r w h e r e a
p a r t ic u la r c o m p la in t e x c i t e s s e r io u s p u b lic co n cern in th e a r e a .
I t i s a x io m a t i c t h a t t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d s h o u ld h a v e had no
p r e v io u s c o n t a c t w it h t h e c a s e and p r e f e r a b l e t h a t h e s h o u ld h a v e
had no r e c e n t c o n t a c t w it h t h e r e q u e s t i n g f o r c e s u c h a s m ig h t
g iv e r i s e to d o u b ts as to h is im p a r t ia lit y .                    N o th in g in t h i s
p a r a g r a p h , h o w e v e r , d e b a r s a n o f f i c e r w ho h a s i n v e s t i g a t e d a
p a r t i c u l a r c o m p l a i n t from b e i n g a s k e d t o i n v e s t i g a t e a s e c o n d
c o m p l a i n t a r i s i n g fro m t h e sam e c i r c u m s t a n c e s .

4.22         W h ere a n i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r i s a p p o i n t e d f r o m a n o t h e r
f o r c e , p r o v is io n o f th e i n v e s t ig a t i n g o f f i c e r sh o u ld n o t be
r e g a r d e d a s m u t u a l a i d w i t h i n t h e m e a n in g o f s e c t i o n 14 o f t h e
1 9 6 4 A c t , a n d a r r a n g e m e n t s m ade u n d e r s e c t i o n 1 4 ( 4 ) d o n o t ,
t h e r e f o r e , a p p ly .      W h ile s t r i c t l y t h e c o s t o f i n v e s t i g a t i o n
sh o u ld be b orn e by th e f o r c e in w hose a r e a th e i n v e s t i g a t i o n
t a k e s p l a c e , i t i s c o n s id e r e d t h a t i t w o u ld r e f l e c t t h e g e n e r a l
co m m u n ity o f i n t e r e s t , an d w o u ld a l s o a v o i d w ork a l l r o u n d , i f
t h e f o r c e w h ich s u p p lie d t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r w ere n o r m a lly
t o m ak e n o c l a i m o n t h e r e q u e s t i n g f o r c e , e x c e p t f o r o u t - o f -
pocket expenses.                W here, h o w e v e r , an i n v e s t i g a t i o n p r o v e s t o b e
e x c e p t i o n a l l y lo n g and co m p le x , p o s s i b l y i n v o l v i n g p r o v i s i o n o f
a team o f o f f i c e r s , i t w o u ld seem r i g h t f o r t h e p a r e n t f o r c e t o
m ak e a c l a i m o n t h e r e q u e s t i n g f o r c e ;     th e s c a l e o r c o s t s c la im e d
i n s u c h c i r c u m s t a n c e s s h o u l d b e t h e sam e a s f o r m u tu a l a i d and
c l a i m s s h o u l d b e s u b j e c t e d b y t h e p a r e n t f o r c e t o t h e sam e
s t a n d a r d o f s c r u t i n y t h a t w o u ld b e g i v e n t o o r d in a r y e x p e n s e s
c la im s.

4.23          The D i s c i p l i n e R e g u la t io n s p r o v id e t h a t t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g
o f f i c e r sh o u ld b e o f a rank n o t lo w er th a n c h i e f in s p e c t o r .               When
d e a lin g        w ith      c o m p la in ts     w h ich     appear         to      have       se r io u s
im p lic a tio n s,        w h eth er by r e a so n o r th e               s e r io u s n e s s o f th e
a l l e g a t i o n s o r t h e num ber an d s t a n d i n g o f t h e o f f i c e r s i n v o l v e d ,
c o n s i d e r a t i o n s h o u ld a lw a y s b e g i v e n t o t h e a p p o in tm e n t o f an
in v e s t ig a t in g o f f i c e r o f th e rank o f s u p e r in te n d e n t o r ab ove.

4.24         S u b j e c t t o t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y ' s pow er t o
a p p ro v e t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r ' s a p p o in tm e n t ( s e e p a ra g ra p h
6 . 7 ) , o n ce an i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r h a s b een a p p o in te d h e w i l l
n o r m a ll y b e r e s p o n s i b l e , u n d e r t h e s u p e r v i s i o n , i n som e c a s e s ,
o f t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y , f o r t h e w h o le o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n
c o v e r i n g b o t h t h e o r i g i n a l c o m p l a i n t b y t h e m em b er o f t h e p u b l i c
 ( i f t h e r e w as on e) and any c r i m in a l o r d i s c i p l i n a r y m a t t e r s w h ich
m ay a r i s e f r o m i t o r w h i c h may c o m e t o l i g h t i n t h e c o u r s e o f h i s
in q u ir ie s.           It   is      im p o r ta n t,     how ever,        th a t,      w h eth er   th e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y a r e e x e r c i s i n g t h e i r s u p e r v is o r y f u n c t io n
o r n o t, th e c h i e f o f f i c e r sh o u ld m a in ta in c l o s e o v e r s ig h t o f th e
p ro g ress o f each in v e s tig a tio n .                I n p a r t i c u l a r , h e s h o u l d k n ow
a t o n ce i f an i n v e s t i g a t i o n h a s m et s e r i o u s d i f f i c u l t y o r i f
s e r io u s d e la y i s in p r o s p e c t . T h is sh o u ld e n su r e sp e ed y p r o g r e s s
and       th e     q u ic k   re so lu tio n       of     d iffic u ltie s          th ro u g h   cen tra l

9/91                                                408
d ir e c tio n .     The i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r s h o u ld a l s o b e i n s t r u c t e d
t o s e e k t h e a d v ic e o f t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r - o r , o f t h e C o m p la in ts
A u t h o r it y , w here th e y a r e s u p e r v is in g an i n v e s t i g a t i o n - i f in
th e      course      of    h is    e n q u ir ie s    m ore s e r i o u s      a lle g a tio n s     are
d i s c l o s e d o r i f i t a p p e a r s t h a t a g r e a t e r n u m b e r o f o f f i c e r s may
b e in v o lv e d in t h e a l l e g a t i o n s th a n a t f i r s t seem ed l i k e l y .

CONDUCT OP THE INVESTIGATION

4.25         I n q u i r i e s s h o u ld b e c a r r i e d o u t a s e x p e d i t i o u s l y and
th o r o u g h ly a s r e a so n a b ly p r a c t ic a b le , due reg a rd b e in g had t o th e
r e q u ir e m e n t s o f j u s t i c e and t h e la w and p r a c t i c e r e l a t i n g t o
p r o se c u tio n s        (s e e a ls o paragraph 4 . 2 8 ) .                 The i n v e s t i g a t i n g
o f f i c e r s h o u ld n o r m a lly a rra n g e t o s e e t h e c o m p la in a n t w ith o u t
d e la y a t t h e o u t s e t o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n , u n le s s t h e c o m p la in a n t
s p e c ific a lly refu ses.              I f t h e r e a r e s p e c i a l c o n s i d e r a t i o n s w h ich
m ean t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n c a n n o t b e s t a r t e d ( e g w h e r e s t a t e m e n t s
c a n n o t b e t a k e n from t h e c o m p la in a n t s t r a i g h t a w a y b e c a u s e o f
r e l a t e d j u d i c i a l p r o c e e d in g s ) , th e p o s i t i o n sh o u ld b e e x p la in e d
t o h im .         S u ch a c t i o n , w h ic h e n a b l e s t h e c o m p la in a n t t o h a v e an
e a r l y and f r a n k d i s c u s s i o n w i t h a s e n i o r p o l i c e o f f i c e r , c a n do
m u ch        to        r e so lv e      ill-fo u n d e d       c o m p la in ts       a r isin g        from
m isu n d e r sta n d in g s.         I n o t h e r c a s e s , t h e c o m p l a i n a n t m ay d e c i d e
t h a t h e d o e s n o t w is h t o p u r s u e h i s c o m p la i n t a g a i n s t an
i n d iv i d u a l o f f i c e r i f h e i s s a t i s f i e d t h a t so m e th in g i s b e in g
d on e (e g b y c h a n g e s in a d m i n i s t r a t i v e a r r a n g e m e n ts) t o rem edy t h e
g r ie v a n c e .        C are s h o u ld n e v e r t h e l e s s b e ta k e n t o a v o id any
s u g g e s t i o n o f im p ro p er p r e s s u r e b e in g e x e r t e d on a c o m p la in a n t
to      w ith d r a w h i s        a lle g a tio n s.        (F or t h e p r o c e d u r e w h ere a
c o m p la in a n t w ith d r a w s h i s c o m p la in t o r a g r e e s n o t t o p u r su e i t ,
se e paragraphs 4.33 - 4 .3 5 ).

4.26        The p u r p o s e o f an i n v e s t i g a t i o n i s t o e s t a b l i s h t h e f a c t s
a b o u t t h e i n c i d e n t o r c o n d u c t c o m p la in e d o f and, in t h e l i g h t o f
t h o s e f a c t s , t o e n a b l e a n o b j e c t i v e a s s e s s m e n t t o b e m ade o f t h e
m e r its o f th e c o m p la in t.           I t i s im p o r ta n t t h a t t h i s s h o u ld be
s e e n t o b e s o b o th b y t h e o f f i c e r c o m p la in e d o f and b y t h e
c o m p la in a n t ; and a l s o t h a t i t s h o u ld b e s e l f - e v i d e n t from t h e
r e p o r t o f th e in v e s t ig a t io n t h a t th e in v e s t ig a t io n h a s been
c a r r ie d o u t im p a r t ia lly , th a t th e o f f i c e r con cern ed h as been
a ffo r d e d t h e s a fe g u a r d s p r o v id e d in t h e D is c ip li n e R e g u la tio n s
and t h a t no p r e s s u r e h a s b een p u t on t h e c o m p la in a n t o r any o t h e r
w itn e ss.

4.27         I t i s im p o rta n t, b o th in th e i n t e r e s t s o f th e o f f i c e r
a g a i n s t whom t h e c o m p l a i n t h a s b e e n m a d e a n d o f t h e c o m p l a i n a n t ,
t h a t t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n s h o u l d b e c o m p l e t e d a s q u i c k l y a s may b e
p r a c tic a b le .     I t s o m e t i m e s o c c u r s t h a t a n i n v e s t i g a t i o n m ay b e
u n a v o id a b ly p r o tr a c te d f o r r e a so n s beyond th e c o n t r o l o f th e
in v e stig a tin g o ffic e r .             In t h i s e v e n t , an e a r l y e x p la n a t io n
sh o u ld be g iv e n in w r it in g t o t h e co m p la in a n t w ith a cop y g o in g
t o t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r ; t h e y s h o u ld a l s o b e k e p t in fo rm ed in
w r itin g o f th e rea so n s i f th e d e la y p e r s i s t s , u n le s s th e r e are
s p e c i a l c o n s id e r a t io n s a g a in s t d o in g so in a p a r t i c u l a r c a s e .

4.27a     From t i m e       to   tim e    in    th e   course       of   an    in v e s tig a tio n ,     it

9/91                                                409
w i l l b e h e l p f u l t o t a k e e v i d e n c e from an o f f i c e r w ho, a s p a r t o f
h i s norm al d u t i e s , h a s b een a s s ig n e d t o a s p e c i a l i s e d a r e a o f
p o l i c e w ork i n w h ic h h e h a s a c q u ir e d an e x p e r t k n o w le d g e r e l e v a n t
to th e p a r tic u la r in v e s tig a tio n .            The q u e s t i o n s t h a t a r e p u t t o
h im m u s t , n a t u r a l l y , b e w i t h i n h i s k n o w l e d g e a n d c o m p e t e n c e an d
i t i s n o t a m a t t e r f o r h i s d i s c r e t i o n w h e t h e r o r n o t h e w i l l m ake
a v a ila b le        such     expert        k n o w led g e.      For       th e    a v o id a n c e of
s u g g e s t i o n s o f b i a s , i t m ig h t s o m e tim e s b e i n a p p r o p r i a t e f o r an
o ffic e r        to    g iv e   e v id e n c e    if   he has       som e r e l a t i o n s h i p    or
a c q u a i n t a n c e w i t h a n y p e r s o n w ho m i g h t b e a f f e c t e d b y h i s
s t a t e m e n t , b u t , f o r e x a m p le , m ere m em b ersh ip o f t h e sam e f o r c e
a s an o f f i c e r u n d e r i n v e s t i g a t i o n s h o u ld n o t o f i t s e l f b e ta k e n
to r a is e such a d i f f i c u l t y .

TIMING OP INVESTIGATIONS

C r im in a l P r o c e e d in g s

4.28          S p e c ia l c o n s id e r a tio n s a r is e in regard t o th e tim in g o f
t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f a c o m p la i n t r e c o r d e d u n d e r s e c t i o n 85 o f t h e
1984 A ct a g a in s t a p o l i c e o f f i c e r w here t h e c o m p la in t i s r e l a t e d
t o s o m e a s p e c t o f p e n d i n g c r i m i n a l p r o c e e d i n g s a g a i n s t a m em ber
o f th e p u b lic ,             f o r e x a m p le , a g a i n s t t h e c o m p la in a n t o r h i s
fr ie n d s.           T h e r e m ay a l s o b e d i f f i c u l t y       in in v e s t ig a t in g a
c o m p la i n t w h e re t h e r e l a t e d t r i a l h a s b e e n c o m p le t e d b u t an
appeal is              p e n d in g .       I t appears to th e S ecreta ry o f S ta te
a p p r o p r ia te t h a t c h i e f o f f i c e r s sh o u ld ad h ere t o th e p r a c t ic e s
s e t o u t i n A nnex F t o t h i s c i r c u l a r , w h ich h a v e t h e a g r e e m e n t o f
th e      D ir e c to r        of      P u b lic   P r o sec u tio n s.         The      p r a c tic e  of
c o n s u lt a t io n by c h ie f o f f i c e r s w ith th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic
P r o sec u tio n s          on       any      m atter    co n cer n in g      th e      h a n d lin g  of
i n v e s t i g a t i o n in c a s e s o f s p e c i a l d i f f i c u l t y i s u n a f f e c t e d by
w hat i s s a id i n t h e A nnex.

4.29                   T h e r e w i l l b e r a r e and e x c e p t i o n a l o c c a s i o n s w hen t h e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n i s ta k e n forw ard w h i le c r i m in a l p r o c e e d in g s a r e in
p r o g r e s s . W here t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n b r i n g s t o l i g h t m a t e r i a l w h ic h
i s l i k e l y t o a s s i s t t h e co m p la in a n t (o r any o t h e r p e r so n ) in
d e f e n d in g p e n d in g c r im in a l p r o c e e d in g s , o r w h ich s u g g e s t s t h a t
such p ro c e e d in g s a re u n sa fe or ill- f o u n d e d , th e c h ie f o f f i c e r
s h o u l d im m e d i a t e ly draw t h e r e l e v a n t m a t e r i a l t o t h e a t t e n t i o n
o f t h e C rown P r o s e c u t i o n S e r v i c e          (H ea d q u a rters).            T h is a ls o
a p p lie s w here any a p p ea l h as y e t t o b e d is p o s e d o f .                       W here t h e
in fo r m a tio n c a l l s in t o q u e s t io n t h e s a f e t y o f a c o n v ic t i o n in a
c a s e w here th e p r o c e e d in g s, in c lu d in g any a p p e a l, h ave b een
c o m p le te d ,        th e     c h ie f   o ffic e r  sh o u ld        report        th e     re le v a n t
i n f o r m a t i o n t o C3 D i v i s i o n , Home O f f i c e , 5 0 Q u e e n A n n e ' s G a t e ,
L o n d o n SW1H 9AT ( t e l e p h o n e 0 1 - 2 7 3 3 1 8 6 o r 0 1 - 2 7 3 3 1 2 1 ) .

C i v i l P r o c e e d in g s

4 . 3 0 a W here     a    m em b er  of      th e      p u b lic    has     in itia te d   c iv il
p ro cee d in g s a g a in s t th e c h ie f o f f i c e r in r e s p e c t o f th e con d u ct
o f a m em b er o f t h e f o r c e o r h a s i n d i c a t e d a n i n t e n t i o n t o
i n i t i a t e such a c t io n , th e m a tter sh o u ld n o t a u to m a tic a lly be
reco rd ed a s a c o m p la in t.         I n s t e a d , e f f o r t s s h o u l d b e m ade t o

9/91                                                410
d eterm in e w h eth er o r n o t th e p erso n co n cern ed w ish e s th e m a tter
a l s o t o b e t r e a t e d a s a c o m p la in t and i s w i l l i n g t o c o - o p e r a t e
in i t s in v e s tig a tio n .            I f he w is h e s a c o m p la in t t o be rec o rd ed
b u t i s u n w illin g t o c o -o p e r a te in th e i n v e s t i g a t i o n , i t sh o u ld
b e m ade c l e a r t o h im t h a t , a s c i v i l c o u r t p r o c e e d i n g s a r e o f t e n
p ro tra cted , i t i s u n lik e ly th a t a s a tis fa c to r y in v e s tig a tio n w ill
b e p o s s i b l e w hen t h e y a r e c o m p le t e d and t h a t t h e d e l a y m ay, i n
c e r t a in c ir c u m sta n c e s, p r e c lu d e d is c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s b e in g
brought           a g a in st    an     o ffic e r .      H is      w ish e s   sh o u ld    a lso      be
a s c e r t a i n e d w h e r e a p e r s o n h a s m ad e a c o m p l a i n t w h i c h h a s b e e n
r e c o r d e d and s u b s e q u e n t ly em barks on c i v i l p r o c e e d i n g s i n t h e
sam e m a t t e r .       I f i n s u c h a c a s e , f o r - e x a m p le on l e g a l a d v i c e , t h e
c o m p la in a n t w is h e s t o w ith d r a w h i s c o m p la in t t h e r e c o r d s s h o u ld
be n o ted a c c o r d in g ly ;         i f he r e fu s e s fu r th e r c o -o p e r a tio n in th e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n w h i l e d e c l i n i n g t o w ith d r a w t h e c o m p la i n t , h e
s h o u ld be w arned a s ab ove o f th e p o s s i b l e c o n se q u e n c e s o f d e la y .

4 . 3 0 b W here, h o w e v e r , t h e p e r s o n c o n c e r n e d a s k s f o r t h e m a t t e r
to be           r e c o r d e d o r m a in ta in e d a s a c o m p la in t and                 in d ic a te s
w illin g n e s s to co -o p era te               in th e        in v e s tig a tio n ,    t h e norm al
p r o c e d u r e s sh o u ld be fo llo w e d in c lu d in g su b m issio n o f th e r e p o r t
t o t h e D i r e c t o r , i f a p p r o p r ia t e , and t o t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts
A u th o r ity under th e r e le v a n t p r o v is io n s o f th e 1984 A c t.                          The
e x i s t e n c e o f c i v i l p r o c e e d i n g s s h o u l d b e m e n t i o n e d t o t h e Crown
P r o s e c u t i o n S e r v i c e (H e a d q u a r te r s) and t h e A u t h o r it y a t t h e tim e
th e c a s e i s su b m itte d .           The c h i e f o f f i c e r s h o u ld i n d i c a t e a l s o
w h e th e r i t i s h i s v ie w t h a t any d i s c i p l i n a r y a c t i o n t h a t seem s
a p p r o p r ia te sh o u ld be d e la y e d u n t i l th e p r o c e e d in g s in th e c i v i l
co u rts        have been           fin ish e d .         In d e c id in g w h eth er          to    d efer
d is c ip lin a r y a c tio n , th e c h ie f o f f ic e r w i l l need to have regard
t o t h e e f f e c t o f d e fe r m e n t on t h e m a in te n a n c e o f f o r c e d i s c i p l i n e
and t h e i n t e r e s t s o f t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d .

4 . 3 0 c N o th in g in t h e p r e c e d in g p a ra g ra p h s sh o u ld b e ta k e n a s
p r e c lu d in g in v e s t ig a t io n o f th e m a tters r a is e d in a c i v i l a c tio n
w here t h i s        i s n e c e ssa r y in ord er to p rep are fo r th e le g a l
p r o c e e d in g s.

REPORTS

4.31          When       th e     in v e stig a tin g      o ffic e r     has      co m p le te d    th e
in v e s t i g a t i o n , o r h as ta k en i t a s f a r a s he r e a so n a b ly can , he
sh o u ld       su b m it      a   report       to     th e c h ie f     o ffic e r .           If   th e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n h a s b een s u p e r v is e d b y t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y ,
t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r sh o u ld in s t e a d su b m it t h e r e p o r t t o th e
A u t h o r it y and sen d a co p y t o t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r .               A lth o u g h th e
r e p o r t w i l l so m etim es (b e c a u s e i t i s r e l e v a n t t o an a s s e s s m e n t
o f t h e m e r it s o f t h e c o m p la in t) n eed t o c o n t a in background
m a t e r i a l a b o u t t h e p e r s o n c o n c e r n e d , w h i c h m ay b e p o t e n t i a l l y
d a m a g in g t o h im , c a r e s h o u l d b e t a k e n n o t t o i n c l u d e i n f o r m a t i o n
o r com m ent w h ic h i s n o t r e l e v a n t t o t h e c o m p l a i n t .

ILL-FOUNDED COMPLAINTS

4.32        W here i n t h e c o u r s e o f a f o r m a l i n v e s t i g a t i o n i t        becom es
c le a r   t o th e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r t h a t th e c o m p la in t        is i l l -

9/91                                               411
fo u n d e d o r t h a t t h e e f f o r t in v o l v e d i n p u r s u in g i t w o u ld b e
d i s p r o p o r t i o n a t e , i t i s o p e n t o h im t o p r e p a r e a n e a r l y r e p o r t
t o t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r (o r t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y , i f t h e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n i s b e i n g s u p e r v i s e d ) recom m en d in g t h a t i t i s n o t
w orth p u r s u in g th e m a tte r f u r t h e r .          In su ch c a s e s , th e c o m p la in t
and t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r ' s r e p o r t w i l l s t i l l h a v e t o be
r e f e r r e d t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y u n d er t h e p r o v i s i o n s o f
S e c t i o n 90 o f t h e 19 8 4 A c t and t h i s s h o u l d b e d o n e w i t h t h e
m in im u m o f d e l a y s o t h a t , i f t h e A u t h o r i t y a g r e e , t h e m a t t e r may
be brought to a s w if t c o n c lu sio n .

SPECIAL CLASSES OF COMPLAINT

A.         WITHDRAWN COMPLAINTS

4.33        R e g u la tio n     11    of    th e     P o lic e     (C o m p la in ts)   (G e n e ra l)
R e g u la t io n s p r o v id e s f o r t h e r e q u ir e m e n t fo r m a lly t o i n v e s t i g a t e
o r i n f o r m a l l y t o r e s o l v e a c o m p la i n t t o b e d i s p e n s e d w i t h when
a c o m p la in t i s w ith d r a w n .

4.34         A c o m p la i n t i s t o b e r e g a r d e d a s w ith d r a w n when a s i g n e d
w r itte n       statem en t i s         r e c e iv e d    from t h e c o m p la i n a n t o r h i s
•so lic ito r      o r o t h e r a u t h o r is e d a g e n t t h a t h e w ith d r a w s            h is
c o m p la in t o r t h a t h e d o es n o t w ish any f u r t h e r s t e p s t o b e ta k en
i n r e g a r d t o i t . To a v o i d d o u b t a n d s u b s e q u e n t a r g u m e n t ,         th e
s ta te m e n t s h o u ld b e w orded in u n e q u iv o c a l term s                  (b u t i t      is
s u g g e s t e d t h a t t h e u s e o f an e x p r e s s i o n su c h a s 'u n r e s e r v e d ly
w ith d r a w n ' i s b e s t a v o id e d ) .          I t s h o u l d b e m ade c l e a r t o t h e
c o m p la in a n t t h a t t h i s w i l l n o r m a lly b r in g a c t i o n on h i s c o m p la in t
t o an en d .           I f t h e c a s e h a s b e e n r e f e r r e d t o t h e C o m p la in ts
A u t h o r it y , t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r s h o u ld in fo r m t h e A u t h o r it y t h a t t h e
c o m p la in t h a s b e e n w ith d r a w n , e n c l o s i n g a c o p y o f t h e s t a t e m e n t
o f w ith d r a w a l.       W here o n l y p a r t o f t h e c o m p l a i n t i s w it h d r a w n ,
t h e o t h e r p a r t s m ust s t i l l b e p u rsu ed in t h e norm al w ay.

4.35          There i s n o th in g t o p r e v e n t th e c h i e f o f f i c e r ,               i f he
th in k s i t n e c e ssa r y in th e c ircu m sta n ce s o f a p a r t ic u la r c a s e ,
fro m p u r s u i n g i n q u i r i e s i n t o an a l l e g a t i o n d e s p i t e t h e w it h d r a w a l
o f t h e o r i g i n a l c o m p l a i n t b y t h e m em b er o f t h e p u b l i c c o n c e r n e d .
T h i s m ay w e l l b e t h e c a s e w h e r e t h e a l l e g a t i o n                 is    o f th e
co m m issio n o f a c r im e .             In such a c a s e , s in c e th e c o m p la in t h as
b e e n w ith d r a w n ,      th e     effect       o f R e g u la tio n       11     is    th at      th e
p r o v i s i o n s o f s e c t i o n 90 o f t h e 1984 A c t no lo n g e r o p e r a t e t o
r e q u ir e r e fe r e n c e t o th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic P r o se c u tio n s.                  In
d e c id in g w h eth er th e c a s e sh o u ld n e v e r t h e le s s go t o th e D ir e c to r
i t w i l l b e a p p r o p r ia te t o a p p ly t h e norm al t e s t a p p l i c a b l e w here
an a l l e g a t i o n o f c r im e i s r e c e i v e d a g a i n s t a p o l i c e o f f i c e r
o t h e r w i s e t h a n i n a c o m p l a i n t f r o m a m em b er o f t h e p u b l i c .       W h ere
a c o m p la in t i s w ith d r a w n b u t t h e a l l e g a t i o n i s n e v e r t h e l e s s
p u r su e d , t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n b ecom es a p u r e ly i n t e r n a l m a t t e r and
th e p r o c e d u r e s d e s c r ib e d in s e c t io n 5 o f t h i s g u id a n c e w i l l n o t
need t o be fo llo w e d (u n le s s th e c h ie f o f f i c e r c o n s id e r s r e fe r e n c e
t o t h e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y u n d e r t h e p r o v i s i o n s o f s e c t i o n 88
o f t h e 1984 A ct t o b e a p p r o p r ia t e ) .



9/91                                                412
B.     COMPLAINTS WHERE ACTION MAY BE WAIVED BY THE COMPLAINTS
AUTHORITY

4.36          R e g u l a t i o n 3 a n d t h e S c h e d u l e o f t h e P o l i c e (A non ym ou s,
R e p e titio u s e tc .          C o m p la in ts) R e g u la t io n s , a s am ended b y t h e
P o l i c e D i s p e n s a t i o n from R e q u ir e m e n t t o I n v e s t i g a t e C o m p la in ts )
R e g u la tio n s       1990,      a p p ly w here a c o m p la in t,           w h ich h a s b een
r e c o r d e d u n d e r s e c t i o n 85 o f t h e A c t , a p p e a r s t o f a l l i n t o on e
o f th e fo llo w in g c a te g o r ie s ;

    i.            W here a c o m p l a i n t b e a r s n o i n d i c a t i o n o f t h e m a k e r ' s
                  i d e n t i t y (o r , w here th e c o m p la in t i s in r e s p e c t o f
                  c o n d u ct to w a rd s a n o th e r p e r s o n , o f t h a t o th e r p e r s o n 's
                  i d e n t i t y ) o r o f how s u c h a p e r s o n c a n b e c o n t a c t e d o r
                  w here a f t e r r e a so n a b le in q u ir i e s i t p r o v e s im p o s s ib le
                  t o c o n t a c t h im o r e s t a b l i s h h i s i d e n t i t y w i t h i n a
                  r e a s o n a b le tim e o r by r e a s o n a b le m eans.           I f a w a iv e r
                  i s s o u g h t , t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y m u st b e t o l d w hat
                  i n q u i r i e s w e r e m ade;

    ii.           W here i n v e s t i g a t i o n i s n o t r e a s o n a b l y p r a c t i c a b l e t h e
                  c o m p la in a n t (o r , w here t h e c o m p la in t i s in r e s p e c t o f
                  co n d u ct tow ard s a n o th e r p e r so n , t h a t o th e r p erso n )
                  refu ses          to    c o -o p e r a te w ith      th e    p o lic e     in      th e ir
                  i n q u i r i e s : f o r e x a m p le , i f a f t e r t h e c o m p le t io n o f
                  r e la te d c r im in a l p ro cee d in g s he f a i l s t o r e p ly to
                  r e q u e s t s a s k i n g h im t o s e e t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r ,
                  o r t o p r o v id e o t h e r s p e c i f i e d a s s i s t a n c e and i f any
                  o th e r s te p s d e t a ile d by th e c h ie f o f f i c e r have a ls o
                  fa ile d        to     secu re       an   in te r v ie w     or    th e      r e q u ir e d
                  a s s i s t a n c e . W herever p o s s i b l e a l e t t e r sh o u ld b e s e n t
                  t o t h e c o m p la in a n t by r e c o r d e d d e l i v e r y e x p la i n in g
                  th a t       a w a iv e r       w ill    be     sought       from      th e      P o lic e
                  C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y i f h e f a i l s t o p r o v id e f u r t h e r
                  a s s i s t a n c e w it h in a s p e c i f i e d t im e , n o r m a lly 21 d a y s.
                  I f a w a iv e r i s su b se q u e n tly s o u g h t, th e c h i e f o f f i c e r
                  sh o u ld g iv e th e A u th o r ity d e t a i l s o f th e a c t io n ta k en
                  to      a ttem p t to          secure      an    in te r v ie w    or      o th e r w ise
                  e sta b lish         c o n ta c t w ith     th e     person concerned                 and
                  fo r w a r d a c o p y o f a n y l e t t e r s e n t t o h im .

     iii.         W here t h e c o m p l a i n t r e p e a t s , w i t h o u t a n y a d d i t i o n a l
                  grounds           and     c o n ta in in g    no      fresh     a lle g a tio n s    or
                  e v i d e n c e , t h e s u b s t a n c e o f a p r e v io u s c o m p la in t w h ich
                  h a s b e e n e i t h e r d e a l t w i t h o r w ith d r a w n o r i n f o r m a l l y
                  r e s o lv e d in accord an ce w ith th e p r o v is io n s o f s e c t io n
                  85 o f t h e A c t o f 1 9 8 4 .              I f a w a iv e r i s so u g h t th e
                  c h ie f     o ffic e r      sh o u ld    in c lu d e   a copy o f th e o ld
                  c o m p la in t o r a r e fe r e n c e t o p r e v io u s co rr esp o n d en ce
                  f o r p u r p o s e s o f co m p a riso n an d , w h ere a p p r o p r ia t e , a
                  co p y o f t h e s t a t e m e n t o f w ith d r a w a l o r a co p y o f t h e
                  o u t c o m e o f t h e i n f o r m a l r e s o l u t i o n p r o c e d u r e m ad e
                  under         r e g u la tio n     5     of     th e    p o lic e    (C o m p la in ts)
                   (In form a l R e so lu tio n ) R e g u la tio n s 1985.

     iv .         W h ere     th e    c o m p la in t    is     v e x a tio u s,     o p p r e ssiv e    or

9/91                                               413
                   o th e r w is e s e e k s t o ab u se th e c o m p la in ts sy ste m o r to
                   h arrass a p a r tic u la r o f f ic e r .    I f a w a iv e r i s so u g h t,
                   a f u l l e x p la n a t io n m ust b e g iv e n o f t h e r e a s o n s f o r
                   th e req u est.

    v.            W h e r e m o r e t h a n 12 m o n t h s h a v e e l a p s e d b e t w e e n t h e
                  i n c i d e n t w h ich g a v e r i s e t o t h e c o m p la in t and t h e
                  m a k in g o f t h e c o m p l a i n t , and t h a t e i t h e r n o g o o d
                  r e a s o n f o r t h e d e la y h a s b e e n g iv e n , o r i t w o u ld b e
                  u n ju st       to      th e    o ffic e r s    accused         to    in itia te        an
                  i n v e s t i g a t i o n a f t e r th e e v e n t s c o n cer n e d h ave fad ed
                  fro m m em ory.            W here p o s s i b l e a l e t t e r s h o u l d b e s e n t
                  t o t h e c o m p la in a n t by r e c o r d e d d e l i v e r y e x p la in in g
                  t h a t c o n s id e r a t io n i s b e in g g iv e n t o s e e k in g a w a iv e r
                  f r o m t h e P o l i c e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y a n d i n v i t i n g h im
                  t o s e t o u t t h e r e a s o n s f o r t h e d e la y w it h in 21 d a y s.
                  I f a w a iv e r i s s u b s e q u e n tly so u g h t th e c h i e f o f f i c e r
                  s h o u ld g i v e t h e A u t h o r it y d e t a i l s o f an y r e a s o n s w h ich
                  t h e c o m p la in a n t h a s p r o v id e d .

4.37          A f te r e s t a b l i s h i n g t h a t th e c o m p la in t f a l l s in t o one or
o th e r o f t h e s e c a t e g o r ie s , th e c h i e f o f f i c e r sh o u ld sen d th e
C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y a c o p y o f t h e c o m p l a i n t a n d a m em orandum
e x p l a i n i n g why h e t h i n k s t h e c o m p l a i n t f a l l i n t o t h e c a t e g o r y i t
d o e s , g i v i n g r e a s o n s f o r h i s v ie w , and i n v i t e th em t o a g r e e t h a t
t h e r e i s n o n e e d f o r a n y f u r t h e r a c t i o n u n d e r p a r t IX o f t h e 1 9 8 4
A ct.       I t sh o u ld be n o ted th a t a r e q u e st under t h i s p r o v is io n i s
n o t p r e c l u d e d b e c a u s e an i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f t h e c o m p l a i n t , o r an
a ttem p t a t in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n , h a s a lr e a d y b een s t a r t e d .               The
C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y may a s k f o r f u r t h e r i n f o r m a t i o n b e f o r e
r e a c h in g a d e c i s i o n , b u t i f t h e y a g r e e t o t h e r e q u e s t , no f u r t h e r
a c tio n need be tak en e x c e p t to                         r e c o r d t h e ou tcom e i n t h e
c o m p la in ts r e g i s t e r .          I f t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y do n o t a g r e e
w ith t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r ' s v ie w th e n , f o llo w in g c o n s u l t a t io n w ith
h im , i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f t h e c o m p l a i n t ( o r t h e a t t e m p t a t in f o r m a l
r e s o l u t i o n ) a n d s u b s e q u e n t a c t i o n may p r o c e e d i n t h e n o r m a l w a y .
I t i s , o f c o u r s e , open t o th e c h i e f o f f i c e r t o d e c id e i f he
th in k s f i t t h a t a c o m p la in t f a l l i n g in t o one o f t h e s e c a t e g o r ie s
d oes n e v e r t h e le s s m e r it              in v e stig a tio n     or o th er      a p p r o p r ia te
a c tio n .         F o r e x a m p l e , a n a n o n y m o u s c o m p l a i n t m ay n e v e r t h e l e s s
c o n ta in        a lle g a tio n s       w h ich      are    se r io u s      enough     to     r e q u ir e
 i n v e s t i g a t i o n , p o s s i b l y u n d er t h e s u p e r v i s i o n o f t h e C o m p la in ts
A u th o r ity .           In t h a t e v e n t , t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n and s u b se q u e n t
a c t io n w i l l p r o c e e d in t h e norm al way.




9/91                                                414
                                               SECTION 5
          CONSIDERATION OF AND ACTION ON INVESTIGATION REPORT

ACTION BY CHIEF OFFICER

5 .1          The f o l l o w i n g p a r a g r a p h s s e t o u t t h e p r o c e d u r e t o b e
f o l l o w e d b y t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r w hen h e r e c e i v e s an i n v e s t i g a t i n g
o f f i c e r ' s r e p o r t s u b m i t t e d t o h im u n d e r s e c t i o n 8 5 ( 9 ) o f t h e 1 9 8 4
A ct o r a copy th e r e o f under s e c t io n 8 9 ( 6 ) .                 For th e p roced u re to
b e f o l l o w e d when t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y r e c e i v e s s u c h a r e p o r t i n
r e s p e c t o f a s e n io r o f f ic e r se e paragraphs 1 0 .1 0 -1 0 .1 4 .

5.2     On r e c e i p t o f t h e r e p o r t t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r s h o u l d s e n d a
copy o f i t t o th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic P r o se c u tio n s i f t h i s n eed s
t o be done (s e e paragraph 5 .8 b e lo w ).              W here:

    a.       th e rep o rt in d ic a te s to th e c h ie f o f f ic e r th a t th e o f f ic e r
    w h o i s t h e s u b j e c t o f t h e r e p o r t m ay h a v e c o m m i t t e d a c r i m i n a l
    o f f e n c e and t h a t t h e o f f e n c e i n d i c a t e d i s su c h t h a t h e o u g h t
    t o b e c h a r g e d w it h i t , and t h e D i r e c t o r h a s d e a l t w it h t h e
    q u e stio n o f c r im in a l p ro c e e d in g s; or

    b.       th e rep o rt does n ot in d ic a te to th e c h ie f o f f ic e r                   t h a t fe
    o f f i c e r m ay h a v e c o m m i t t e d a c r i m i n a l o f f e n c e ;

t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r m ay p r o c e e d t o p r e f e r a n y d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s
he c o n s id e r s a p p r o p r ia te (b u t s e e p aragrap h 5 .4 b e lo w ).                  U nder
t h e p r o v i s i o n s o f s e c t i o n 9 0 ( 5 ) and (7) o f t h e 1984 A c t , w h e t h e r
or n o t th e c h i e f o f f i c e r p r e f e r s any c h a r g e s he sh o u ld th e n r e f e r
t h e c a s e t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y .        Paragraphs 6 . 1 6 - 6 . 2 5 s e t
o u t th e a rran gem en ts f o r r e f e r r in g a c a s e t o t h e A u th o r ity under
th o se p r o v isio n s.         I t w ill be seen th a t th e c h ie f o f f ic e r is
r e q u ir e d t o t e l l th e A u th o r ity w h eth er o r n o t h e h as p r e fe r r e d
c h a r g e s and, i f n o t, h i s r e a s o n s f o r n o t d o in g s o .            I t sh o u ld be
n o te d t h a t i f t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r p r e f e r s a c h a r g e w h ich i s n o t
a d m i t t e d , h e m ay n o t p r o c e e d i m m e d i a t e l y t o a h e a r i n g s i n c e t h e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y h a v e t o d e c id e w h e th e r t h e c a s e j u s t i f i e s
a tr ib u n a l h ea rin g (s e e paragraphs 6 . 3 7 - 6 . 3 9 ) .

5.3          W here t h e r e p o r t i n d i c a t e s t o t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r t h a t a
c r i m i n a l o f f e n c e m ay h a v e b e e n c o m m i t t e d b y t h e o f f i c e r w ho i s
th e s u b je c t o f th e r ep o rt but he c o n sid e r s th a t th e o ffe n c e i s
n o t such th a t th e o f f i c e r ought t o be ch arged w ith i t , he i s
r e q u ir e d by s e c t i o n 9 0 (6 ) o f t h e 1984 A ct t o r e f e r t h e c a s e t o
t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y , s t a t i n g w h e th e r h e p r o p o s e s t o p r e f e r
d is c ip l in a r y c h a rg es and, i f n o t, h i s r e a so n s fo r n o t p ro p o sin g
t o do s o .      T h e A u t h o r i t y m ay d e c i d e t o e x e r c i s e t h e i r p o w e r u n d e r
s e c t io n 9 2(2) t o d i r e c t t h a t th e c a s e sh o u ld be r e fe r r e d t o th e
D ir e c to r o f P u b lic P r o se c u tio n s,             and t h e r e f o r e t h e c h a r g e s
p r o p o s e d i n t h e m em orandum s h o u l d n o t b e p r e f e r r e d u n t i l t h e
A u th o r ity have in d ic a te d th a t th e y a re c o n te n t w ith th e c h ie f
o f f i c e r ' s p ro p o sa ls.

5 .4     U nder t h e p r o v i s i o n s o f s e c t i o n 8 9 ( 1 2 ) o f t h e 1984 A c t,
i n a c a s e in w h ich t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y h a v e s u p e r v is e d t h e

9/91                                               501
i n v e s t i g a t i o n , n o d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e m ay b e b r o u g h t b e f o r e t h e
c h i e f o f f i c e r h a s r e c e i v e d t h e s ta te m e n t w h ich t h e A c t ( s e e
paragraph 6 .8 ) . S im ila r ly , under th e p r o v is io n s o f s e c t io n 89(13)
o f th e A ct n e it h e r th e c h ie f o f f i c e r nor th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic
P r o s e c u t i o n s m ay b r i n g c r i m i n a l p r o c e e d i n g s b e f o r e t h e c h i e f
o f f ic e r has r e c e iv e d th e A u th o r ity 's sta tem en t, b u t su b se c tio n
 (14) d i s a p p l i e s t h i s r e s t r i c t i o n w here i t a p p e a r s t o t h e D ir e c t o r
th a t       th ere        are   e x c e p tio n a l      c ircu m sta n ce s     w h ich     m ake      it
u n d e sir a b le t o w a it fo r th e sta te m e n t t o be su b m itte d .

5 .5          E x c e p t in c a s e s in w h ich s e c t i o n 9 0 ( 6 ) a p p l i e s , a c a s e
n eed n o t b e r e f e r r e d t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y u n d er t h e
p r o v i s i o n s o f s e c t i o n 90 o f t h e 1984 A c t i f d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s
h a v e b een p r e f e r r e d and t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r h a s a d m itte d t h e
c h a r g e s and h a s n o t w ith d r a w n h i s a d m is s i o n .  In such a c a s e , th e
c h i e f o f f i c e r i s r e q u ir e d by s e c t i o n 91 o f t h e 1984 A c t t o su b m it
t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u th o r it y a t t h e c o n c l u s io n o f t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y
p r o c e e d i n g s a m em orandum s e t t i n g o u t t h e p a r t i c u l a r s o f t h e
d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s p r e f e r r e d and o f any p u n ish m e n t im p o se d .

5 .6         A s i n d i c a t e d i n p a r a g r a p h 3 . 1 4 a c o m p l a i n t m ay c o v e r
s e v e r a l m a t t e r s o r s e v e r a l c o m p l a i n t s m ay r e l a t e t o t h e s a m e
in c id e n t.       I t w i l l b e e v id e n t t h a t one c o m p la in t on one m a tte r
c a n r a i s e v a r y i n g i s s u e s and g i v e r i s e t o o n e o r m ore o f s e v e r a l
p o s s i b l e o u tc o m e s : i t c o u l d l e a d t o o n e o r m ore c r i m i n a l c h a r g e s ,
t o o n e o r m ore d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s , t o a d v i c e t o t h e o f f i c e r
co n cern ed , t o c i v i l p r o c e e d in g s b e in g b rou gh t a g a in s t th e p o lic e ;
o r t o no d i s c i p l i n a r y a c t i o n .         E q u a lly , i f th e c h i e f o f f i c e r
d e c id e s to ta k e d is c ip lin a r y a c tio n , th e r e w i l l o fte n be a range
o f p o s s i b l e c h a r g e s o r p o s s i b l e c o m b in a tio n s o f c h a r g e s w h ich
m ig h t b e p r e f e r r e d a g a i n s t t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d from w h ic h h e
w i l l h ave t o c h o o se th e m ost a p p r o p r ia te in a l l t h e c ir c u m sta n c e s
o f th e c a se .        In th e g r e a t m a jo r ity o f c a s e s , how ever, th e c h ie f
o f f i c e r sh o u ld have l i t t l e d i f f i c u l t y in d e c id in g what i s th e
r ig h t th in g to do.            In p a r t ic u la r he can c o n tin u e , a s a t p r e s e n t
t o s e l e c t m ore im p o r ta n t m a t t e r s f o r fo r m a l d i s c i p l i n a r y a c t i o n
and d i s p o s e o f s m a l l e r m a t t e r s w it h o u t r e c o u r s e t o a d i s c i p l i n a r y
h e a r i n g , i e b y a w ord o f w a r n in g o r a d v i c e from a s e n i o r o f f i c e r .
In a c o m p la in ts c a s e i t w i l l , o f c o u r s e , be n e c e s s a r y f o r th e
c h ie f      o ffic e r     to     in d ic a te ,    in   r e fe r r in g    th e  case        to      th e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y , t h a t h e c o n s i d e r s su c h a c o u r s e t o b e
a p p r o p r i a t e a n d why ( s e e p a r a g r a p h s 6 . 2 1 - 6 . 2 3 ) .

REPORTS ON CASES NOT ARISING OUT OF COMPLAINTS

5 .7        The P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y ' s r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s in
d i s c i p l i n a r y m a t t e r s e x t e n d o n l y t o t h o s e c a s e s i n w h ic h an
i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r ' s r e p o r t was su b m itte d u n d er t h e p r o v is io n s
o f s e c t i o n s 8 5 ( 9 ) o r 8 9 ( 6 ) o f t h e 1984 A c t, i e w here i t r e l a t e s
t o a c a s e a r i s i n g o u t o f a c o m p la in t o r o u t o f a m a tte r w hose
i n v e s t i g a t i o n w as s u p e r v is e d by t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y a f t e r
b e in g r e fe r r e d under s e c t io n 88.                In a l l o th e r c a s e s th e c h ie f
o f f i c e r w i l l d e c i d e w h e th e r i t w o u ld b e a p p r o p r ia t e t o b r in g a
d isc ip lin a r y        charge          or charges         under R e g u la tio n       8 of        th e
D is c ip lin e R e g u la tio n s a g a in s t th e o f f i c e r co n cern ed and, i f he
d oes n o t b r in g              such c h a r g e s,      w h eth er any o th e r        a c tio n    is

9/91                                                502
a p p r o p r ia te t o d e a l w ith th e m a tte r .  He m ay t h e n p r o c e e d w i t h
t h e p r e f e r r i n g o f any c h a r g e s and w it h a r r a n g e m e n ts f o r t h e
h ea rin g o f th o se ch a rg es.          The C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y a r e n o t
in v o lv e d .

THE ROLE OF THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS

5 .8          U nder s e c t i o n 9 0 ( 4 ) o f t h e 1984 A c t i f a c h i e f o f f i c e r
d e t e r m i n e s t h a t a r e p o r t s u b m i t t e d t o h im u n d e r s e c t i o n 8 5 ( 9 ) ( o r
a copy t h e r e o f su b m itte d under s e c t io n 89(6) in d ic a t e s t h a t a
c r i m i n a l o f f e n c e m ay h a v e b e e n c o m m i t t e d b y a m em b er o f h i s
f o r c e , and i f h e c o n s id e r s t h a t t h e o f f e n c e i n d i c a t e d i s su c h
t h a t th e o f f i c e r ou gh t t o be ch arged w ith i t , th e n h e sh o u ld send
a copy o f th e r e p o r t to th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic P r o se c u tio n s.
T h is r e q u ir em en t e x te n d s t o a l l t y p e s o f c r im in a l o f f e n c e s b u t
a llo w s th e c h i e f o f f i c e r ' s d i s c r e t i o n t o c o n s id e r w h eth er any
such        offen ce       is    m in o r en o u g h t o        be d e a lt w ith            under th e
d is c ip l in a r y cod e r a th e r th an a s a c r im in a l o f f e n c e .               I t sh o u ld
b e e m p h a sise d , h o w ev er, t h a t t h e r e q u ir e m e n t i s n o t m et by
r e f e r r i n g o n ly t h o s e c a s e s w h ere, in th e c h i e f o f f i c e r ' s v ie w ,
t h e r e i s s u f f i c i e n t e v i d e n c e t o show t h a t a c r i m i n a l o f f e n c e h a s
b e e n c o m m i t t e d : h e m u s t r e f e r a n y c a s e w h e r e s u c h a n o f f e n c e mav
h a v e b e e n co m m itte d ( p r o v id e d , o f c o u r s e , t h a t h e c o n s i d e r s t h a t ,
i f th e ev id e n c e i s s u f f i c i e n t , th e o f f i c e r concerned ought to be
ch arged w ith th e o f f e n c e ) .             "M oreover, i t i s n o t s u f f i c i e n t f o r
th e c h i e f o f f i c e r t o r e f e r o n ly th o s e c a s e s w here he f e e l s th a t
a c r i m i n a l c h a r g e w o u ld b e l i k e l y t o s u c c e e d .              P r o v id e d th e
r e q u ir e m e n ts o f s e c t i o n 9 0 (4 ) o f t h e A ct a r e m et, a l l su ch c a s e s
sh o u ld be r e fe r r e d t o              th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic            P r o se c u tio n s
r e g a r d l e s s o f w h e t h e r i t m ay a p p e a r t h a t t h e c h a r g e c o u l d f a i l :
th is        is     a    ju d gem en t      w h ich      o n ly   th e   D ir e c to r      of      P u b lic
P r o s e c u t i o n s h a s t h e a u t h o r i t y t o m ake” .

5 .9         W here i n f o r m a t i o n fro m a s o u r c e o t h e r t h a n a r e p o r t
s u b m itte d u n d er s e c t i o n 8 5 ( 9 ) o r 8 9 ( 6 ) o f t h e 1984 A ct i n d i c a t e s
t o t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r t h a t a m em b er o f h i s            f o r c e may h a v e
c o m m itte d a c r i m in a l o f f e n c e and t h a t t h e o f f i c e r o u g h t t o b e
ch arged w ith i t , he sh o u ld r e f e r th e c a s e t o th e D ir e c to r fo r
a d v ic e ,   ev en th o u g h t h e c ir c u m s ta n c e s o f t h e o f f e n c e have
r e q u ir e d a ch a rg e t o be p r e fe r r e d fo r th w ith .

5.10        W h e r e a c r i m i n a l o f f e n c e may h a v e b e e n c o m m i t t e d i t may
so m e tim e s happen t h a t i n t h e c o u r s e o f an i n v e s t i g a t i o n th e
in v e s t ig a t in g o f f i c e r w i l l c o n sid e r i t d e s ir a b le to se e k th e
a d v ic e    of     th e   D ir e c to r    on w h e th e r,        for       in sta n c e ,     fu rth er
in q u ir ie s sh o u ld b e u n d ertak en o r a d d it io n a l s ta te m e n ts ta k en .
W h ere t h e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y a r e s u p e r v i s i n g t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n
th e in v e s t ig a t i n g o f f i c e r sh o u ld , under R e g u la tio n 6 o f th e
P o l i c e (C o m p la in ts) (G e n e r a l) R e g u la t io n s , in fo r m t h e A u t h o r it y
t h a t h e p r o p o s e s t o c o n s u l t t h e D i r e c t o r and o f t h e o u tco m e o f
th e c o n su lta tio n .

5.11          The D i r e c t o r w i l l h i m s e l f in fo r m a c o m p la in a n t d i r e c t o f
h i s d e c i s i o n w h e th e r o r n o t a p o l i c e o f f i c e r c o m p la in e d o f s h o u ld
be p ro secu ted .             The D i r e c t o r d o e s n o t g i v e r e a s o n s f o r h i s
d e c i s i o n , b u t w here th e d e c i s i o n i s a g a in s t p r o s e c u tio n , th e

9/91                                                503
r e p l i e s s e n t t o t h e c o m p la in a n t and t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r w i l l
n o r m a lly in d i c a t e w h eth e r h e c o n s id e r s t h a t t h e e v id e n c e i s
i n s u f f i c i e n t t o j u s t i f y c r im in a l p r o c e e d in g s or t h a t c r im in a l
p ro cee d in g s are n o t n e c e ssa r y in th e p u b lic in t e r e s t .                  The
D i r e c t o r m ay s o m e t i m e s i n d i c a t e t o t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r t h a t ,
a lth o u g h c r im in a l p r o c e e d in g s a re n o t a p p r o p r ia te , i t i s s t i l l
o p e n t o h im t o c o n s i d e r d i s p o s i n g o f t h e m a t t e r b y m ea n s o f
d is c ip lin a r y a c tio n .

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CRIMINAL AND DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS

5.12         A p o l i c e o f f i c e r i s s u b j e c t t o t h e c r i m in a l la w and t o a
d is c ip lin e code.         A s a r e s u l t , a l l e g e d m i s c o n d u c t may r e n d e r h im
l i a b l e t o b o t h c r i m i n a l and d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d i n g s .      It is
n e c e s s a r y t h a t w h e r e b o t h t h e s e s y s t e m s m ay a p p l y , t h e y a r e
o p e r a te d in w ays w h ich a r e n e i t h e r u n f a i r t o t h e o f f i c e r n o r
o ffe n s iv e to th e p u b lic in t e r e s t .          In d e c id in g w h eth er t o p r e fe r
a d i s c i p l in a r y c h a rg e th e e f f e c t o f any c r im in a l p r o c e e d in g s
w h ic h h a v e a l r e a d y t a k e n p l a c e h a s t o b e d i s t i n g u i s h e d from t h e
e f f e c t o f any d e c i s i o n by th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic P r o s e c u tio n s
t h a t c r im in a l p r o c e e d in g s sh o u ld n o t b e b r o u g h t.

WHERE CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS HAVE ALREADY TAKEN PLACE

5.13         H ere i t h a s t o b e ex a m in ed w h e th e r s e c t i o n 104 o f t h e
P o l i c e and C r im in a l E v id e n c e A ct 1984 o p e r a t e s .                   The s e c t i o n
p r o v id ie s t h a t an o f f i c e r b r o u g h t b e f o r e t h e c o u r t s on a c r i m in a l
ch a rg e sh o u ld n o t, w h eth er a c q u itte d o r c o n v ic t e d , t h e r e a f t e r be
c h a r g e d w it h a d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e w h ich i s in s u b s t a n c e t h e
sam e         (sa v e   th at      c r im in a l       conduct          itse lf       c o n stitu te s     a
d isc ip lin a r y o f f e n c e ) .         T h is i s b e c a u s e , s i n c e t h e r e q u ir e d
s t a n d a r d o f p r o o f i n d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d i n g s i s t h e sam e a s t h a t
in c r im in a l p r o c e e d in g s, t o b r in g a d is c i p l i n a r y ch a rg e fo llo w in g
a c r i m in a l c h a r g e w o u ld b e e f f e c t t o t r y t h e o f f i c e r t w i c e f o r
t h e sam e o f f e n c e .     T h is i s th e o n ly s t a t u t o r y b a r t o d i s c i p l i n a r y
p r o c e e d in g s and t h e s o l e s i t u a t i o n in w h ich i t i s a p p r o p r ia t e t o
s a y t h a t " d o u b le je o p a r d y " o b t a i n s .

5.14          In      c o n sid e r in g   w h eth er     se c tio n       104    o p era tes,        c lo se
a t t e n t io n sh o u ld b e p a id t o th e s i m i l a r i t y in th e e le m e n ts o f th e
c r im in a l c h a r g e and t h e p o s s i b l e d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e .          I n som e
c a s e s t h e y may n o t b e a s s i m i l a r a s a p p e a r s a t f i r s t s i g h t : t h e
m e n t a l e l e m e n t o f t h e c r i m i n a l o f f e n c e may b e l a c k i n g i n t h e
d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e , o r t h e c o n d u c t i n v o l v e d m ay d i f f e r .    W h ere
t h i s i s s o , t h e r e i s no b a r t o d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s , b e c a u s e
t h e tw o o f f e n c e s a r e n o t i n s u b s t a n c e t h e sa m e.          As e x a m p le s, in
c r im in a l p ro c e e d in g s a g a in s t a p o lic e o f f i c e r fo r c o r r u p tio n i t
i s n e c e s s a r y t o e s t a b l i s h t h a t t h e o f f i c e r a g r e e d t o show fa v o u r
to      th e      person        f r o m whom h e         agreed        to      accept      a gift          or
c o n s i d e r a t i o n b u t t h i s e l e m e n t i s a b s e n t from t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y
o ffe n c e o f a c c e p tin g a g r a tu ity ; a c r im in a l ch arge o f p erju ry
in v o l v e s p r o o f t h a t an a l l e g e d l y f a l s e s ta te m e n t w as m a t e r ia l t o
t h e p r o c e e d i n g s i n w h ic h i t w as m ade, b u t a d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e
o f f a ls e h o o d d o e s n o t ; and a T h e ft A c t c h a r g e w i l l r e q u ir e p r o o f
o f an i n t e n t i o n p e r m a n e n tly t o d e p r iv e a p e r s o n o f h i s p r o p e r ty
o r p e r m a n e n tly t o e v a d e paym ent o f a d e b t , w h e rea s t h e s e e le m e n ts

9/91                                                504
a r e a b s e n t from d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e s r e l a t i n g t o t h e c a r e o f
p ro p erty or f a il u r e to d isc h a r g e d e b ts .                    By c o n t r a s t , th e
c r i m i n a l c h a r g e o f a s s a u l t and t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y        charge o f
u n n e c e s s a r y v i o l e n c e i s t h e m o s t common e x a m p l e o f s u c h c h a r g e s
b e in g in s u b s t a n c e t h e sam e.

5.15          T h ere w i l l a l s o b e c a s e s w h ere an a c q u i t t a l on a c r im in a l
c h a r g e m ay b e v e r y r e l e v a n t t o t h e q u e s t i o n w h e t h e r t o p r e f e r a
d is c ip l in a r y ch a rg e, n o tw ith sta n d in g t h a t th e ch a rg es a re n o t in
s u b s t a n c e t h e sam e s o t h a t s e c t i o n 104 o f t h e 19 8 4 A c t d o e s n o t
o p e r a t e . T h is w i l l b e s o , i n p a r t i c u l a r , when a m a t t e r e s s e n t i a l
t o t h e p r o o f o f t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y ch a rg e w as in i s s u e in th e
c r i m i n a l p r o c e e d i n g s and w as a p p a r e n t ly r e s o l v e d i n t h e o f f i c e r ' s
fa v o u r.       I n t h e f i r s t ex a m p le q u o te d i n p a r a g r a p h 5 . 1 4 , i f t h e
e s s e n t i a l i s s u e in a t r i a l f o r c o r r u p tio n was w h e th e r t h e o f f i c e r
r e c e i v e d a g i f t , r a t h e r th a n w h e th e r h e show ed fa v o u r i n r e t u r n
f o r a g i f t , i t m ay n o t b e a p p r o p r i a t e t o p r e f e r a d i s c i p l i n a r y
c h a r g e o f a c c e p t in g a g r a t u i t y f o llo w in g an a c q u i t t a l in th e
cr im in a l p r o c e e d in g s.

WHERE THE DIRECTOR HAS DECIDED THAT CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS. SHOULD
NOT BE BROUGHT

5.16          H ere s e c t i o n 104 o f t h e 1984 A c t d o e s n o t o p e r a t e and a l l
cases         fa ll      t o be c o n sid e r e d      in d iv id u a lly    on t h e i r m e r it s .
H ow ever, a c c o u n t sh o u ld b e ta k e n o f su ch a d e c i s i o n by th e
D i r e c t o r i f t h e c r im in a l o f f e n c e w h ich h e h a s c o n s id e r e d i s in
su b sta n ce          th e     sam e    as      th e     d isc ip lin a r y      offen ce        under
c o n s id e r a t io n ( i e th e s o r t o f ex a m in a tio n o u t lin e d in paragrap h
5 . 1 4 w i l l b e r e l e v a n t h e r e a l s o ) and h i s d e c i s i o n i s on t h e
grounds th a t th e a v a ila b le ev id e n c e i s                   in su ffic ie n t:      i f th e
D ir e c to r h as d e c id e d t h a t th e e v id e n c e i s                in s u f fic ie n t for
c r im in a l p r o s e c u tio n i t       is     fo r c o n s id e r a t io n w h eth er i t       is
s u f f i c i e n t fo r d is c ip lin a r y p ro c e e d in g s.       U ltim a te ly , how ever,
h a v in g c o n s id e r e d e a c h c a s e on i t s m e r i t s , t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y
a u th o r ity i s f r e e t o b r in g p r o c e e d in g s i f i t th in k s in a l l th e
c i r c u m s t a n c e s t h a t i t i s f a i r and a p p r o p r ia t e t o do s o .

5.17          In a se p a r a te         c a te g o r y a re c a s e s w here th e            a lle g e d
m is c o n d u c t i s f a i r l y t r i v i a l when r e g a r d e d a s a c r i m i n a l o f f e n c e ,
b u t f a r m ore s e r i o u s i n t h e c o n t e x t o f a d i s c i p l i n e d s e r v i c e .
C a s e s o f common a s s a u l t , m i n o r t h e f t s o f p o l i c e p r o p e r t y a n d t h e
u s e o f b a d l a n g u a g e t o a m em b er o f t h e p u b l i c m i g h t f a l l w i t h i n
t h is category.            I n s u c h c a s e s , t h e D i r e c t o r m ay d e c i d e t h a t t h e
o f f e n c e i s n o t s u c h a s t o m e r i t p r o s e c u t i o n ( h e may u s e t h e
e x p r e s s i o n t h a t i t w o u ld n o t b e i n t h e p u b l i c i n t e r e s t t o b r in g
a c r im in a l charge) .           I f t h is i s so , h is d e c isio n i s n ot r e le v a n t
t o th e q u e s tio n w h eth er d is c ip l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s sh o u ld be
b ro u g h t s i n c e h e h a s n o t e x p r e s s e d th e v ie w t h a t t h e e v id e n c e i s
in s u ffic ie n t to ju s tify               c r im in a l p r o c e e d in g s.      It   fo llo w s,
t h e r e f o r e , t h a t th e d i s c i p l i n a r y a u t h o r it y i s f r e e t o ta k e w hat
a c t io n i t th in k s a p p r o p r ia te in such in s t a n c e s w ith o u t fu r th e r
regard to th e D ir e c to r 's d e c isio n .

5.18      W here a d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e i s b r o u g h t i n a c a s e i n w h ic h
t h e D ir e c t o r h a s d e c id e d t h a t t h e r e s h o u ld b e no p r o s e c u t io n , t h e

9/91                                                505
a ccu sed o f f i c e r sh o u ld b e s u p p lie d w ith a copy o f                   th e D ir e c to r 's
le t t e r n o tify in g h is d e c is io n , u n le ss th e c h ie f                  o ffice r, a fter
s u c h c o n s i d e r a t i o n w i t h t h e D i r e c t o r a s m ay               be n ecessary,
c o n sid e r s th a t th e r e are s p e c ia l rea so n s a g a in s t                d o in g so in a
p a r tic u la r ca se.

5.19         I t c a n n o r m a l l y b e a s s u m e d t h a t a p e r s o n w ho h a s m a d e a
c o m p la in t      a g a in st     a     p o lic e      o ffic e r    w ill      be    prepared            to
su b sta n tia te          th a t     c o m p la in t      in    c r im in a l     or    d is c ip lin a r y
p r o c e e d in g s.     I f a w it n e s s i n d i c a t e s an u n w i lli n g n e s s t o a tte n d
a d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r i n g , t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r m ay a p p l y t o t h e Crown
O f f i c e o f t h e Suprem e C o u r t f o r a su b p o e n a ad t e s t i f i c a n d u m .              (In
su ch c a s e s , s e r v i c e o f th e subpoena w i l l b e in a c co r d a n ce w ith
t h e R u l e s o f t h e Suprem e C o u r t ) .                 C o m p la in a n ts s h o u ld n o t b e
asked to e x p r e ss a p r e fe r e n c e fo r c r im in a l or d is c ip lin a r y
p r o c e e d in g s , o r fo r a tte n d in g one ty p e o f h e a r in g r a th e r th an th e
o th er.       Any u n s o l i c i t e d e x p r e s s i o n o f t h e c o m p l a i n a n t ' s f e e l i n g s
sh o u ld n e v e r t h e le s s be re c o r d e d .

FURTHER        CONSIDERATIONS              WHERE       CRIMINAL         PROCEEDINGS           HAVE       BEEN
BROUGHT

5.20         S e c t i o n 104 o f t h e 1984 A c t d o e s n o t a p p ly t o a c h a r g e o f
c r i m i n a l c o n d u c t u n d e r p a r a g r a p h 16 o f t h e d i s c i p l i n e c o d e i n
S c h e d u le 1 o f t h e D i s c i p l i n e R e g u la t io n s w h ich c o n s i s t s o f h a v in g
b een fou n d g u i l t y o f a c r im in a l o f f e n c e .         The S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e
c o n s i d e r s t h a t w here an o f f i c e r h a s b e e n c o n v ic t e d o f a c r im in a l
o f f e n c e t h e r e i s n o r e a s o n i n p r i n c i p l e why t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y
charge o f             c o n v ic tio n   fo r th a t o ffen ce          sh o u ld n o t th en be
p referred .             I f , f o r e x a m p le , a p o l i c e o f f i c e r h a s c o m m itte d a
s e r i o u s c r im e , t h e o f f i c e r ' s f i t n e s s t o rem a in i n t h e f o r c e i s
c l e a r l y i n d o u b t and i t i s r i g h t t h a t t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r s h o u ld
be a b le to p r e fe r th e d is c ip lin a r y ch arge o f c o n v ic tio n fo r a
c r i m i n a l o f f e n c e s o t h a t s u i t a b l e a c t i o n may b e t a k e n .

5.21         I t i s em p h a sise d t h a t w h ere a p o l i c e o f f i c e r h a s b een
fou n d g u i l t y o f a c r im in a l o f f e n c e , t h e r e i s d i s c r e t i o n w h e th e r
o r n o t t o b r i n g a c h a r g e u n d e r p a r a g r a p h 16 o f t h e D i s c i p l i n e
Code.         G e n e r a lly s p e a k in g , t h e a c c u se d h a v in g b een s e n te n c e d by
a c o u r t, th e o n ly m a tter o u tsta n d in g i s h i s f i t n e s s fo r th e
r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s o f h i s r a n k o r a s a m em b er o f a p o l i c e f o r c e .
T h e r e m ay b e c a s e s w h e r e s o m e l e s s e r p u n i s h m e n t t h a n d i s m i s s a l
o r r e d u c t i o n i n r a n k , s u c h a s rep rim a n d (th o u g h n o t a m o n eta ry
p u n ish m en t         -     see    R e g u la tio n       25(1)       of       th e    D isc ip lin a r y
R e g u l a t i o n s ) , w o u ld b e a p p r o p r ia t e .       I n som e c a s e s i n v o l v i n g
c o n v i c t i o n f o r c o m p a r a t i v e l y t r i v i a l o f f e n c e s , i n c l u d i n g m in o r
t r a f f i c o f f e n c e s w ith o u t a g g r a v a tin g f a c t o r s , form al d i s c i p l i n a r y
a c tio n w i l l , in a l l p r o b a b ility , r a r e ly be n e c e ssa r y .

5.22         The c o n s i d e r a t i o n s m e n tio n e d i n t h e p r e c e d i n g p a r a g r a p h s
c o n tin u e t o a p p ly w here th e c o u r t h a s g iv e n a su sp en d ed or
d e fe r r e d se n te n c e , a c o n d itio n a l or a b so lu te d isc h a r g e , or put
t h e p o l i c e o f f i c e r on p r o b a t io n .    N o tw ith sta n d in g th e p r o v is io n s
o f s e c t i o n 1 3 ( 1 ) o f t h e Pow ers o f C r im in a l C o u r ts A c t 1 973, t h e
c o n d u c t i n q u e s t i o n com es w i t h i n t h e s c o p e o f p a r a g r a p h 16 o f t h e
D i s c i p l i n e Code s i n c e t h e s e s e n t e n c e s f o l l o w a f i n d i n g o f g u i l t .

9/91                                                 506
5.23          C a s e s m ay a r i s e w h i c h i n v o l v e b o t h a c r i m i n a l o f f e n c e
w h ich i s t o b e a s u b j e c t o f p r o s e c u t i o n and m is c o n d u c t n o t
a m o u n tin g t o a c r im e w h ic h i s s e p a r a t e from t h e c r i m i n a l c h a r g e
an d c o u l d p r o p e r l y b e m ade t h e s u b j e c t o f d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s .
The p r o c e d u r e t o b e f o l l o w e d i n r e g a r d t o t h e b r i n g i n g o f
d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s w i l l depend on t h e n a tu r e o f t h e c a s e .              In
an i n t e r n a l d i s c i p l i n a r y c a s e , w h ere no c o m p la in t i s in v o lv e d ,
and t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r i s s a t i s f i e d t h a t no f u r t h e r d i s c i p l i n a r y
e n q u i r i e s m ig h t b e n eed ed d u r in g o r a s a r e s u l t o f t h e c r im in a l
p r o c e e d in g s, th en i f i t i s p r a c tic a b le th e d is c ip lin a r y ch arges
s h o u l d b e fra m ed and n o t i f i e d a t t h e e a r l i e s t o p p o r t u n i t y ; b u t
t h e o f f i c e r s h o u ld b e in fo rm ed t h a t t h e c h a r g e s w i l l n o t be
p r o c e e d e d w i t h u n t i l t h e r e s u l t o f t h e c r i m i n a l c h a r g e s i s known.
In a c o m p la in ts c a s e , th e d e c i s i o n t o p r e f e r d i s c i p l i n a r y ch a rg es
m ust a w a it t h e             d ete r m in a tio n    of     th e   q u e stio n      of     c r im in a l
p r o c e e d in g s , o r th e c o m p le tio n o f th e t r i a l i f th e o f f i c e r
con cern ed i s ch arged w ith a c r im in a l o f f e n c e .                      H ow ever, i t i s
s t r o n g l y recom m ended t h a t a t t h e t im e t h e o f f i c e r i s c h a r g e d w it h
t h e c r i m i n a l o f f e n c e , h e s h o u l d , t o l e a v e h im i n n o d o u b t , b e
se r v e d w ith a w r itte n sta te m e n t t h a t th e d is c ip l in a r y a s p e c ts o f
th e      case        rem a in o u t s t a n d i n g .     He s h o u l d b e t o l d           t h a t no
d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s w i l l b e ta k e n u n t i l t h e ou tcom e o f t h e
t r i a l i s known.           The u n d e r ly in g p o l i c y h e r e i s t h a t a f t e r h a v in g
s to o d t r i a l on a c r im in a l c h a r g e t h e o f f i c e r sh o u ld n o t th en
le a r n f o r t h e f i r s t tim e t h a t h e m ust a l s o f a c e d i s c i p l i n a r y
charges.             The o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d w i l l n a t u r a l l y b e aw are o f t h e
p r o t e c t i o n g iv e n by s e c t i o n 1 0 4 ( 1 ) o f t h e P o l i c e and C r im in a l
E v id e n c e A c t.        (S e e p a r a g r a p h 2 o f A nnex G ) .

5.24          T here a r e c e r t a in s p e c ia l c o n s id e r a tio n s t o be borne in
m in d w h e n a c a s e r e s u l t i n g i n c r i m i n a l p r o c e e d i n g s a r i s e s o u t o f
a c o m p l a i n t b y a m em b er o f t h e p u b l i c .          U nder t h e te r m s o f t h e
1984 A c t s u c h a c a s e m u st s t i l l b e c o n s i d e r e d from t h e p o i n t o f
v ie w o f d i s c i p l i n e , even i f th e c r im in a l p r o c e e d in g s a d e q u a te ly
d is p o s e o f th e su b sta n c e o f th e c o m p la in t.                       The s u g g e s t e d
p r o c e d u r e f o r r e f e r e n c e t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y in s u c h c a s e s
i s s e t o u t i n d e t a i l i n A n n e x G.            ( I t sh o u ld b e n o te d t h a t th e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y h a v e no i n t e r e s t in t h e q u e s t i o n o f th e
b r i n g i n g o f a d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e u n d e r p a r a g r a p h 16 o f t h e
D isc ip lin e Code).




9/91                                                507
                                               SECTION 6
                FUNCTIONS OF THE POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY

A.         SUPERVISION OF INVESTIGATIONS

MANDATORY AND DISCRETIONARY REFERRAL

6 .1         O nce a c o m p l a i n t h a s b e e n r e c o r d e d i t w i l l b e n e c e s s a r y
t o r e f e r i t t o t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y i f i t a l l e g e s
con d u ct by a p o li c e               officer          fa llin g      w ith in e it h e r        s e c tio n
8 7 ( 1 ) (a) ( i ) o f t h e 1984 A c t o r R e g u la t io n 4 ( 1 ) o f t h e P o l i c e
 (C o m p la in ts ) (M an d atory R e f e r r a l s E t c ) R e g u l a t i o n s 1 9 8 5 ; i n t h e
c a s e o f t h e fo rm er t h e A u t h o r it y w i l l h a v e no a l t e r n a t i v e b u t t o
su p e r v ise       th e     in v e s tig a tio n .          C h ief      O ffic e r s      (or      p o lic e
a u t h o r i t i e s w here th e y c o n s t it u t e th e 'a p p r o p r ia te a u th o r ity ' a s
d e f i n e d b y s e c t i o n 8 4 ( 4 ) ) w i l l a l s o w i s h t o b e a r i n m in d t h a t t h e
A u t h o r i t y a r e em pow ered t o s u p e r v i s e t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f any
o t h e r c o m p la in t n o t f a l l i n g w i t h i n t h o s e c r i t e r i a and o f o t h e r
m atters          (n o t t h e s u b j e c t o f a c o m p la in t)              w here th e p u b lic
i n t e r e s t m akes i t          a p p r o p r i a t e f o r th em t o do s o .                   I t may
th e r e fo r e be d e s ir a b le t o in v i t e th e A u th o r ity to c o n s id e r
b e c o m in g i n v o l v e d i n an y c a s e l i k e l y t o u n d e rm in e c o n f i d e n c e i n
th e p o l i c e , l o c a l l y o r n a t i o n a l l y , w here in d e p e n d e n t te s tim o n y
t o th e th o ro u g h n ess o f th e in v e s t ig a t i o n c o u ld h e lp t o m eet t h a t
concern.              W here m a t t e r s o f t h i s            k in d a r e r e f e r r e d t o t h e
A u th o r ity f o r t h e i r c o n s id e r a t io n , i t w i l l u s u a lly be a p p r o p r ia te
t o g i v e an i n d i c a t i o n o f t h e r e a s o n f o r d o in g s o .             U nder s e c t i o n
 87(2)        o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t , t h e A u t h o r i t y m ay a l s o r e q u i r e t h e
 s u b m is s io n t o them o f an y c o m p la in t w h ic h d o e s n o t m eet t h e
c r i t e r i a f o r m a n d a t o r y r e f e r r a l : w h e r e s u c h a r e q u i r e m e n t i s m ad e
 i t w i l l b e t h e d u t y o f t h e a p p r o p r i a t e a u t h o r i t y t o co m p ly w i t h
 it.

6 .2          If   th ere       is    u n certa in ty        over      w h eth er        a   p a r tic u la r
c o m p la in t sh o u ld b e r e fe r r e d t o th e A u th o r ity , i t w i l l g e n e r a lly
be a p p r o p r ia te t o l e t th e A u th o r ity d e c id e th e is s u e .                       It is
l i k e l y t o b e c o m e c l e a r , a s e x p e r i e n c e o f t h e n ew a r r a n g e m e n t s
 (an d o f t h e A u t h o r i t y ' s p o l i c y i n a p p l y i n g th em ) d e v e l o p s , w h ic h
a r e t h e c a s e s i n w h ich t h e A u t h o r it y w i l l p r o b a b ly w is h t o
m a i n t a i n a n i n t e r e s t . W h ere t h e r e i s d o u b t w h e t h e r a n a l l e g a t i o n
o f in ju r y c o n s t it u t e s " se r io u s in ju r y ” a s d e fin e d in s e c t io n
8 7 ( 4 ) o f t h e A c t (b u t t h e r e i s no d o u b t t h a t i t w o u ld am ount t o
a c t u a l b o d i l y h a rm ) t h e a p p r o p r i a t e a u t h o r i t y s h o u l d e i t h e r s e e k
t h e v ie w o f t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y on t h e q u e s t i o n o f r e f e r r a l
o r sim p ly r e f e r i t under s e c t i o n 8 7 ( 1 ) ( a ) .                     In c o n sid e r in g
w h e th e r an i n j u r y am ou nts t o , o r f a l l s s h o r t o f , a c t u a l b o d i l y
harm , i t i s t h e o p i n i o n o f t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e t h a t f o r c e s
s h o u l d b e g u i d e d b y t h e j u d g e m e n t i n t h e c a s e R v M i l l e r (2 QB
2 8 2 ) ( 1 9 5 4 ) w h i c h d e f i n e s a c t u a l b o d i l y h a rm a s " h u r t o r i n j u r y
c a lc u la t e d t o in t e r f e r e w ith a p e r s o n 's h e a lth or co m fo rt” .

6 .3        The a p p r o p r ia t e a u t h o r i t y i s r e q u ir e d b y r e g u l a t i o n 4 ( 2 )
o f t h e P o l i c e (C o m p la in ts)          (M an d atory R e f e r r a l s E tc ) and by
R e g u la t io n 1 0 ( 1 ) o f t h e P o l i c e (C o m p la in ts) (G e n e r a l) R e g u la t io n s
1985 t o         su b m it m an d atory r e f e r r a l        c a s e s t o t h e C o m p la in ts

9/91                                                 601
A u t h o r it y b y t h e end o f t h e d ay a f t e r t h e d ay on w h ic h i t becam e
c l e a r t o th e a p p r o p r ia te a u t h o r it y t h a t th e c o m p la in t f e l l w ith in
th e c r it e r ia fo r r e fe r r a l.             ( I t sh o u ld be r e c o g n is e d t h a t th e r e
may b e c a s e s w h e r e i t i s n o t i m m e d i a t e l y a p p a r e n t t h a t t h e
c o m p la in t f a l l s w it h in t h e s e c r i t e r i a .            Such a s i t u a t i o n w o u ld
a r i s e , i f f o r i n s t a n c e , m e d ic a l r e p o r t s show ed t h a t an in j u r y
o r ig in a lly       th o u g h t      to    be      m in o r    w as       in    fa ct     of   grea ter
sig n ific a n c e ).         B ecause th e f a c t o f r e f e r r a l h as to ta k e p la c e
w ith in so s h o r t a t im e - s c a le i t w i l l be im p e r a tiv e f o r f o r c e s to
b e r e a d y t o r e s p o n d q u i c k l y t o i n d i c a t i o n s t h a t a c o m p l a i n t may
f a l l in to one o f th e se c a te g o r ie s .                  R e f e r r a l w i l l b e deem ed t o
h a v e t a k e n p l a c e w hen t h e A u t h o r i t y h a v e r e c e i v e d t h e i n f o r m a t i o n
c o n s t it u t in g th e rec o rd o f c o m p la in t.             R e fe r r a l sh o u ld t h e r e f o r e
b e m ad e b y t e l e x o r t e l e p h o n e a n d , i f b y t e l e p h o n e , t h e c a l l a n d
i t s c o n t e n t s sh o u ld b e c o n fir m e d im m e d ia te ly in w r i t i n g .              There
is      no tim e l i m i t in r e g a r d t o v o lu n t a r y r e f e r r a l s                   to th e
A u t h o r i t y ; b u t i t w i l l b e b o r n e i n m in d t h a t t h e v a l u e o f t h e
A u t h o r i t y ' s i n d e p e n d e n t s u p e r v i s i o n m ay i n l a r g e m e a s u r e d e p e n d
u p on i t s b e i n g i n v o l v e d from a v e r y e a r l y s t a g e .

6 .4          W here a c o m p l a i n a n t m a k es s e v e r a l c o m p l a i n t s a b o u t t h e
sam e i n c i d e n t , n o t a l l o f w h ic h f a l l w i t h i n t h e c r i t e r i a f o r
m an d atory r e f e r r a l , t h e A u t h o r it y s h o u ld b e t o l d o f a l l t h e
c o m p la i n t s t h a t h a v e b e e n m ade. The A u t h o r i t y w i l l s u p e r v i s e t h e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f a l l m a t t e r s o f c o m p la in t t h a t a r i s e from t h e
sam e i n c i d e n t .      W h ere t h e A u t h o r i t y ' s s u p e r v i s i o n i s l i m i t e d t o
p a r tic u la r        m atters        w ith in     an    in v e stig a tio n       w h ich      is     a lso
concerned              w ith      u n con n ected       breaches         of        d isc ip lin e ,        th e
i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r ' s r e p o r t sh o u ld c a r e f u l l y d i s t i n g u i s h th e
su p e r v ise d        from t h e u n s u p e r v i s e d m a t t e r s .          The A u t h o r i t y ' s
a p p r o p r ia te sta te m e n t in such c a s e s w i l l be lim it e d t o su p e r v is e d
m a tters.

COMPLAINTS RECEIVED BY THE POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY

6 .5          When a c o m p l a i n t s e n d d i r e c t l y t o t h e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y
i s s e n t on t o t h e a p p r o p r ia te a u t h o r it y u n d er R e g u la tio n 3 o f th e
P o l i c e ( C o m p l a i n t s ) ( G e n e r a l ) R e g u l a t i o n s 1 9 8 5 t h e A u t h o r i t y may
a t t h e sam e t i m e i n d i c a t e w h e t h e r t h e y i n t e n d t o s u p e r v i s e t h e
in v e stig a tio n s.         In such c a s e s i t w i l l s t i l l be n e c e s s a r y fo r th e
c o m p la in t t o b e r e f e r r e d t o t h e A u th o r ity fo r m a lly in a c c o r d a n c e
w it h t h e p r o c e d u r e f o r m an d atory r e f e r r a l (w h ere t h i s a p p l i e s )
or fo r c a s e s " c a lle d i n ” by th e A u th o r ity under s e c t io n 8 7 ( 2 ) .
In      d o in g       so,    referen ce           sh o u ld     be       m ade     to    any     p re v io u s
c o r r e s p o n d e n c e w it h t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y .         The f a c t t h a t t h e
A u t h o r it y h a v e p a s s e d on a c o m p la in t w h ich d o e s n o t h a v e t o b e
referred ,           w ith o u t    sig n ify in g        in     so      d o in g    an   in te n tio n      of
s u p e r v i s i n g , d o e s n o t p r e c l u d e t h e a p p r o p r i a t e a u t h o r i t y from
i n v i t i n g th em t o s u p e r v i s e i f i t w i s h e s t o do s o .

MATTERS  ALREADY                THE      SUBJECT         OF      CRIMINAL          OR     DISCIPLINARY
PROCEEDINGS

6 .6          S e c tio n 84(6)     o f t h e A ct o f 1984 i n d i c a t e s t h a t th e
p r o v i s i o n s o f P a r t IX o f t h e A c t i n r e g a r d t o t h e r e c o r d i n g o r
in v e s tig a tio n      of    c o m p la in ts, sh a ll    not     be    a p p lic a b le    to

9/91                                                 602
c o m p la in t s a b o u t m a t t e r s w h ich a r e o r h a v e b e e n t h e s u b j e c t o f
c r im in a l or d is c ip lin a r y p r o c e e d in g s.          The e f f e c t o f t h i s i s t o
rem ove any o b l i g a t i o n t o r e f e r su c h c o m p la in t s t o t h e C o m p la in ts
A u t h o r i t y , e v e n w h e re t h e c o n d u c t i n q u e s t i o n w o u ld o t h e r w i s e
m eet th e c r i t e r i a fo r such a r e fe r e n c e .               (T h ere w o u ld i n t h e o r y
be      n o th in g     to  prevent          th e    a p p r o p r ia te    a u th o r ity ,   at    its
d i s c r e t i o n , from r e f e r r i n g s u c h m a t t e r s u n d e r s e c t i o n 88 - th o u g h
th e r e i s u n lik e ly t o be any p o in t in in v o lv in g th e A u th o r ity in
m a tte r s w h ich , by d e f i n i t i o n , h a v e a lr e a d y b een i n v e s t i g a t e d ) .

APPROVAL OF INVESTIGATING OFFICER

6 .7         I t w i l l be f o r th e A u th o r ity t o d e c id e w h eth er t o e x e r c is e
t h e i r p o w e r s u n d e r s e c t i o n 89 o f t h e 1984 A c t t o r e q u i r e t h e i r
a p p r o v a l o f t h e a p p o in tm e n t o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r .       To
a s s i s t th em i n t h i s t a s k , t h e a p p r o p r i a t e a u t h o r i t y s h o u l d a t t h e
tim e o f r e f e r r i n g a c o m p la in t o r o th e r m a tte r p r o v id e th e
in fo rm a tio n in d ic a te d in paragraph 4 .1 5 .

CONDUCT OF INVESTIGATION

6 .8         W here t h e A u t h o r i t y s u p e r v i s e a n i n v e s t i g a t i o n t h e y w i l l
h a v e pow er t o         im p o se r e a s o n a b l e r e q u ir e m e n t s a f f e c t i n g    its
c o n d u c t (w h ic h i n c l u d e s t h e r e s o u r c e s em p lo y e d t o c a r r y i t o u t) .
T h is pow er i s s u b j e c t t o th e f o llo w in g r e s t r i c t i o n s :

    a.     w here      th e p o s s i b i l i t y o f c r im in a l p r o c e e d in g s a r i s e s th e
    A u th o rity       m ay n o t m a k e a n y r e q u i r e m e n t r e l a t i n g          to   th e
    o b ta in in g      or p reserv a tio n          o f e v id e n c e w ith o u t th e p r io r
    consent of          th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic P r o se c u tio n s.

    b.      b e f o r e m a k in g a n y r e q u ir e m e n t a f f e c t i n g t h e r e s o u r c e s t o
    b e em p lo y e d i n an i n v e s t i g a t i o n , t h e A u t h o r i t y m u st s e e k t h e
    v ie w s o f th e c h ie f o f f i c e r r e s p o n s ib le               f o r m a k in g t h o s e
    r e s o u r c e s a v a i l a b l e , and h a v e r e g a r d t o an y v ie w s e x p r e s s e d .

A t t h e end o f an i n v e s t i g a t i o n w h ic h t h e y h a v e s u p e r v i s e d , t h e
A u t h o r i t y m u s t make a s t a t e m e n t ( w h ic h w i l l b e s e n t t o t h e c h i e f
o f f i c e r o r o t h e r a p p r o p r ia te a u t h o r it y , t h e c o m p la in a n t and any
o f f i c e r w hose co n d u ct h a s b een in v e s t i g a t e d ) s a y in g w h e th e r th e y
are       sa tis fie d        w ith      th e     conduct         of    t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n , and
s p e c i f y i n g any r e s p e c t in w h ich t h e y a r e n o t .               T h is i s in te n d e d
a s a s a n c t i o n o f l a s t r e s o r t and i t i s h op ed t h a t t h e A u t h o r i t y
w ill r a r e ly ,         i f ever,         f i n d i t n e c e s s a r y t o m ake a n a d v e r s e
sta tem en t.            H ow ever i t w i l l b e op en t o t h e A u t h o r i t y t o e n t e r
c e r t a i n q u a l i f i c a t i o n s w hen r e c o r d i n g a s a t i s f a c t o r y v e r d i c t on
an i n v e s t i g a t i o n , w ith o u t im p ly in g t h a t th e y a r e d i s s a t i s f i e d
w ith th e i n v e s t i g a t i o n a s a w h o le.              The A u t h o r i t y w i l l a l s o b e
a b le      to     record        th e ir     reasons      fo r b e in g        sa tisfie d          w it h an
in v e s tig a tio n ,         and       m e n tio n    any        m a tter a r is in g           from t h e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n o r i t s s u p e r v is io n w h ich t h e y t h in k s h o u ld b e
brou gh t t o th e a t t e n t io n o f th e a p p r o p r ia te a u t h o r it y ,                        th e
c o m p la in a n t o r t h e o f f i c e r w hose c o n d u c t w as i n v e s t i g a t e d , o r
d e a lt w ith in th e p u b lic in t e r e s t ; th e A u th o r ity can be ex p ecte d
t o p r e s e r v e t h e c o n f i d e n t i a l i t y o f i n v e s t i g a t i o n r e p o r t s and
a c c o m p a n y in g s t a t e m e n t s ( s e e p a r a g r a p h s 7 . 1 4 - 7 . 1 5 ) .

9/91                                                 603
6.9          The f a c t t h a t an i n v e s t i g a t i o n i s b e in g s u p e r v i s e d b y t h e
A u t h o r i t y d o e s n o t a b s o l v e p o l i c e f o r c e s from t h e r e q u ir e m e n t t o
h a v e r e g a r d t o t h o s e p a r t s o f t h i s G u id a n ce w h ich a p p ly g e n e r a l l y
t o t h e r e c o r d in g and i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f c o m p la in t s .      A t t h e sam e
tim e i t s h o u ld b e r e c o g n is e d t h a t t h e A u th o r ity a r e n o t s i m i l a r l y
bound t o h a v e r e g a r d t o t h e G u id a n ce ( f o r e x a m p le , i n im p o s in g
r e q u ir e m e n ts upon i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r s ) .

6.10         I f a c o m p la in t w hose i n v e s t i g a t i o n t h e A u th o r ity a r e
su p e r v isin g      is     w ith d r a w n t h e   in v e stig a tin g   officer         is     not
r e q u ir e d t o su b m it a r e p o r t t o t h e A u th o r ity u n d er s e c t i o n 8 9 (6 )
o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t , n o r w i l l t h e A u t h o r i t y b e r e q u i r e d t o m ake an
a p p r o p r ia te sta te m e n t under s e c t io n 8 9 ( 7 ) .     The A u t h o r i t y s h o u ld
h o w ever b e s u p p li e d on r e q u e s t w it h any in f o r m a t io n b e a r in g on
t h e c ir c u m s t a n c e s i n w h ic h t h e c o m p la in t w as w ith d r a w n , t o g e t h e r
w ith a cop y o f t h e c o m p la in a n ts n o t i c e o f w ith d r a w a l.

6.11         A p o l i c e o f f i c e r c o n d u c tin g c o m p la in t i n v e s t i g a t i o n s under
t h e s u p e r v i s i o n o f t h e A u t h o r i t y s h o u l d b e a r i n m in d n o t o n l y t h e
n eed t o o b se r v e th e form al r e q u ir e m e n ts o f th e A u th o r ity in
r e g a r d t o t h e s u p p ly o f in f o r m a t io n and t h e c o n d u c t o f t h e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n , b u t a ls o th e d e s i r a b i l i t y o f k e e p in g th e A u th o r ity
a b r e a s t o f s i g n i f i c a n t d ev elo p m e n ts in t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n .          In
p a r t i c u l a r h e i s rem in d ed o f t h e p r o c e d u r e s e t o u t i n p a r a g r a p h
5 . 1 0 w h i c h r e q u i r e s h im t o i n f o r m t h e A u t h o r i t y i f h e p r o p o s e s
t o c o n s u l t t h e D i r e c t o r o f P u b l i c P r o s e c u t i o n s and a c q u a i n t th em
o f t h e ou tcom e o f su c h c o n s u l t a t i o n .

B.         DISCIPLINARY ROLE

SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES

6.12         The p r o c e d u r e s t o b e f o ll o w e d by t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r in
s u b m i t t i n g c o m p l a i n t s c a s e s (and c e r t a i n n o n - c o m p l a in t c a s e s ) t o
t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y a f t e r i n v e s t i g a t i o n and by t h e A u t h o r it y
in c o n s id e r in g th o se c a s e s ,           a r e s e t o u t i n m ore d e t a i l in
p a r a g r a p h s 6 . 1 6 - 6 . 4 0 b u t i t may b e h e l p f u l t o s t a r t w i t h a f a i r l y
b r i e f o u t l in e o f what i s in v o lv e d .

6.13          I f , a f t e r c o n sid e r in g th e in v e s t ig a t in g o f f i c e r ' s r e p o r t,
and a f t e r a n y r e f e r e n c e t o t h e D i r e c t o r o f P u b li c P r o s e c u t i o n s ,
t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r d e c id e s t h a t no fo rm a l d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s
s h o u ld b e b r o u g h t a g a i n s t t h e o f f i c e r c o m p la in e d o f , h e m ust
r e f e r t h e c a s e t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y .             I f th e A u th o rity
a c c e p t t h a t no d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s a r e c a l l e d f o r , t h e y w i l l
n o t i f y t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r and t h e c o m p la in a n t.            A copy o f t h e ir
n o t i f i c a t i o n t o t h e c o m p l a i n a n t w i l l g o t o t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r who
s h o u ld h a v e n o t i f i e d t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d on f i r s t h e a r in g o f
t h e A u t h o r i t y 's c o n c u r r e n c e t h a t no d i s c i p l i n a r y a c t i o n n eed be
tak en .          I f , how ever, th e A u th o r ity a re n o t s a t i s f i e d w ith th e
c h i e f o f f i c e r ' s d e c i s i o n t h e y m ay a s k f o r f u r t h e r i n f o r m a t i o n a n d
may d i s c u s s t h e m a t t e r w i t h t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r .               In th e l a s t
r e s o r t t h e y m ay d i r e c t t h a t d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s b e b r o u g h t .

 6.14     D i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s may b e b r o u g h t b y t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r
 in fo u r circu m sta n ce s:

 9/91                                               604
    a.     on h i s         ow n i n i t i a t i v e     and w it h o u t r e f e r e n c e to     th e
           A u t h o r it y . E x c e p t i n c a s e s t o w h ich s e c t i o n 9 0 ( 6 ) a p p l i e s
            ( s e e p a r a g r a p h 5 . 3 ) , t h e r e i s no r e q u ir e m e n t i n t h e 1984
           A ct t h a t th e c h i e f o f f i c e r sh o u ld c o n s u lt th e A u th o r ity
           b e f o r e p r e f e r r i n g c h a r g e s : b u t s e e p a r a g r a p h s 6 . 3 5 and
           6.3 6 in r e s p e c t o f th e h ea rin g o f such ch a rg es;
    b.     on h i s          ow n i n i t i a t i v e ,    but   a fte r referen ce         to     th e
           C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y u n d er s e c t i o n 9 0 ( 6 ) - s e e p ara g ra p h
           5.3;

    c.     a f t e r d i s c u s s i o n w it h t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y a s a r e s u l t
           o f w h ic h h e h a s a c c e p t e d t h e i r rec o m m en d a tio n t h a t c h a r g e s
           sh o u ld b e b ro u g h t;

    d.     on t h e  d ir e c tio n o f            th e    C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y    fa ilin g
           agreem ent under ( c ) .

I f t h e o f f i c e r when n o t i f i e d o f a c h a r g e b r o u g h t u n d e r (a) a b o v e
a d m its t h e c h a r g e , t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y h a v e no c o n c e r n in
t h e c a s e , a lth o u g h t h e y w i l l b e n o t i f i e d o f t h e ou tcom e o f t h e
c a s e and t h e p u n ish m en t aw arded b y t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r in due
c o u rse - s e e paragraph 9 .3 5 .                   In th e c a se o f ch a rg es brought
u n d e r (b) o r ( c ) a b o v e , o r , w h e r e t h e o f f i c e r i n d i c a t e s t h a t h e
i n t e n d s t o d e n y t h e c h a r g e , u n d e r ( a ) a b o v e , t h e c a s e m ay b e
h eard e i t h e r by th e c h ie f o f f i c e r s i t t i n g a lo n e o r , a t                    th e
A u t h o r it y 's d ir e c t io n , by a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r ib u n a l c o m p risin g th e
c h i e f o f f i c e r a s c h a ir m a n and tw o m em bers o f t h e A u t h o r i t y .            (In
e i t h e r c a s e , w here th e c a s e h a s b een r e m itte d under R e g u la tio n
14 o f t h e D i s c i p l i n e R e g u l a t i o n s , t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r ' s p l a c e w i l l
be ta k en by a n o th er c h ie f o f f i c e r ) .            W h ere a c h a r g e i s b r o u g h t
in th e c ir c u m sta n c e s d e sc r ib e d in ( d ) , a d is c ip lin a r y tr ib u n a l
w i l l a lw a y s b e h e ld .

6.15         A t a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r ib u n a l t h e f in d in g w i l l b e rea c h e d by
a l l t h r e e m em bers, i f n e c e s s a r y b y a m a j o r i t y a lt h o u g h t h e f a c t
w ill not be d isc lo se d .              I f t h e o f f i c e r i s fou n d g u i l t y t h e c h i e f
o f f i c e r w i l l d e c i d e p u n ish m en t a f t e r c o n s u l t a t i o n w it h o t h e r
m em bers o f t h e t r i b u n a l .

MEMORANDUM AND INFORMATION TO BE                            SUBMITTED        TO THE        COMPLAINTS
AUTHORITY

6.16         A f t e r r e c e i v i n g t h e r e p o r t o f an i n v e s t i g a t i o n i n t o any
c o m p la in t o r n o n -c o m p la in t m a tte r w here t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n was
s u p e r v is e d b y t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y , t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r i s
r e q u ir e d f i r s t t o c o n s id e r m a tte r s r e la t e d t o any c r im in a l
o ffe n c e s r e v e a le d in th e rep o rt (s e e s e c t io n 5 ) .             T h ere a fte r he
i s r e q u i r e d t o s u b m i t t o t h e A u t h o r i t y a m em orandum i n w h i c h h e
s e t s o u t h i s o p in io n o f t h e c o m p la in t o r o t h e r m a t t e r t o w h ich
i t r e la te s.       T h e m emorandum m u s t a l s o c o n t a i n p a r t i c u l a r s o f :

    a.     any d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s w h ich t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r h a s
           p r e fe r r e d or p ro p o ses to p r e fe r in r e s p e c t o f th e conduct
           i n v e s t i g a t e d ; and

    b.     a n y e x c e p t i o n a l c i r c u m s t a n c e s w h ic h l e a d h im t o     c o n sid e r

9/91                                               605
           t h a t th e c h a r g e s sh o u ld be h eard            by a tr ib u n a l;

    c.      w here d is c ip lin a r y ch a rg es           have      n ot been       b ro u g h t,     h is
           r e a s o n s f o r n o t d o in g s o .

6 .1 7        S im ila r r e q u ir e m e n ts w i l l a t t a c h t o t h e r e c e i p t by th e
c h i e f o f f i c e r o f t h e r e p o r t o f an i n v e s t i g a t i o n i n t o a c o m p la in t
w here         th e       C o m p la in ts  A u th o rity        d id     not     su p e r v ise    th e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n . I n s u c h a c a s e , h o w e v e r , t h e m em orandum d e s c r i b e d
i n p a r a g r a p h 6 .1 6 s h o u ld b e a cc o m p a n ie d b y:

    a.     a cop y o f t h e c o m p la in t o r ,         if   it    w a s m ade o r a l l y ,       a copy
           o f t h e r e c o r d o f i t ; and

    b.     a copy o f th e in v e s t ig a t in g o f f i c e r ' s r e p o r t w ith th e
           r e l e v a n t s u p p o r t in g s t a t e m e n t s and o t h e r d ocu m en ts a n n exed
           to      th e    r e p o r t by th e           in v e stig a tin g    o ffic e r   w hen h e
           s u b m itte d i t t o th e c h i e f o f f i c e r .

6 .1 8       In any c a s e w here th e c h i e f o f f i c e r , a f t e r c o n s id e r in g th e
r e p o r t o f an i n v e s t i g a t i o n i n t o a n o n -c o m p la in t m a tte r s u p e r v is e d
by t h e A u th o r ity o r in t o a c o m p la in t w h eth er t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n
w as o r w as n o t s o s u p e r v is e d , h a s p r e f e r r e d d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s
a g a i n s t t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d and t h e o f f i c e r h a s a d m itte d t h e
charge         and n o t w ith d r a w n t h e          a d m issio n ,      n o m em orandum a s
d e s c r ib e d in th e p r e c e d in g paragraphs n eed s t o be s e n t t o th e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y .      In stea d , a t th e c lo s e o f th e d is c ip lin a r y
p r o c e e d in g s , in c lu d in g any a p p ea l t o t h e S e c r e ta r y o f S t a t e , th e
c h ie f o f f i c e r i s r e q u ir e d t o sen d t o th e A u th o r ity :

    a.     p a r t i c u l a r s o f t h e c h a r g e s p r e f e r r e d and o f any p u n ish m en t
           a w a r d ed ; and

    b.    w here th e              charges    r e la te d     to   a   c o m p la in t  and             th e
           i n v e s t i g a t i o n was n o t s u p e r v is e d by t h e A u th o r ity :

           i.     a cop y o f t h e c o m p la in t o r t h e           record o f       it,      and

           ii.     a copy         o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r ' s r e p o r t and
                   s u p p o r t in g d ocu m en ts a s d e s c r ib e d i n p a ra g ra p h 6 .1 7 .

6 .1 9      D e ta ils o f        a n y d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s p r e f e r r e d m ay b e
s u b m i t t e d b y m eans o f a c o p y o f t h e d i s c i p l i n e form ( S c h e d u l e 2
o f th e D is c ip lin e R e g u la tio n s) i f t h i s i s c o n v e n ie n t.               W here t h e
in v e s t i g a t i o n r e p o r t h a s b een su b m itte d t o th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic
P r o s e c u t io n s u n d er s e c t i o n 9 0 (4 ) o f t h e 1984 A c t, t h e C o m p la in ts
A u th o r ity w i l l n eed t o be t o l d , p a r t ic u l a r ly i f no d i s c i p l i n a r y
c h a r g e s a r e p r e f e r r e d , w hat t h e D i r e c t o r ' s d e c i s i o n w as and t h e
te r m s in w h ich i t w as e x p r e s s e d .            T h i s m ay b e d o n e b y s e n d i n g t h e
A u th o r ity a copy o f th e D ir e c t o r 's l e t t e r t o th e c h i e f o f f i c e r
and a l s o (w h ere t h e r e i s on e) h i s l e t t e r t o t h e c o m p la in a n t .

6 .2 0       The S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e c o n s i d e r s t h a t t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r ' s
o p i n i o n on t h e m e r i t s o f a n y c o m p l a i n t ( w h ic h s h o u l d m ake c l e a r
w h e th e r h e c o n s id e r s t h e c o m p la in t t o b e s u b s t a n t i a t e d in w h o le
o r in p a r t) w i l l b e in v a lu a b le t o t h e A u t h o r it y , a s in d e e d w i l l

 9/91                                               606
b e h i s a d v i c e o n a n y m a t t e r s c o n n e c t e d w i t h t h e c o m p l a i n t . W h ere
h e h a s b r o u g h t c h a r g e s , t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r ' s o p in io n on th e
q u e s tio n w h eth er o r n o t th e r e a r e e x c e p t io n a l c ir c u m sta n c e s
c a l l i n g f o r a d i s c i p l i n a r y tr ib u n a l ( s e e p aragrap h 6 .3 7 ) w i l l be
p a r t i c u l a r l y im p o r ta n t t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y .

6 .2 1     W here d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s a r e b r o u g h t t h e l i n k b e t w e e n
th em and t h e c o m p l a i n t w h ic h             l e d t o th em w i l l n o r m a lly        be
o b v io u s.   B u t w h e r e n o c h a r g e s h a v e b e e n b r o u g h t , i t m ay n o t b e
so c le a r     why t h i s        is    s o and t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y w i l l
th e r e fo r e need to have a sta tem en t o f th e c h ie f o f f i c e r ' s
reasons.        F or e x a m p le :

    a.     t h e r e i s no e v id e n c e t o s u b s t a n t i a t e t h e c o m p la in t (o r non
           co m p la in t m a t t e r ) ;

    b.     th e m a tte r can be d e a lt w ith by g iv in g s u i t a b le                 a d v ic e to
           th e o f f ic e r concerned;

    c.     c r i m in a l p r o c e e d in g s h a v e b e e n b r o u g h t w h ich l e a v e no
           aspect        of    th e      c o m p la in t  (or    n o n -c o m p la in t m a tter)
           o u tsta n d in g ; or

    d.     th e r e i s i n s u f f i c i e n t e v id e n c e t o su p p o rt a d is c ip lin a r y
           c h a r g e (e g t h e r e a r e no in d e p e n d e n t w i t n e s s e s ) .

I t s h o u ld b e n o te d t h a t t h i s i s n o t in te n d e d t o b e an e x h a u s t iv e
lis t      and       in    a c o m p lic a te d      case     a   fu lle r      account       of    th e
c i r c u m s t a n c e s may b e n e c e s s a r y , b u t i t i s s u g g e s t e d t h a t a s h o r t
e x p la n a t io n on t h e s e l i n e s w i l l s u f f i c e f o r t h e m a j o r it y o f
cases.

6 .2 2       W here b i n p a r a g r a p h 6 . 2 1 a b o v e a p p l i e s i t i s i m p o r t a n t
t h a t t h e m em orandum t o t h e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y s h o u l d e x p l a i n
w h a t t h e ' s u i t a b l e a d v i c e ' w o u ld c o n s i s t o f ; t h e te r m i s an
i m p r e c i s e o n e w h i c h may b e u s e d t o c o v e r d i f f e r e n t f o r m s o f
a d v ic e .     T h e m em orandum s h o u l d , t h e r e f o r e , i n d i c a t e e x a c t l y w h a t
t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r h a s i n m in d i n t h e i n d i v i d u a l c a s e , a t w h a t
le v e l     th e     o ffic e r  c o n c e r n e d w o u ld b e      in te r v ie w e d     and t h e
s u b s t a n c e o f w h a t w o u ld b e s a i d t o h im .

6 .2 3       A l t h o u g h t h e g i v i n g o f a d v i c e m ay n o t h a v e b e e n p r o p o s e d
i n t h e m em orandum s e n t t o t h e m , t h e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y m i g h t
n e v e r t h e l e s s f e e l t h a t s u c h a d v i c e w o u ld b e a p p r o p r i a t e and
a c c o r d in g ly s u g g e s t t h i s t o th e c h ie f o f f i c e r .

6 .2 4        The      C o m p la in ts     A u th o rity    are       not       concerned           w ith
d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s o th e r th a n t h o s e in r e s p e c t o f m a tte r s
c o m p la in e d o f o r m a t t e r s t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f w h ic h h a s b een
su p e r v ise d by th e A u th o r ity .           I t i s p o s s i b l e , f o r e x a m p le , t h a t
th e      in v e s tig a tio n       of   a c o m p la in t m ig h t b r in g          to    lig h t     a
d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e w h o lly u n co n n ected w ith i t (eg a c o m p la in t
t h a t a c o n s t a b l e h ad b e e n ru d e on a p a r t i c u l a r o c c a s i o n m ig h t
b r i n g t o l i g h t t h a t h e w as a b s e n t from h i s b e a t ) .                       I t is
u n n e c e s s a r y f o r t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y t o c o n s i d e r s u c h an
o f f e n c e o r an y c h a r g e w h ic h m ig h t b e b r o u g h t a s a r e s u l t ; t h i s

9/91                                               607
is purely a matter of internal discipline.

6 .2 5        In a d d it io n t o t h e s t a t u t o r y r e q u ir e m e n ts f o r in fo r m a tio n
t o b e fo rw a rd ed t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y d e t a i l s o f any
r e le v a n t a c t io n ta k e n o r c o n te m p la te d f o llo w in g t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n
o f a c o m p la in t (o th e r th a n t h e p r e f e r r in g o f fo rm a l d i s c i p l i n a r y
c h a r g e s ) m ay b e m a d e a v a i l a b l e t o t h e m a n d t h e y m ay b e t o l d w h a t
in fo r m a tio n on t h i s a c t i o n can p r o p e r ly b e c o n v e y e d t o t h e
c o m p la in a n t ( s e e p aragrap h 7 .4 ) i f th e y a c c e p t t h e d e c i s i o n t h a t
no d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s h o u ld b e p r e f e r r e d in r e s p e c t o f t h e
c o m p l a i n t . I f t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r r e c e i v e s a n y r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s from
t h e c o m p la i n a n t o r from t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d f o r o r a g a i n s t t h e
h o l d i n g o f a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l h e s h o u l d s e n d c o p i e s o f th em
t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y .

REQUESTS BY THE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

6 .2 6       U nder s e c t i o n 9 3 (8 ) o f t h e 1984 A c t c h i e f o f f i c e r s a r e
r e q u i r e d t o co m p ly w i t h a r e q u e s t from t h e A u t h o r i t y f o r an y
i n f o r m a t i o n w h i c h t h e y may r e a s o n a b l y r e q u i r e f o r t h e e x e r c i s e
o f t h e i r f u n c t i o n s u n d er t h a t s e c t i o n w h ich r e l a t e s t o t h e
A u th o r ity 's pow ers in r e s p e c t o f d is c ip lin a r y c h a r g e s.                 Such
i n f o r m a t i o n may b e i n a d d i t i o n t o t h e i n f o r m a t i o n c o n t a i n e d i n
t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n r e p o r t and o t h e r d o cu m en ts s u b m itt e d t o th em .

6 .2 7        I t i s e x p e c t e d t h a t , i f t h e p r o c e d u r e s e t d ow n i n t h e A c t
and R e g u la t io n s and d i s c u s s e d i n p a r a g r a p h s 6 .1 6 t o 6 .2 5 i s
f o l l o w e d , t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y w i l l n o t n e e d t o c a l l f o r
a d d i t i o n a l in f o r m a t io n o t h e r th a n r a r e l y , and t h a t su c h r e q u e s t s
a re n o t l i k e l y t o in v o lv e e x tr a in q u ir ie s a s opposed t o th e
su p p ly o f in fo r m a tio n r e a d i ly a v a il a b le t o t h e p o l i c e .                 If,
h o w e v e r , t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r i s o f t h e o p i n i o n t h a t t o c o m p ly w it h
any s u c h r e q u e s t w o u ld b e p r e j u d i c i a l t o t h e i n t e r e s t s o f j u s t i c e
o r t h a t th e r e q u ir e d in fo r m a tio n i s n o t o b ta in a b le w ith o u t
d i s p r o p o r t i o n a t e e f f o r t o n t h e p a r t o f t h e p o l i c e , t h e n h e may
make r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s t o t h e A u t h o r i t y t o t h i s e f f e c t .

POWERS OF THE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY I N RELATION TO THE BRINGING
OF CHARGES

6 .2 8        The C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y a r e r e q u ir e d u n d e r s e c t i o n 1 0 5 (4 )
o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t t o h a v e r e g a r d t o a n y g u i d a n c e g i v e n t o th em b y
th e S e c r e ta r y o f S ta te w ith r e s p e c t t o such m a tte r s a f f e c t i n g th e
p r e f e r r i n g and w ith d r a w in g o f d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s a s a r e t h e
s u b j e c t o f c u r r e n t g u i d a n c e b y h im t o t h e p o l i c e .    The S e c r e ta r y
o f S t a t e h a s is s u e d g u id a n c e t o t h e A u th o r ity t o f o llo w th e
c r i t e r i a s e t o u t in p a ra g ra p h s 5 . 6 , 5 . 1 2 - 5 .1 7 and 9 . 4 - 9 . 1 4 .

R e c o m m e n d a tio n b y t h e C o m p l a in t s A u t h o r i t y

6 .2 9        W here      th e        C o m p la in ts      A u th o r ity    c o n sid e r     th a t     a
d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s h o u ld b e p r e f e r r e d a g a i n s t an o f f i c e r in
r e s p e c t o f a m a tte r c o m p la in e d o f w h ich h a s n o t a lr e a d y b e e n t h e
s u b j e c t o f d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s , t h e y w i l l recom m end t o t h e c h i e f
o f f i c e r t h e c h a r g e w h ich t h e y c o n s i d e r s h o u ld b e p r e f e r r e d ,
g iv in g        reasons        for      th e ir     rec o m m en d a tio n .       The     C o m p la in ts

9/91                                                608
A u t h o r it y m u st b e s p e c i f i c a s t o t h e c h a r g e w h ich t h e y r e g a r d a s
a p p r o p r ia te .       The c h i e f o f f i c e r w i l l in fo r m t h e C o m p la in ts
A u t h o r i t y w h e th e r h e a c c e p t s t h e i r rec o m m en d a tio n and i f h e d o e s ,
proceed to p refer th e ch arges.                         (T h e C o m p la in t s A u t h o r i t y w i l l
n o r m a l l y i n d i c a t e a t t h e sam e t i m e w h e t h e r t h e y c o n s i d e r t h a t t h e
ch a rg e sh o u ld b e h eard by a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r ib u n a l -p a ra g ra p h s
6 .3 7 t o 6 .3 9 ) .

D i r e c t i o n b y t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y

6 .3 0        W here     th e   c h ie f     o ffic e r  d isa g r e e s   w ith   th e      P o lic e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y ' s rec o m m en d a tio n t o p r e f e r a d i s c i p l i n a r y
c h a r g e , h e s h o u ld in fo r m th em , g i v i n g h i s r e a s o n s . The A u t h o r it y
m ay a c c e p t t h i s ; o r t h e y may e n t e r i n t o f u r t h e r d i s c u s s i o n s ; o r
t h e y m ay d i r e c t t h a t c h a r g e s b e b r o u g h t a s t h e y may s p e c i f y ,
a g a in g iv in g r e a so n s f o r t h e i r d ir e c t io n in w r it in g .                If a
d i r e c t i o n i s m ade, t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r s h o u ld p r e f e r t h e c h a r g e
f o r t h w i t h and in fo r m t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d and t h e c o m p la in a n t
th a t th e charge has been brought a t th e d ir e c tio n                                 o f th e
A u th o r ity .      The c h a r g e w i l l b e h e a r d and t h e p u n ish m e n t t o b e
im p o sed o r recom m ended w i l l b e d e c i d e d b y a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l
c o n s t i t u t e d i n a c c o r d a n c e w i t h S e c t i o n 94 o f t h e P o l i c e and
C r im in a l E v id e n c e A c t 1 9 8 4 .

ADVANCE WARNING OR URGENT CASES

6 .3 1        The C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y w i l l            c o n sid e r   and r e a c h     a
d e c i s i o n on a l l c a s e s s u b m i t t e d t o th em u n d e r s e c t i o n 90 o f t h e
1 9 8 4 A c t a s e x p e d i t i o u s l y a s p r a c t i c a b l e , b u t t h e r e m ay b e c a s e s
w h ere i t i s p a r t i c u l a r l y im p o r ta n t t h a t t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y
sh o u ld a c t w ith e s p e c i a l u rg en cy .           I t i s s u g g e s te d t h a t in such
c a s e s t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r s h o u l d t r y t o g i v e th em a d v a n c e w a r n in g .

THE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY'S POWER TO DIRECT THAT A MATTER BE
REFERRED TO THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS

6 .3 2        S e c t i o n 92 o f t h e 1984 A c t p r o v i d e s t h a t w h e r e a c a s e i s
r e fe r r e d t o th e A u th o r ity under s e c t io n                  90 o r 9 1 ,       if      th e
A u th o r ity c o n s id e r t h a t c r im in a l p r o c e e d in g s a g a in s t th e o f f i c e r
c o n c e r n e d w o u l d b e j u s t i f i e d , t h e y m ay d i r e c t t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r
t o sen d th e c a se to th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic P r o se c u tio n s.                       The
c h i e f o f f i c e r m u st co m p ly w i t h t h i s d i r e c t i o n .     In such a c a se ,
t h e p r o c e d u r e s e t o u t in p a ra g ra p h s 6 .1 6 - 6 .1 8 m u st b e f o llo w e d
on ce th e D ir e c to r h as g iv e n h is d e c is io n in th e c a s e .

WITHDRAWAL OF CHARGES BEFORE THE HEARING

6 .3 3        W here t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r c o n s i d e r s t h a t a c h a r g e b r o u g h t
a g a i n s t an o f f i c e r f o l l o w i n g a c o m p la i n t s h o u ld b e w ith d r a w n
b e f o r e t h e h e a r i n g , s e c t i o n 9 3 ( 6 ) o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t r e q u i r e s h im
t o s e e k t h e l e a v e o f t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y t o do s o , g i v i n g
r e a s o n s f o r h i s v ie w t h a t t h e c h a r g e s h o u ld b e w ith d r a w n .      T h is
i s b e c a u s e t h e w ith d r a w a l o f c h a r g e s m akes t h e c a s e b r o a d ly
a n a lo g o u s w it h t h o s e i n w h ich no d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s h a v e b een
p r e f e r r e d and w h ic h f a l l t o b e c o n s id e r e d by t h e C o m p la in ts
A u t h o r i t y u n d e r s e c t i o n 9 0 o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t ( s e e a l s o A n n e x H,

9/91                                               609
paragraph 2 1 ).

CONFIDENTIALITY

6 .3 4       W here t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r p r e f e r s d i s c i p l i n a r y      charges
b e f o r e r e f e r e n c e t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y h e m u st n o t , o f
c o u r s e , arran ge fo r th e c h a r g e s, i f d e n ie d , t o be h eard u n t i l th e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y h a v e c o n s id e r e d w h e th e r a d i s c i p l i n a r y
t r ib u n a l sh o u ld b e h e ld .      I t i s im p lic it in th e p roced u re la id
d o w n i n t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t t h a t t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r s h o u l d n o t m a k e k n ow n
h is d e c isio n         (w h ic h m u st o f n e c e s s i t y b e p r o v i s i o n a l )       th a t
c h a r g e s sh o u ld n o t b e p r e fe r r e d in r e s p e c t o f any c o m p la in t
b e f o r e t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y h a v e r e a c h e d t h e i r d e c i s i o n on
th e ca se.          W here t h e r e h a s b e e n d i s c u s s i o n b e t w e e n t h e c h i e f
o f f i c e r and t h e A u t h o r it y t h i s w i l l b e t r e a t e d a s c o n f i d e n t i a l .

CASES COVERING MORE THAN ONE MATTER OF COMPLAINT

6 .3 5       Paragraphs        3 .1 2       to       3 .1 5 d e a l      w ith     ite m isa tio n o f
c o m p la in ts      and     e x p la in      in te r        a lia        th e      im p o r ta n c e o f
d istin g u ish in g d iffe r e n t           m a ttersw ith in a s in g le sta tem en t o f
c o m p la in t.    W here a c a s e        c o n ta in ss e v e r a l in d iv id u a l m a tters o f
c o m p la in t, i t w i l l o c c a s io n a lly happen t h a t th e c h i e f o f f i c e r
c o n s id e r s t h a t th e e v id e n c e j u s t i f i e s d is c ip l in a r y c h a r g e s in
r e s p e c t o f som e m a t t e r s b u t n o t o f o t h e r s .        E xcept in c a s e s to
w h ich s e c t i o n 9 0 (6 ) a p p l i e s , h e i s , o f c o u r s e , a t l i b e r t y t o
b r in g su c h c h a r g e s w it h o u t r e f e r e n c e t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y ,
but he w ill s t i l l             have       to r e fe r th e o th er           m a tters to th e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y , and t h e A u t h o r it y r e t a i n t h e i r p o w ers t o
recom m end o r d i r e c t t h e b r i n g i n g o f c h a r g e s i n r e s p e c t o f t h o s e
m a tters.       I f t h e y d e c id e d t o e x e r c i s e t h o s e p o w e r s, t h i s m ig h t
m ea n t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d f i n d i n g h i m s e l f f a c e d w i t h a s e c o n d
c h a r g e o f c h a r g e s som e t i m e a f t e r t h e f i r s t .

6 .3 6        To a v o i d t h i s d i f f i c u l t y , c h i e f o f f i c e r s m ay t h e r e f o r e
w ish t o c o n s id e r t h e f o llo w in g p r o c e d u r e , f o r u s e in c a s e s o th e r
th a n t h o s e w h ic h m u st b e r e f e r r e d t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y
u n d e r s e c t i o n 90 (6) o f              t h e 1984 A c t.         I f th e c h ie f o ffic e r
th in k s th a t th e ch arges                    he w ish e s t o b r in g       c o v e r t h e m a in
s u b s t a n c e o f t h e c o m p l a i n t , h e w i l l p r o c e e d t o b r i n g th em and
t h e n r e f e r t h e c a s e t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y e x p l a i n i n g h i s
r e a so n s fo r c h o o sin g t o b r in g ch a r g e s in r e s p e c t o f t h o s e m a tte r s
and n o t o f o t h e r s , and g i v i n g h i s v ie w a s t o w h e th e r t h e y s h o u ld
be heard by a d is c ip lin a r y t r ib u n a l.                    I f th e c h a r g e s he w ish e s
t o b r i n g c o v e r a m in o r p a r t o f t h e c o m p la i n t o n l y , h e s h o u ld n o t
b r in g t h e c h a r g e s b u t r e f e r t h e c a s e t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y
t e l l i n g th em , h o w e v e r , o f t h e c h a r g e s t h a t h e i n t e n d s t o b r in g
and a g a in e x p l a i n i n g h i s r e a s o n s f o r t h a t i n t e n t i o n ;          i f th e
C o m p la in t s A u t h o r i t y e x e r c i s e t h e i r p o w e r s t o recom m end o r d i r e c t
th e b r in g in g o f c h a r g e s in r e s p e c t o f th e o th e r , m ajor, m a tte r s
c o m p la in e d o f , h e w i l l t h e n b e a b le t o b r in g a l l t h e c h a r g e s a t
t h e sam e t i m e .             I t i s s tr e s s e d th a t i t i s a m atter fo r th e
d is c r e t i o n o f th e c h ie f o f f i c e r w h eth er h e d e c id e s t o b r in g
c h a r g e s b e f o r e r e f e r e n c e t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y in t h e
s i t u a t i o n d e s c r i b e d . E q u a lly , i t i s f o r t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y
t o d e c i d e w h e t h e r t h e y w is h t o e x e r c i s e t h e i r p o w e r s t o recom m end

9/91                                              610
o r d i r e c t th e b r in g in g o f c h a r g e s in r e s p e c t o f any m a tter
c o m p la in e d o f i n r e s p e c t o f w h ich c h a r g e s h a v e n o t a lr e a d y b een
b ro u g h t.

POWER OF THE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY TO DIRECT THAT CHARGES BE HEARD
BY A DISCIPLINARY TRIBUNAL

6 .3 7        U nder s e c t i o n      94 (2 )     o f th e      1984 A ct th e             C o m p la in ts
A u t h o r i t y may d i r e c t t h a t a d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s h o u l d b e h e a r d
by a d is c ip lin a r y tr ib u n a l in s te a d o f by th e c h ie f o f f i c e r
s i t t i n g a lo n e i f th e y c o n s id e r t h a t t o be d e s ir a b le by rea so n o f
any e x c e p tio n a l c ir c u m sta n c e s a f f e c t i n g th e c a s e .        The A u t h o r it y
m ay e x e r c i s e t h i s p o w e r o n l y i n r e s p e c t o f c h a r g e s i n r e s p e c t o f
m a t t e r s t o w h i c h a m em orandum u n d e r s e c t i o n 9 0 r e l a t e s .                      A
d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l c a n n o t b e c o n v e n e d t o h e a r c h a r g e s w h ich
t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r h a s b r o u g h t o n h i s own i n i t i a t i v e , u n l e s s t h e
o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d d o e s n o t a d m it t h e c h a r g e s .    F a c t o r s w h ich a r e
lik e ly         to    be r e le v a n t to         th is   d e c isio n     are th e         in tr in sic
s e r io u s n e s s o f th e c h a r g e , th e c o m p le x ity or d i f f i c u l t y o f th e
case          and       any      grave       p u b lic    d isq u ie t       or     o th er       sp e c ia l
c ir c u m sta n c e s.

6 .3 8       W here t h e A u t h o r i t y d e c i d e t h a t a c h a r g e s h o u l d b e h e a r d
b y a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r m ay h i m s e l f w i s h t o
d i s c u s s t h e C o m p la in t s A u t h o r i t y ' s d e c i s i o n w i t h th em i f h e
c o n s i d e r s t h e r e a r e a r g u m e n t s p o i n t i n g t h e o t h e r w a y ( t h i s may
o f c o u r s e , a p p ly e q u a l l y w h e r e t h e A u t h o r i t y h a v e n o t recom m ended
a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l and t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r f e e l s t h a t on e i s
ju stifie d ).            The c h i e f o f f i c e r s h o u ld a l s o e n s u r e t h a t t h e
C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y a r e a w a r e o f a n y r e p r e s e n t a t i o n h e may h a v e
r e c e iv e d on t h a t p o in t o n ce t h e c h a r g e s h a v e b een b r o u g h t.

6 .3 9      In     a ll     cases    b o th     th e  o ffic e r      concerned           and      th e
c o m p la in a n t s h o u ld b e in fo r m e d a t t h e e a r l i e s t o p p o r t u n i t y o f a
d e c is io n th a t a ch arge w i l l be heard by a t r ib u n a l.

HEARING OF RELATED CHARGES BY A DISCIPLINARY TRIBUNAL

6 .4 0       S e c tio n 94 (9 )      o f t h e 1984 A c t p r o v id e s t h a t , w here a
d is c ip lin a r y tr ib u n a l i s t o be h e ld , o th er ch a rg es a g a in s t th e
a c c u s e d o f f i c e r may a l s o b e h e a r d b y t h e t r i b u n a l , i f t h i s s e e m s
t o t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r t o b e t h e c o n v e n ie n t and f a i r c o u r s e .    T h is
i s in te n d e d t o a llo w th e d i s c i p l i n a r y t r ib u n a l t o d e a l w ith
c h a r g e s r e l a t i n g t o o t h e r o f f e n c e s w h i c h may h a v e c o m e t o l i g h t
in th e c o u r s e o f th e in v e s t ig a t i o n o f a c o m p la in t, a lth o u g h t h e s e
a r e n o t r e le v a n t t o t h e c o m p la in t i t s e l f ( s e e p aragrap h 6 .3 5 ) .
The a c c u s e d o f f i c e r s h o u ld b e t o l d a t o n c e o f any c h a r g e t o b e
s o h e a r d and t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y s h o u ld a l s o b e in fo r m e d a s
soon a s p o s s ib le .

CHANGE OF ADMISSION OR DENIAL BEFORE THE HEARING OF CHARGES

6 .4 1      I f b e f o r e t h e h e a r i n g t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r c h a n g e s from a
d e n i a l t o an a d m is s io n o f a c h a r g e w h ich t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y
h ave d e c id e d sh o u ld be h e ld b e fo r e a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r ib u n a l, th en
t h e A u t h o r i t y s h o u ld b e in fo r m e d im m e d ia t e ly .         I f , b efo re th e

9/91                                               611
h ea rin g        o f c h a r g e s w h ich h a v e b e e n a d m itte d         by th e a ccu sed
o ffic e r        ( s o t h a t n o m em orandum w i l l h a v e b e e n s u b m i t t e d u n d e r
s e c t i o n 90) t h e a c c u s e d w ith d r a w s h i s a d m is s io n , t h e h e a r i n g w i l l
have to           b e p o stp o n ed u n t i l th e n e c e s s a r y su b m issio n u n der th e
p r o v isio n s        of    se c tio n    90 h a s b e e n m ade t o           t h e C o m p la in ts
A u t h o r i t y . T h e A u t h o r i t y may t h e n d i r e c t t h a t t h e c h a r g e s s h o u l d
be heard by a d is c ip lin a r y tr ib u n a l.

SPECIAL REPORTS BY THE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY

6 .4 2      The C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y a r e em pow ered b y s e c t i o n 9 7 ( 2 )
o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t t o m ake a s p e c i a l r e p o r t t o t h e S e c r e t a r y o f
S t a t e on any g r a v e o r e x c e p t i o n a l m a tte r w h ic h com es t o t h e i r
n o t i c e w h ic h t h e y t h i n k s h o u ld b e draw n t o h i s a t t e n t i o n .    I t is
fo r th e A u th o r ity t o d e c id e w hat c o n s t i t u t e s a g r a v e m a tte r .
S p e c ia l r e p o r ts a r e r e q u ir e d t o b e c o p ie d t o th e p o l i c e a u th o r ity
and t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r o f t h e f o r c e c o n c e r n e d .     I t i s fo r th e
r e c ip ie n ts      o f such       a report to           d e c id e w hat a c tio n       it     is
a p p r o p r i a t e f o r th em t o t a k e i n r e g a r d t o i t .

DELEGATION OP FUNCTIONS OF THE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY

6 .4 3        P aragrap h 1 0 (2 ) o f S c h e d u le 4 t o t h e 1984 A c t g i v e s t h e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y p o w er,      su b je c t to th e approval o f th e
S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e , t o m ak e a r r a n g e m e n t s f o r t h e d e l e g a t i o n o f
th e d isc h a r g e o f t h e ir fu n c tio n s .               T h ese a rra n g em en ts w i l l
i n c l u d e p r o v i s i o n t h a t a l l d e c i s i o n s on c a s e s r e f e r r e d t o t h e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y u n d er s e c t i o n 90 o f t h e 1984 A c t w i l l b e
t a k e n b y o n e o r m ore A u t h o r i t y m em bers ( i f t h e y a r e n o t t a k e n b y
th e A u th o rity as a w h o le ).

ACCUSED OFFICER CEASING TO SERVE

6 .4 4       T h e f a c t t h a t a n o f f i c e r w ho i s t h e s u b j e c t o f a c o m p l a i n t
o r o f a n o n -c o m p la in t m a tte r c e a s e s t o s e r v e a s a p o l i c e o f f i c e r
(o r had a lr e a d y c e a s e d t o               serve b efo re th e           c o m p la in t was
r e c e iv e d ) d o e s n o t p u t t h e m a tte r o u t s i d e t h e p u r v ie w o f t h e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y .      The c a s e s h o u ld t h e r e f o r e b e t r e a t e d in
a c c o r d a n c e w ith t h e norm al p r o c e d u r e s a s f a r a s i s p r a c t i c a b l e
and a r e p o r t s e n t t o t h e A u t h o r it y , n o t w it h s t a n d in g t h a t t h e r e
c o u ld b e no q u e s tio n o f d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s .    The A u t h o r it y
s h o u ld a l s o b e in fo rm ed i f t h e o f f i c e r c e a s e s t o s e r v e w h ile a
r e p o r t u n d e r s e c t i o n 90 o f t h e 1984 A c t i s c u r r e n t l y w i t h th em ;
or i f ,        c h a r g e s h a v in g b een p r e f e r r e d   (w h eth er o r n o t a f t e r
r efe ren ce to th e A u th o r ity ), th e o f f ic e r c e a se s to serv e b efo re
a d is c ip lin a r y h e a r in g i s h e ld .           The A u t h o r i t y w o u ld f i n d i t
h e l p f u l t o b e in fo r m e d a s t o t h e c i r c u m s t a n c e s i n w h ic h an
o f f i c e r l e f t t h e p o l i c e s e r v i c e a f t e r a c o m p la in t had been
lo d g ed .




9/91                                               612
                                                SECTION 7
INFORMATION AND ASSISTANCE FOR COMPLAINANT AND OFFICER COMPLAINED
OF

LEAFLET FOR MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC

7 .1          A r e v is e d l e a f l e t e x p la in in g th e c o m p la in ts p ro ced u re has
b e e n p r e p a r e d an d i s a v a i l a b l e fro m e a r l y 1 9 8 9 i n E n g l i s h , W e ls h ,
C h in e s e , B e n g a li, G u j u r a t i, H in d i, P u n ja b i and U rdu.                 S u p p lie s
may b e o b t a i n e d f r o m t h e C e n t r a l O f f i c e o f I n f o r m a t i o n .         C o p ies
o f t h e l e a f l e t (a n d t h e t r a n s l a t i o n w h e r e a p p r o p r i a t e ) s h o u l d b e
m ade a v a i l a b l e a t e v e r y p o l i c e s t a t i o n a n d a n y w h e r e e l s e w h e r e
t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r c o n s id e r s i t d e s i r a b l e , and a co p y s h o u ld b e
s u p p l i e d t o a n y m em b er o f t h e p u b l i c w ho a s k s f o r o n e .                C o p ies
a r e a l s o m ade a v a i l a b l e b y t h e C e n t r a l O f f i c e o f I n f o r m a t i o n t o
v a r io u s o r g a n is a t io n s su ch a s t h e C it iz e n s A d v ic e B u reaux.                  The
l e a f l e t i s n o t in te n d e d t o be a s u b s t i t u t e f o r th e o r a l a d v ic e
and       e x p la n a tio n    of     procedure         th a t     is   u su a lly      g iv e n     to     a
c o m p l a i n a n t b y t h e o f f i c e r w ho i n t e r v i e w s h im t h e r e a f t e r , b u t i t
m ay b e f o u n d u s e f u l t o g i v e a c o p y t o e a c h c o m p l a i n a n t a s a
r e m in d e r      of    th e    procedu res.             A copy         of    th e       a p p r o p r ia te
t r a n s l a t i o n s h o u ld b e g iv e n t o a c o m p la in a n t w h en ever i t           appears
t h a t i t w o u l d b e h e l p f u l t o h im o r h e r t o h a v e a n e x p l a n a t i o n i n
one o f t h e s e la n g u a g e s o f th e p ro ced u res in v o lv e d .

NOTIFICATION OF THE OUTCOME OF A COMPLAINT

7 .2         P a r a g r a p h 4 . 2 7 recom m ends t h a t c e r t a i n a c t i o n s h o u ld b e
ta k e n t o k eep b o th t h e c o m p la in a n t and t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d
in fo r m e d a b o u t t h e p r o g r e s s o f i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f a c o m p la in t u n d er
s e c t i o n 85 o f t h e A c t .           A nnex H d e a l s w it h t h e p r e s e n c e o f t h e
c o m p la in a n t a t a d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r in g .       The f o l l o w i n g p a r a g r a p h s
a r e c o n c e r n e d p r im a r ily w it h n o t i f i c a t i o n t o t h e c o m p la in a n t and
t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d o f t h e ou tcom e o f t h e c o m p la in t .                  I t is
recom m ended t h a t a s i m i l a r p r o c e d u r e s h o u ld b e f o l l o w e d w h e re t h e
a p p r o p r i a t e a u t h o r i t y h a s r e c e i v e d d i r e c t l y f r o m a m em b er o f t h e
p u b lic a c o m p la in t a g a in s t a s e n io r o f f i c e r .

To t h e C o m p l a i n a n t

7 .3          W here d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s h a v e b e e n b r o u g h t a s a r e s u l t
o f a c o m p la in t (w h e th e r o r n o t a f t e r r e f e r e n c e t o t h e C o m p la in ts
A u th o r ity )       i t w ill be fo r th e c h ie f o f f ic e r to n o tify th e
c o m p la in a n t a c c o r d in g ly .     W here t h e C o m p l a in t s A u t h o r i t y a c c e p t
t h a t d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s sh o u ld n o t b e p r e fe r r e d th e y w i l l
n o t i f y t h e c o m p la in a n t and w i l l s e n d a c o p y o f t h e i r n o t i f i c a t i o n
to th e c h ie f o f f ic e r .           R e g u la t io n 7 o f t h e P o l i c e (C o m p la in ts)
 (G e n e r a l) R e g u la t io n s a llo w s t h e A u t h o r it y , in s e n d in g t h e i r
n o t i f i c a t i o n , t o p r o v id e t h e c o m p la in a n t w ith su ch in fo r m a tio n
b y way o f e x p l a n a t i o n a s t h e y c o n s i d e r a p p r o p r i a t e .

7 .4        T h e r e m ay b e a d d i t i o n a l i n f o r m a t i o n , a p a r t f r o m t h a t w h i c h
th e A u th o r ity a re p er m itte d t o sen d by v ir t u e o f th e R e g u la tio n s ,
w h ic h t h e p o l i c e c o n s i d e r s h o u l d b e p a s s e d t o t h e A u t h o r i t y and
w h i c h t h e A u t h o r i t y m ay t a k e i n t o a c c o u n t i n t h e i r n o t i f i c a t i o n

9/91                                                 701
t o th e c o m p la in a n t.          A ny i n f o r m a t i o n w h i c h a c h i e f o f f i c e r
c o n s id e r s m ig h t b e in c lu d e d in t h e n o t i f i c a t i o n (su c h a s d e t a i l s
o f a d m in istr a tiv e or o th er a c tio n ta k en , th e c o r r e c tio n o f
f a c t u a l e r r o r s in t h e c o m p la in t, o r an e x p r e s s io n o f r e g r e t f o r
t h e i n c i d e n t w h ic h h a s g iv e n r i s e t o t h e c o m p la in t) s h o u ld b e
i n c o r p o r a t e d i n h i s c o v e r i n g m em oran d u m .     I t i s o p e n t o h im t o
i n d i c a t e w h a t p a r t s o f t h e mem orandum m ay o r m ay n o t b e p a s s e d
on t o t h e c o m p la in a n t.        The i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r ' s r e p o r t w i l l
rem a in c o n f i d e n t i a l .

To t h e o f f i c e r    concerned

7 .5         The c h i e f o f f i c e r i s r e s p o n s i b l e f o r n o t i f y i n g t h e o f f i c e r
c o n c e r n e d o f d e c i s i o n s on d i s c i p l i n a r y a c t i o n w h e th e r o r n o t t h i s
a r i s e s from a c o m p la i n t .              He s h o u l d e n d e a v o u r t o         see th a t
o f f i c e r s a r e n o t l e f t in u n n e c e s s a r y s u s p e n s e and s h o u ld k eep
th em in f o r m e d o f t h e p r o g r e s s o f t h e m a t t e r .            In p a r tic u la r he
s h o u ld in fo rm t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d a s so o n a s p o s s i b l e o f t h e
ou tcom e a f t e r a c o m p la in t h a s b e e n c o n s id e r e d b y t h e C o m p la in ts
A u th o r ity .      As n o te d a b o v e (p a ra g ra p h 7 . 3 ) i n a c a s e w h ere no
d is c ip lin a r y ch a rg es a re t o be p r e fe r r e d , th e A u th o r ity w i l l
n o r m a ll y w r i t e t o t h e c o m p l a i n a n t a t t h e sam e t i m e a s w r i t i n g t o
t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r t o n o t i f y h im o f t h e i r d e c i s i o n .           I f , in any
p a r t ic u l a r c a s e , i t i s f e l t t h a t em barrassm ent c o u ld b e ca u sed
b y a c o m p la in a n t b eco m in g aw are o f t h e A u t h o r i t y ' s d e c i s i o n
b e f o r e t h e o f f i c e r ( f o r e x a m p le w h e re an o f f i c e r i s i n n e a r d a i l y
c o n t a c t w it h a c o m p la in a n t and i t i s p r o p o se d t o g i v e g u id a n c e
t o t h e o f f i c e r on h i s c o n d u c t) , t h i s s h o u ld b e draw n t o t h e
A u t h o r i t y ' s n o t i c e w hen t h e p a p e r s a r e fo r w a r d e d f o r t h e i r
c o n sid e r a tio n .       The A u t h o r it y h a v e a g r e e d t h a t t h e y w i l l , in
c a s e s o f t h i s k in d ,          d e fe r n o tify in g t h e ir d e c is io n to th e
c o m p la in a n t t o a llo w t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r t o in fo r m t h e o f f i c e r
co n c er n e d and ta k e any n e c e s s a r y r e l a t e d a c t i o n .           In a p p r o p r ia te
c a s e s , a c o p y o f t h e A u t h o r i t y ' s l e t t e r t o t h e c o m p l a i n a n t may
be g iv e n t o th e o f f i c e r co n cern ed .

7 .6        W here t h e A u t h o r i t y h a v e s u p e r v i s e d t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f
a c o m p la in t t h e y w i l l su b m it a s t a t e m e n t t o t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r
sta tin g       w h eth er th e     in v e s tig a tio n      was      con d u cted         to      th e ir
sa tisfa c tio n       or n o t.        They a r e a l s o r e q u ir e d , w h ere i t                  is
p r a c t ic a b le t o do s o , t o sen d a copy o f t h a t s ta te m e n t t o th e
c o m p la in a n t and t o t h e o f f i c e r o r o f f i c e r s c o n c e r n e d .

7 .7         W h ere a c o m p l a i n t h a s b e e n s e t t l e d b y w a y o f t h e i n f o r m a l
r e s o l u t i o n p r o c e d u r e t h e c o m p la in a n t w i l l b e e n t i t l e d t o a r e c o r d
o f t h e ou tcom e o f t h e p r o c e d u r e p r o v id e d t h a t h e a p p l i e s w i t h i n
t h r e e m o n th s o f t h a t r e c o r d b e i n g m ade.           The c o m p la in a n t s h o u ld
b e in fo r m e d o f t h i s e n t i t l e m e n t w hen h e i s in f o r m e d t h a t t h e
p ro ced u re h a s b een co n clu d ed .

COPIES OF COMPLAINTS

7 .8        I n t h e f o l l o w i n g p a r a g r a p h s " th e c o m p la in t" m eans t h e
b a s i c d ocum ent o r d o cu m en ts i n w h ich a c o m p la in a n t 's a l l e g a t i o n s
a g a in st     an   o ffic e r      are    brought         to   th e   a tte n tio n    of   th e
a p p r o p r ia te a u th o r ity .     I t i s c o n s id e r e d t h a t a l e t t e r w h ich

9/91                                                702
s im p ly s t a t e s t h a t t h e w r i t e r w is h e s t o c o m p la in , b u t w h ich d o e s
n o t in c lu d e s u f f i c ie n t d e t a ils fo r th e p u rp oses o f in v e s tig a tio n
d o e s n o t c o n s t i t u t e a c o m p la in t in t h i s s e n s e ; in su ch c a s e s th e
c o m p la in t in c l u d e s t h e s t a t e m e n t w h ich t h e c o m p la in a n t w i l l th e n
n o r m a l l y m ake s e t t i n g o u t h i s a c c o u n t o f t h e i n c i d e n t o r c o n d u c t
in q u e s tio n .        W here a c o m p l a i n t i s m ade o r a l l y " t h e c o m p la i n t "
in c l u d e s t h e w r it t e n r e c o r d o f w hat was s a id by t h e co m p la in a n t
in d e s c r ib in g th e grounds o f h is c o m p la in t.                       When a c o p y o f a
c o m p l a i n t i s s u p p l i e d t o t h e c o m p l a i n a n t o r t h e o f f i c e r w ho i s
th e s u b j e c t o f th e c o m p la in t, in a cco r d a n ce w ith th e f o llo w in g
p r o v i s i o n s , i t s h o u l d n o t i n c l u d e a n y s u b s e q u e n t s t a t e m e n t s m ad e
in th e co u rse o f th e in v e s t ig a t io n .

7 .9         W here d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s a r e t o b e p r e f e r r e d a g a i n s t an
o f f i c e r R e g u la tio n 1 0 (1 ) o f th e D is c ip lin e R e g u la tio n s r e q u ir e s
t h a t h e sh o u ld b e s u p p lie d w ith a copy o f th e r e p o r t, a ll e g a t io n
o r c o m p la in t on w h ich t h e c h a r g e i s fo u n d e d , no l e s s th a n 21 d a y s
b e fo r e th e d a te o f th e d is c ip lin a r y h e a r in g .

7 .1 0                W here d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s a r e n o t t o b e p r e f e r r e d ,
t h e o f f i c e r a g a i n s t whom a c o m p l a i n t h a s b e e n m a d e m ay m a k e a
w r i t t e n r e q u e s t t o t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r t o s u p p l y h im w i t h a c o p y
o f th e c o m p la in t.                In t h e s e c ir c u m sta n c e s th e c h ie f o f f i c e r
s h o u ld ( s u b j e c t t o p a r a g r a p h 7 .1 2 b e lo w ) a r r a n g e f o r a co p y (o r
a c o p y o f t h a t p a r t w h i c h d i r e c t l y c o n c e r n s h im ) t o b e s u p p l i e d
t o th e o f f i c e r in a cco rd a n ce w ith R e g u la tio n 9 o f th e P o lic e
 (C o m p la in ts)         (G e n e r a l) R e g u la t io n s .   T h is R e g u la tio n a p p lie s
n o t w i t h s t a n d i n g t h a t a c o m p la in t h a s b e e n w ith d r a w n .

7 .1 0 a The d ocum en t o r d o cu m en ts o f w h ich                        c o p ie s    sh o u ld    be
s u p p lie d t o an o f f i c e r u n d er t h e R e g u la t io n s          are:

     a.     i f t h e c o m p l a i n t i s m ade i n w r i t i n g , a c o p y o f t h e l e t t e r
            o f c o m p la in t o r o f t h a t p a r t o f i t w h ich r e l a t e s t o t h a t
            o ffic e r ,

    b.      i f t h e c o m p l a i n t i s m ad e o r a l l y , a c o p y o f t h e w r i t t e n
            r e c o r d m a d e o f t h e c o m p l a i n t ( w h i c h m ay i n c l u d e a c o p y o f
            a con tem p oran eou s e n tr y e g , in a p o ck etb o o k o r in c id e n t
            r e g i s t e r , an d t h e f o r m a l r e c o r d o f t h e c o m p l a i n t m ade o u t
            l a t e r ) ; and

    c.     c o p ie s      o f t h e r e l e v a n t p a r t s o f any          s t a t e m e n t s w h ich
           e ith e r       c o n ta in     fresh         c o m p la in ts       or         e x p la in    or
           p a r t i c u l a r i s e c o m p la i n t s a l r e a d y m ade.

I t i s c o n s id e r e d t h a t a l e t t e r i n d i c a t i n g a w is h t o c o m p la in n o t
d e t a i l i n g t h e s u b s ta n c e o f t h e c o m p la in t d o e s n o t c o n s t i t u t e a
c o m p la in t f o r    t h e s e p u r p o se s. In su ch c a s e s , th e c o m p la in t o f
w h ich a co p y s h a l l b e p r o v id e d i s t h e r e l e v a n t p o r t i o n o f t h e
sta tem en t or o th er w r itte n record o f th e su b sta n ce o f th e
c o m p la in t.

7.11       U n d er t h e sam e R e g u l a t i o n s a c o p y o f t h e c o m p l a i n t s h o u l d
b e s u p p l i e d , on r e q u e s t , t o t h e c o m p la in a n t (w h e th e r d i s c i p l i n a r y
ch arges are to be p refer red a g a in st th e o f f ic e r concerned or

9/91                                               703
7.12          The R e g u l a t i o n s a l s o p r o v id e , h o w e v e r , f o r c e r t a i n c a s e s
w h e r e i t m ay b e c o n s i d e r e d n e c e s s a r y t o w i t h h o l d a c o p y o f t h e
c o m p la i n t from e i t h e r c o m p la in a n t o r (w h e r e d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s
a r e n o t t o b e p r e f e r r e d ) t h e o f f i c e r a g a i n s t whom t h e c o m p l a i n t
w as m ade.           F i r s t , u n d e r R e g u l a t i o n 9 ( 2 ) ( a ) t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r may
r e f u s e t o c o m p ly w i t h a r e q u e s t f o r a c o p y o f a c o m p l a i n t i f h e
c o n s id e r s t h a t t o s u p p ly a co p y m ig h t p r e j u d ic e any c r im in a l
i n v e s t i g a t i o n o r c o n s id e r s t h a t t o s u p p ly a co p y m ig h t p r e j u d ic e
any        c r im in a l        in v e s tig a tio n       or    p ro c e e d in g s    th en       p e n d in g .
S e c o n d l y , u n d e r R e g u l a t i o n 9 ( 2 ) ( b ) h e may r e f u s e t o c o m p l y w i t h
s u c h a r e q u e s t i f h e c o n s i d e r s t h a t i t w o u ld i n som e o t h e r way
b e c o n tr a r y t o t h e p u b lic i n t e r e s t t o su p p ly a cop y o f t h e
c o m p la in t.        In t h e l a t t e r c a s e , h o w e v e r , h e m u st s e e k t h e c o n s e n t
o f th e S ecreta ry o f S ta te fo r r e fu sin g th e r e q u e st.                                        The
S e c r e ta r y o f S t a t e c o n s id e r s t h a t w here a r e q u e s t i s t o be
r e f u s e d i t s h o u l d b e m ad e c l e a r w h e t h e r t h e r e f u s a l c o m e s u n d e r
R e g u la t io n 9 ( 2 ) (a) o r R e g u la t io n 9 ( 2 ) ( b ) .

7.13          Any r e q u e s t f o r t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e ' s c o n s e n t u n d e r
R e g u l a t i o n 9 ( 2 ) ( b ) s h o u l d b e s e n t t o t h e A s s i s t a n t S e c r e t a r y , F2
D i v i s i o n , Home O f f i c e , Q u e e n A n n e ' s G a t e , L o n d o n SW1H 9A T, a n d
sh o u ld in c lu d e :

    a.      a c o p y o f t h e r e q u e s t m ade f o r a c o p y o f t h e                  c o m p la in t;

    b.      a c o p y o f t h e c o m p l a i n t ( o r s o m u ch o f              it    as    r e la te s   to
            t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d ) ; and

    c.      th e r e a so n s fo r th e c h ie f o f f i c e r ' s o p in io n t h a t th e
            request        sh o u ld   be  refu sed under         th e  p r o v isio n s of
            R e g u la tio n 9 ( 2 ) (b ).

CONFIDENTIALITY                OF      DOCUMENTS            PREPARED          IN     THE        COURSE        OF
INVESTIGATION

7.14          I t i s a p r in c i p le o f lo n g s ta n d in g t h a t in v e s t i g a t i o n
r e p o r t s and an y a c c o m p a n y in g s t a t e m e n t s s h o u ld n o t b e p u b l i s h e d .
Many r e p o r t s c o n t a i n i n f o r m a t i o n w h i c h c o u l d n o t b e f r e e l y
d i s c l o s e d , s u c h a s t h e nam e a n d a d d r e s s e s o f w i t n e s s e s , t h e
c r i m i n a l r e c o r d s o f n am ed p e r s o n s , o r f a c t s d i s c l o s e d i n t h e
c o u r s e o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n w h i c h m i g h t b e p r e j u d i c i a l t o n am ed
p erson s.           The m a in te n a n c e o f t h e p r i n c i p l e t h a t r e p o r t s a r e
c o n f i d e n t i a l i s in t h e i n t e r e s t s o f e n s u r in g t h a t t h e r e sh o u ld
b e no i n h i b i t i o n ,        in c o n n e c tio n w ith          an i n v e s t i g a t i o n ,    on
c o m m u n ic a tio n b e tw e e n p o l i c e o f f i c e r s , b e tw e e n c h i e f o f f i c e r s and
t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e , and b e tw e e n t h e p o l i c e and t h e C o m p la in ts
A u th o r ity .

7.15         O c c a s io n a lly a c o m p la in a n t i n s t i t u t e s c r im in a l p r o c e e d in g s
a g a i n s t a n o f f i c e r w ho h a s b e e n t h e s u b j e c t o f i n v e s t i g a t i o n
u n d er s e c t i o n 85 o f t h e A ct upon le a r n in g t h a t t h e D ir e c t o r o f
P u b lic P r o s e c u tio n s d o es n o t in te n d t o do s o .              In such a c a s e th e
c o m p l a i n a n t m ay r e q u e s t a c o p y o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r ' s
r e p o r t a n d /o r t h e a cco m p a n y in g s t a t e m e n t s w i t h a v ie w t o g a i n i n g

9/91                                                  704
a c c e s s t o e v i d e n c e w h i c h m ay i n c r i m i n a t e t h e     o ffic e r .     A ny s u c h
r e q u e s t sh o u ld be d e c lin e d .

7.16        T h e r e m ay b e c i r c u m s t a n c e s , h o w e v e r , i n w h i c h i t w i l l b e
p r o p e r and n e c e s s a r y t o d i s c l o s e m a t e r ia l w h ich h a s b een o b ta in e d
in t h e c o u r s e o f a form al i n v e s t i g a t i o n .          B r o a d ly , t h e s i t u a t i o n
w h e r e d i s c l o s u r e m ay b e w a r r a n t e d a r i s e s w h e r e s u c h m a t e r i a l may
a s s i s t s o m e o n e w ho f a c e s c r i m i n a l p r o c e e d i n g s , o r w h o i s s e e k i n g
t o c h a lle n g e a c o n v ic t io n , t o p rove h is in n o c e n c e .                     I f such
m a t e r ia l com es t o l i g h t in t h e c o u r s e o f an i n v e s t i g a t i o n i t
sh o u ld be b rou gh t t o th e n o t ic e o f th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic
P r o se c u tio n s (s e e paragraph 4 . 2 9 ) .

7.17          S i m i l a r l y , i t m ay a t t i m e s b e p r o p e r a n d a p p r o p r i a t e t o
d i s c l o s e t o an a c c u s e d o f f i c e r in d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s (o r
h is        'fr ie n d '         or    le g a l   r e p r e se n ta tiv e )      m a te r ia l   to    an
i n v e s t i g a t i o n r e p o r t w h ich c o u ld a s s i s t in d e m o n s t r a tin g h i s
in n o c e n c e o f a c h a r g e o r in m i t i g a t i n g any p e n a l t y t h a t m ig h t b e
aw arded upon a f in d in g o f g u i l t .                 S u c h m a t e r i a l m ay b e f o u n d i n
a case            w here        a d is c ip lin a r y     charge       is    p referred        w hen an
i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r h a s recom m ended n o n e o r h a s recom m ended
th a t fa c to r s m itig a tin g th e accu sed o f f i c e r ' s c u lp a b ilit y be
t a k e n i n t o a c c o u n t b e f o r e a d e c i s i o n i s m ade t o p r e f e r a c h a r g e .




9/91                                                705
                                                SECTION 8

ROLES OF HM INSPECTORS OF CONSTABULARY AND POLICE AUTHORITIES
                   I N RELATION TO COMPLAINTS

8 .1          P o lic e a u t h o r it ie s are th e d is c ip lin a r y a u th o r ity fo r
o f f i c e r s h o ld in g a ra n k a b o v e t h a t o f c h i e f s u p e r in t e n d e n t and
are       r e sp o n sib le    fo r     d e a lin g w ith   c o m p la in ts    a g a in st     such
o ffic e r s.        They a r e n o t o t h e r w is e in v o l v e d i n i n d i v i d u a l c a s e s
o f p o lic e d is c ip lin e .

8 .2          S e c t i o n 95 o f t h e 1984 A c t, h o w ev er, r e q u ir e s b o th p o l i c e
a u t h o r i t i e s and i n s p e c t o r s o f c o n s t a b u la r y t o k eep t h e m s e lv e s
in fo r m e d a b o u t t h e w o r k in g o f t h e c o m p la in t s and d i s c i p l i n e
procedure.              T h is i s an a s p e c t o f t h e i r g e n e r a l d u ty t o s e c u r e t h e
m a in te n a n c e o f an a d e q u a te and e f f i c i e n t p o l i c e f o r c e and t o
e x e r c i s e t h e i r pow ers under t h e 1964 A c t.                   P o lic e a u th o r itie s,
in p a r t i c u l a r , a r e r e q u ir e d t o k eep t h e m s e lv e s in fo r m e d a b o u t t h e
w ay i n w h ic h c o m p l a i n t s b y m em bers o f t h e p u b l i c a g a i n s t m em bers
o f t h e f o r c e f o r w h ich t h e y a r e r e s p o n s i b l e a r e d e a l t w it h by t h e
c h ie f o f f ic e r o f th e fo rce .          I t appears to th e S ecreta ry o f S ta te
th a t t h i s r e s p o n s ib ilit y i s a su p e r v iso r y on e, t o en su re th a t th e
s t a t u t o r y p r o ced u res f o r th e h a n d lin g o f c o m p la in ts a r e b e in g
p r o p e r ly o b serv ed .

8 .3         The p r e c i s e way i n w h ic h p o l i c e               a u th o r itie s      a ct to
d i s c h a r g e t h e i r f u n c t i o n u n d e r s e c t i o n 9 5 o f t h e A c t may v a r y
fro m o n e a u t h o r i t y t o a n o t h e r .             Common p r a c t i c e i n d i c a t e s ,
h o w e v e r , t h a t t h i s i s l i k e l y t o b e b y way o f a c o m p l a i n t s su b
c o m m i t t e e , o r p a n e l , w ho may h o l d r e g u l a r m e e t i n g s w i t h t h e
p o l i c e f o r c e a n d may r e g u l a r l y i n s p e c t t h e c o m p l a i n t s r e g i s t e r .
C h i e f o f f i c e r s s h o u l d m ak e t h e i r c o m p l a i n t s b o o k s a v a i l a b l e f o r
s c r u t i n y b y m em bers o f t h e A u t h o r i t y i n s u c h c i r c u m s t a n c e s .

8 .4         S e c tio n   12(1)       o f t h e P o l i c e A ct 1964 r e q u ir e s c h i e f
o f f i c e r s t o su b m it a g e n e r a l r e p o r t t o t h e a u t h o r it y e a c h y e a r
on t h e p o l i c i n g d u r in g t h a t y e a r o f t h e a r e a f o r w h ich t h e i r
f o r c e s a r e m a in ta in e d .          That r e p o r t sh o u ld in c lu d e a s e c t io n
c o n c e r n in g c o m p la in ts and d i s c i p l i n e .         S e c t i o n 1 2 ( 2 ) o f t h e 1964
A c t r e q u i r e s c h i e f o f f i c e r s , w h e n e v e r r e q u i r e d t o do s o b y an
a u t h o r i t y , t o s u b m i t a r e p o r t o n s u c h m a t t e r s a s m ay b e s p e c i f i e d
by th e a u th o r ity .         C l e a r l y , t h e s e t o o m ay c o n c e r n c o m p l a i n t s a n d
d isc ip lin e .        In a d d it io n , a s t a t i s t i c a l r e tu r n o f a l l c o m p la in ts
fro m m em bers o f              th e     p u b lic      a g a i n s t m em bers o f           th e    fo rce
i n d i c a t i n g h ow t h e y h a v e b e e n d e a l t w i t h , i n c l u d i n g a n y r e f e r e n c e
t o t h e a c t i o n by t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y , s h o u ld b e p la c e d
b e fo r e th e p o lic e a u th o r ity a t i t s m e e tin g s.                 (S ee paragrap h 3 .1 7
and A nnex K f o r t h e form w h ic h t h i s s h o u l d t a k e ) .                     The a t t e n t i o n
o f t h e a u t h o r i t y s h o u l d b e draw n e x p r e s s l y t o t h e f o l l o w i n g
c a te g o r ie s o f c a s e :-

    a.      t h o s e in w h ich an i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r h a s b e e n a p p o in te d
            fro m a n o t h e r f o r c e u n d e r s e c t i o n 8 5 ( 3 ) o r 8 5 ( 5 ) o f t h e
            1984 A ct;

    b.      th o se    in   w h ic h t h e     in v e s tig a tio n     has    been     su p e r v ise d    by

9/91                                                 801
            t h e A u t h o r it y and i n w h ich t h e A u t h o r it y              have exp ressed
            d iss a tis fa c tio n    w ith th e   in v e stig a tio n                 under s e c tio n
            8 9 (1 0 ) o f th e A ct;

    c.      t h o s e w h ich h a v e b e e n r e f e r r e d t o t h e D ir e c t o r o f            P u b lic
            P r o s e c u t i o n s u n d e r s e c t i o n 90 o f t h e 1984 A c t;

    d.      t h o s e w h ere t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y h a v e d i r e c t e d t h e
            b r i n g i n g o f d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s u n d e r s e c t i o n 93 o f t h e
            1984 A ct;

    e.     th o s e w here a d is c ip l in a r y tr ib u n a l u n d er s e c t io n                   94(3)
           o f t h e 1984 A ct h a s b een o r i s t o b e h e ld .

8 .5         The S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e h o p e s t h a t c h i e f            o f f i c e r s and
p o lic e a u t h o r it ie s w i l l d is c u s s to g e th e r w hat can be done to
su p p le m e n t t h e in f o r m a t io n p r o v id e d w it h f u r t h e r in f o r m a t io n
w h i c h m ay b e o f a s s i s t a n c e t o t h e a u t h o r i t y i n t h e e x e r c i s e o f
i t s fu n c tio n s o f g e n e r a l o v e r s ig h t o f th e h a n d lin g o f c o m p la in ts.
P a r t i c u l a r l y i n c a s e s w h i c h h a v e a r o u s e d l o c a l c o n c e r n i t may b e
h e l p f u l t o t h e a u t h o r i t y t o k n ow s o m e t h i n g o f t h e b a c k g r o u n d .
I t w i l l a ls o b e u s e f u l t o th e a u t h o r it y t o g iv e any in fo r m a tio n ,
beyond t h a t r e f e r r e d t o in th e p r e c e d in g p a ragrap h , ab ou t th e
general           p a ttern      o f c o m p la in ts     in     th e    force      area.             It   is
recom m ended t h a t c h i e f o f f i c e r s s h o u l d , a t t h e i r d i s c r e t i o n (an d
c o n s i s t e n t l y w ith th e p r in c i p le t h a t th e a u th o r ity sh o u ld n o t be
in v o lv e d       in    th e     h a n d lin g  of      in d iv id u a l     cases)        m ake       such
i n f o r m a t i o n a v a i l a b l e w hen r e q u e s t e d b y t h e a u t h o r i t y t o d o s o .
 (B u t s e e p a r a g r a p h 8 . 8 ) .

8.6          HM I n s p e c t o r s w i l l , a s p a r t o f t h e i r a n n u a l i n s p e c t i o n o f
in d iv id u a l      fo rces,       c o n s i d e r t h e h a n d l i n g o f c o m p l a i n t s and
d i s c i p l i n e w i t h i n t h e f o r c e s a n d c h i e f o f f i c e r s s h o u l d m ake t h e i r
c o m p la in ts      books        a v a ila b le     for     th is      pu rp ose.           An a n n u a l
s t a t i s t i c a l r e tu r n o f a l l c o m p la in ts, s im ila r t o th e r e tu r n s
w h ic h a r e m ade t o p o l i c e a u t h o r i t i e s , s h o u l d b e m ad e.           Paragraph
3 . 1 6 r e f e r s and A nnex J g i v e s t h e form w h ic h t h i s s h o u l d t a k e .
I t i s a n t i c i p a t e d t h a t d e t a i l s fro m t h e s e r e t u r n s w i l l fo r m t h e
b a s i s o f w h a t e v e r c o m m e n t s HM C h i e f I n s p e c t o r o f C o n s t a b u l a r y may
m ak e o n c o m p l a i n t s a n d d i s c i p l i n e i n h i s a n n u a l r e p o r t .

INFORMAL RESOLUTION

8 .7          O v e r sig h t o f th e p ro ced u re fo r d e a lin g w ith l e s s s e r io u s
c o m p la in t s b y way o f in f o r m a l r e s o l u t i o n w i l l f a l l t o t h e p o l i c e
a u t h o r i t i e s a n d HM I n s p e c t o r s a s p a r t o f t h e i r f u n c t i o n u n d e r
se c tio n       95 o f t h e 1984 A c t.                   Paragraph 3 .7              r e fe r s to th e
m a in te n a n c e o f a r e g i s t e r o f c o m p la in t s , i n c l u d i n g t h o s e w h ich
a r e s e t t l e d by in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n .      T h e r e g i s t e r s h o u l d b e m ad e
a v a i l a b l e f o r i n s p e c t i o n b y p o l i c e a u t h o r i t i e s a n d HM I n s p e c t o r s ;
t h e ^r e c o r d       of       c o m p la in ts    in fo r m a lly        re so lv e d      sh o u ld     be
s u f f i c i e n t l y d e t a i l e d t o e n a b l e a j u d g e m e n t t o b e m ade on t h e
g e n e r a l s u i t a b i l i t y f o r in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n o f c a s e s h a n d le d in
t h i s w ay, a s w e l l a s t h e m eans b y w h ic h s u c h r e s o l u t i o n w as
co n d u cted .


9/91                                                 802
DISCLOSURE AND CONFIDENTIALITY

8 .8          S e c t i o n 1 2 (3) o f t h e P o l i c e A c t 1964 s t a t e s t h a t i f i t
a p p ea rs t o a c h i e f o f f i c e r t h a t a r e p o r t r e q u ir e d by a p o l i c e
a u th o r ity         under      s e c tio n   12(2)      of     th e     A ct    w o u ld      c o n ta in
in fo r m a tio n         w h ic h in t h e p u b l i c       in te r e st    ought n ot to               be
d i s c l o s e d o r w h ich i s n o t n eed ed b y t h e a u t h o r it y f o r t h e p r o p e r
d i s c h a r g e o f i t s f u n c t i o n s , h e m ay r e q u e s t t h e a u t h o r i t y t o r e f e r
t h e r e q u ir e m e n t t o th e S e c r e ta r y o f s t a t e .     I t i s c o n sid e r e d th a t
t h e sam e p r i n c i p l e s h o u ld a p p ly t o a n y r e q u e s t b y t h e a u t h o r i t y
t o s e e t h e c o m p le te d f i l e s ,         o r m a t e r i a l from s u c h f i l e s ,          on
in d iv id u a l c a s e s .        I f i t i s f e l t t h a t d is c lo s u r e o f in fo r m a tio n
c o n c e r n i n g a c o m p l a i n t may i n v o l v e a b r e a c h o f c o n f i d e n t i a l i t y ,
o r t h a t d i s c l o s u r e w o u ld i n a n y w ay b e im p r o p e r , t h e a u t h o r i t y
m ay b e d i r e c t e d , u n d e r s e c t i o n 1 2 ( 3 ) o f t h e 1 9 6 4 A c t , t o r e f e r
t h e i r r e q u ir e m e n t t o t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e .

INFORMATION CONCERNING THE POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY

8 .9         B o t h HM I n s p e c t o r s a n d p o l i c e a u t h o r i t i e s w i l l b e e n t i t l e d
t o r e c e i v e in f o r m a t io n on t h e p a r t p la y e d by t h e C o m p la in ts
A u t h o r it y in t h e h a n d lin g o f c o m p la in t s .           The n orm al c h a n n e l f o r
s u c h in f o r m a t i o n w i l l b e t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r a s h a v in g t h e p r im a r y
r e s p o n s i b i l i t y f o r t h e h a n d lin g o f c o m p la in t s and d i s c i p l i n a r y
m a tters in h is fo r c e .               I t i s fo r t h is reason th a t i t i s su ggested
above th a t             in f o r m a t io n on t h i s         aspect       o f th e h a n d lin g          of
c o m p l a i n t s s h o u l d f o r m a p a r t o f t h e r e g u l a r r e t u r n ( A n n e x K) b y
th e c h ie f o f f ic e r to h is p o lic e a u th o r ity . S im ila r ly , th e annual
r e t u r n t o HM I n s p e c t o r ( A n n e x J ) i n c l u d e s a s e c t i o n w h i c h d e a l s
w it h c o m p la in t s r e f e r r e d t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y .             P o lic e
a u t h o r it ie s w i l l a lso             (u nd er s e c t i o n 9 7 ( 6 ) o f t h e 1984 A ct)
r e c e iv e      a c o p y o f t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y ' s a n n u a l r e p o r t
t o g e t h e r w it h any s t a t i s t i c a l o r o t h e r g e n e r a l in f o r m a t io n w h ich
t h e A u t h o r it y c o n s id e r sh o u ld b e b r o u g h t t o t h e i r a t t e n t i o n in
c o n n e c t i o n w i t h t h e i r f u n c t io n s u n d e r s e c t i o n 95 o f t h e 1984 A c t;
and, a s i n d ic a t e d in paragraph 6 . 4 2 , a co p y o f any s p e c i a l r e p o r t
m ade u n d e r s e c t i o n 9 7 ( 2 ) o f t h e A c t w h ic h c o n c e r n s t h e i r a r e a .




9/91                                                803
                                                  SECTION 9

    DISCIPLINARY ARRANGEMENTS FOR OFFICERS UP TO AND INCLUDING
                       CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT

GENERAL

9 .1          T hose r e s p o n s ib le f o r a d m in is te r in g t h e p o l i c e d i s c i p l i n e
s y s t e m a r e rem in d e d t h a t t h i s g u id a n c e i s i s s u e d u n d e r s t a t u t o r y
a u t h o r i t y , s e c t i o n 105 o f t h e P o l i c e and C r im in a l E v id e n c e A ct
1 9 8 4 , and t h a t in d is c h a r g in g t h e i r r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s t h e y a r e
r e q u ir e d t o ta k e i t s p r o v is io n s f u l l y in t o a cc o u n t.            W h ilst i t
i s n o t n e c e s s a r y t o f o llo w i t s term s e x a c t l y in a l l c a s e s , i t
s h o u l d n o t b e d e p a r t e d from w i t h o u t g o o d r e a s o n .              If,       on a
d i s c i p l i n a r y a p p e a l, an a p p e l l a n t r a i s e s an a p p a r e n t f a i l u r e by
th e re sp o n d e n t t o f o llo w any o f i t s p r o v is io n s th e resp o n d e n t
w i l l b e r e q u ir e d t o e x p l a i n and j u s t i f y t h i s ( s e c t i o n 1 0 5 ( 3 )
e x p l i c i t l y m akes s u c h m a t t e r s a d m i s s i b l e on a p p e a l ) . The w e ig h t
and s i g n i f i c a n c e t o b e a t t a c h e d t o             a n y d e p a r t u r e from t h e
g u i d a n c e w i l l v a r y from c a s e t o c a s e .         H ow ever, t h e S e c r e t a r y o f
S t a t e w i l l w is h t o b e s a t i s f i e d a s t o t h e e x t e n t t o w h ich t h a t
d e p a r t u r e w as j u s t i f i e d and t h e e x t e n t t o w h ic h , i f a t a l l , t h e
d e p a r t u r e m ig h t h a v e p r o v e d d e t r im e n t a l t o t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r ' s
conduct o f h is d efen ce.

9 .2          Much o f w h a t f o l l o w s i s a d d r e s s e d t o t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r ,
in      h is      c a p a c ity   as    d isc ip lin a r y   a u th o r ity      and a s       o ffic e r
p r e s id in g a t th e f i r s t in s ta n c e h e a r in g .           B u t m uch i s e q u a l l y
a p p lic a b le t o th e f u n c t io n s o f d ep u ty c h i e f o f f i c e r s , o r th o s e
o th e r w ise r e s p o n s ib le        fo r th e d e c isio n        t o b r in g d i s c i p l i n e
c h a r g e s , t h e f o r m u la t io n o f su c h c h a r g e s , and t h e p r e p a r a t io n o f
th e c a se a g a in st accu sed o f f ic e r s .           The S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e w is h e s
t h e s e o f f i c e r s a l s o t o h a v e r e g a r d t o s u c h o f t h i s s e c t i o n and
of       A nnex        H as        is    r e le v a n t  to    th e     d isc h a r g e    of     th e ir
r e sp o n sib ilitie s.           He w i s h e s t h e m t o h a v e r e g a r d i n p a r t i c u l a r
 (b u t n o t s o l e l y ) t o t h e p a s s a g e s on t h e f o r m u la t io n and s c o p e o f
d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s , t h e la w and p r o c e d u r e r e l a t i n g t o l e g a l
r e p r e se n ta tio n a t d is c ip lin a r y h e a r in g s, th e a d m is s ib ilit y o f
e v id e n c e , th e e d i t i n g o f s ta te m e n ts , th e burden o f p r o o f and,
g e n e r a lly , m easures t o en su re f a ir n e s s to th e a ccu sed o f f i c e r .
W here i t i s p o s s i b l e t o r e s o l v e s u c h i s s u e s b e f o r e t h e h e a r i n g
t a k e s p la c e , t h i s sh o u ld b e done; b u t w here th e r e i s a d if f e r e n c e
o f v ie w on a q u e s t io n su ch a s a d m i s s i b i l i t y , t h e f i n a l d e c i s i o n
w i l l r e s t w ith th e o f f i c e r p r e s id in g a t th e h e a r in g .

D IS C IP L IN E CODE

9 .3          F o r m any d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e s ( d e p e n d i n g o n t h e t e r m s i n
w h ic h t h e y a r e fram ed i n t h e d i s c i p l i n e c o d e ) t h e m e n ta l e le m e n t
n e c e s s a r y f o r a f in d in g o f g u i l t i s l e s s th a n t h a t f o r m ost
c r i m i n a l o f f e n c e s : t h e o f f e n c e m ay, f o r i n s t a n c e , b e m ade o u t i f
t h e a c t i n q u e s t i o n w as co m m itte d th r o u g h l a c k o f d u e c a r e .

D is c r e d ita b le conduct            (d is c ip lin e   code,     paragraph        1)

9 .4       P r o c e e d in g s   fo r     th e    o ffen ce     of    d is c r e d ita b le     conduct

9/91                                                901
sh o u ld b e b ro u g h t s p a r in g ly .       W h erever p o s s i b l e a m ore s p e c i f i c
charge under one o f th e o th e r paragraphs o f th e d is c ip l in e code
s h o u ld b e l a i d , and a c h a r g e o f d i s c r e d i t a b l e c o n d u c t s h o u ld n o t
b e added t o a ch a r g e u n d er a n o th e r p aragrap h u n le s s i t i s b a sed
on f a c t s d i s t i n c t from t h o s e u n d e r l y i n g t h a t o t h e r c h a r g e .  T h is
a p p lie s w ith p a r t ic u l a r f o r c e w here th e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d w as o f f
d u ty w hen t h e a l l e g e d m is c o n d u c t t o o k p l a c e .      T hose r e s p o n s ib le
f o r b r i n g i n g c h a r g e s s h o u l d b e a r i n m in d t h a t c e r t a i n t y p e s o f
c o n d u c t m ig h t r e a s o n a b ly b e s a i d t o b r in g d i s c r e d i t on t h e p o l i c e
s e r v i c e w hen c o m m itte d b y an o f f i c e r on d u t y , b u t n o t o t h e r w i s e .
T h is i s n o t a n a r e a i n w h ic h i t i s p o s s i b l e t o l a y down h a r d and
f a s t r u l e s : e a c h c a s e m u st b e t r e a t e d on i t s m e r i t s .             C h ie f
o f f i c e r s s h o u l d b e a r i n m in d a l s o i n s u c h c a s e s t h e a d v i c e
c o n ta in e d in paragraph 3 . 1 9 .

9.5          An i l l i c i t o r i r r e g u l a r s e x u a l r e l a t i o n s h i p b e t w e e n a
p o l i c e o f f i c e r and a n o th e r p e r s o n i s n o t o f i t s e l f d i s c r e d i t a b l e
c o n d u c t w i t h i n t h e m e a n in g o f t h e d i s c i p l i n e c o d e .        H ere a g a in
i t i s n e c e s s a r y t o ex a m in e c a r e f u l l y t h e p a r t i c u l a r c ir c u m s t a n c e s
o f each c a s e in o rd er t o d e c id e w h eth er d is c r e d i t t o th e p o li c e
fo rce or p o lic e se r v ic e is lik e ly .

9 .6         The o f f e n c e o f d i s c r e d i t a b l e c o n d u c t i s c o m m itte d w h ere
an o f f i c e r a c t s i n a m anner l i k e l y t o b r in g d i s c r e d i t on t h e
r e p u ta tio n o f th e p o lic e fo r c e or s e r v ic e .                I f th e conduct is
k n ow n a b o u t o u t s i d e t h e f o r c e , i t w i l l b e n e c e s s a r y t o e s t a b l i s h
o n ly t h a t i t i s r e a so n a b ly l i k e l y t o b r in g d i s c r e d i t .          But th e
S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e c o n s i d e r s t h a t t h e o f f e n c e m ay b e p r o v e d e v e n
i f t h e c o n d u c t i s n o t k n ow n a b o u t o u t s i d e t h e f o r c e , p r o v i d e d
t h a t i t i s r e a s o n a b l y l i k e l y t o b e co m e known a b o u t a t so m e s t a g e ,
and t h a t s u c h d i s c r e d i t w i l l r e s u l t i f t h i s o c c u r s .    W here i t i s
i n p r a c t i c e u n l i k e l y t h a t t h e c o n d u c t w i l l b e co m e known a b o u t
o u ts id e th e fo r c e , i t w i l l be a p p r o p r ia te t o b r in g a ch a rg e under
t h i s p aragrap h o n ly w here th e o f f i c e r h a s b eh aved in a d is o r d e r ly
m anner o r i n a m anner p r e j u d i c i a l t o d i s c i p l i n e .

9 .7         T h e r e may b e s i t u a t i o n s w h e r e t h e a l l e g e d m i s c o n d u c t
c o n s is t s o f a c o n tin u in g s t a t e o f a f f a i r s r a th e r th an a s in g le
a c t i o n ; i t m ig h t n o t b e s e r i o u s en ou gh t o r e q u ir e a c h a r g e i f i t
o c c u r s o v e r a s h o r t p e r i o d , b u t i t s c o n t i n u a n c e m ay m ak e i t
se r io u s.         In such a c a s e , th e c h i e f o f f i c e r sh o u ld c o n s id e r
w h e th e r t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d s h o u ld b e g iv e n an o p p o r t u n it y t o
c o r r e c t t h e s i t u a t i o n r a t h e r t h a n b e c h a r g e d i m m e d i a t e l y w i t h an
o ffe n c e a g a in st d is c ip lin e .          W h eth er t h i s i s a p p r o p r i a t e i n any
c a s e w i l l d ep en d on t h e n a tu r e o f t h e c o n d u c t and t h e o f f i c e r ' s
b la m e w o r th in e ss.

D iso b e d ie n c e t o    orders       (d isc ip lin e     code,      p a r a g r a p h 3)

9 .8        Paragraph 3 p r o v id e s a d e fe n c e t o a ch arge o f d is o b e d ie n c e
t o o r d e r s w h ere an o f f i c e r h a s 'g o o d and s u f f i c i e n t c a u s e ' n o t
t o ob ey an o r d e r .      T h u s a n o f f i c e r d o e s n o t co m m it t h i s o f f e n c e
i f h i s r e a s o n f o r f a i l i n g t o c a r r y o u t an o r d e r w as t h a t h e d id
n o t kn ow o f i t a n d h a d g o o d r e a s o n f o r n o t k n o w i n g o f i t - f o r
e x a m p le ,   because     it      h ad n o t b e e n p r o p e r l y c o m m u n ic a te d o r
p r o m u lg a te d .

9/91                                                902
9 .9           A d i s c i p l i n a r y ch a rg e o f fa ls e h o o d o r p r e v a r ic a t io n sh o u ld
n o t in g e n e r a l b e b a se d on any m is - s t a t e m e n t c o n t a in e d in a
p ersonal            e x p la n a tio n     m ade     by   an      o ffic e r     in     resp on se       to
 • R e g u l a t i o n 7 n o t i c e ' o r a n y w r i t t e n o r o r a l s t a t e m e n t m ade b y
t h e o f f i c e r a t an e a r l i e r s t a g e o f a d i s c i p l i n a r y e n q u ir y .         But
to t h is r u le th e r e are e x c e p tio n s.                      S u ch a c h a r g e w o u ld b e
a p p r o p r ia t e , f o r i n s t a n c e , i f a f a ls e h o o d u s e d a s a m eans o f
 ' c o v e r i n g u p ' w as m ore r e p r e h e n s i b l e th a n t h e o r i g i n a l o f f e n c e -
   a s w hen an o f f i c e r a t t e m p t e d t o i m p l i c a t e an in n o c e n t c o l l e a g u e
a s a m ean s o f d i v e r t i n g s u s p i c i o n from h i m s e l f .            In su ch a c a s e
i t i s r e a s o n a b le t o s e e t h e f a l s e h o o d a s a d i s t i n c t and s e p a r a t e
e le m e n t        in      th e      officer's        m isc o n d u c t,   d e se r v in g      sep a ra te
d is c ip lin a r y a c tio n .

R a c i a l l y d i s c r i m i n a t o r y b e h a v i o u r ( d i s c i p l i n e c o d e , p a r a g r a p h 9)

9.10         A c h a r g e o f r a c i a l l y d is c r im in a t o r y b e h a v io u r s h o u ld be
b r o u g h t w h e r e t h e r e i s e v i d e n c e t o show t h a t an o f f i c e r h a s , on
th e grounds o f a p e r s o n 's c o lo u r , r a c e , n a t io n a lit y or e th n ic or
n a t i o n a l o r i g i n s , e i t h e r b e h a v e d to w a r d s t h a t p e r s o n i n a m anner
w h ic h , e v e n w it h o u t t h o s e g r o u n d s , am ou nts t o t h e c o m m is s io n o f
th e d is c ip l in a r y o ffe n c e o f ab u se o f a u th o r ity , o r o th e r w ise
t r e a t e d h im i m p r o p e r l y .           In e i t h e r c a s e ,     th e b e h a v io u r in
q u e s t i o n m u st h a v e o c c u r r e d w h i l e t h e o f f i c e r w as on d u t y .
P r i v a t e a c t s o f d i s c r i m i n a t i o n c o m m i t t e d b y a n o f f i c e r w ho i s o f f
d u ty s h o u ld n o t b e c h a r g e d a s an o f f e n c e u n d e r t h i s p a ra g ra p h o f
th e d is c ip lin e code.                I f t h e o f f d u ty b e h a v io u r o f an o f f i c e r
a m ou n ts t o a d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e , t h e c h a r g e s h o u ld b e b r o u g h t
under a n o th er paragraph o f th e cod e.

9.11       The i n c l u s i o n o f t h i s o f f e n c e i n t h e d i s c i p l i n e c o d e d o e s
n o t i m p l y t h a t n o n o t i c e may e v e r b e t a k e n o f r a c i a l d i f f e r e n c e s .
F o r e x a m p le , an i n d i c a t i o n o f r a c i a l o r i g i n i n t h e d e s c r i p t i o n
o f a s u s p e c t m ig h t b e a s r e l e v a n t and p r o p e r a s an i n d i c a t i o n
t h a t t h e s u s p e c t i s m a le o r f e m a le , y o u n g o r o l d .              F a ilu r e ,
h o w ev er, t o r esp o n d t o an em ergen cy c a l l f o r no r e a s o n o t h e r th a n
t h e r a c i a l o r e t h n i c o r i g i n s o f t h e c a l l e r w o u ld am ou nt t o an
o ffen ce.

L o s s o r dam age t o p o l i c e p r o p e r t y         ( d i s c i p l i n e c o d e , p a r a g r a p h 12)

9.12         A ch arge under t h i s paragraph r e q u ir e s a s ig n if i c a n t
e le m e n t o f f a u l t on t h e o f f i c e r ' s p a r t : l o s s o r dam age c a u s e d by
a sim p le m ista k e d o e s n o t j u s t i f y d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s ,       ^n
o f f i c e r ' s a g r e e m e n t t o p ay to w a r d s t h e c o s t o f t h e p r o p e r t y w h ich
h e h a s l o s t o r d a m a g e d may b e r e l e v a n t t o t h e d e c i s i o n w h e t h e r
t o c h a r g e h im u n d e r t h i s p a r a g r a p h .        B ut an o f f e r o f paym ent
s h o u l d n o t b e u s e d o r s e e n a s a way o f a v o i d i n g fo r m a l d i s c i p l i n e
w here t h i s i s o th e r w is e j u s t i f i e d ; n or sh o u ld a r e f u s a l t o pay
be u sed a s a re a so n fo r a d i s c i p l i n e ch a rg e w here t h i s i s n o t
o th e r w ise      ju stifie d ;        nor    sh o u ld     an    o ffic e r      be   g iv e n    th e
im p r e s s io n t h a t t h e d e c i s i o n w h e th e r t o c h a r g e w i l l d ep en d on h i s
w illin g n e ss to pay.

U n f it n e s s f o r d u ty th ro u g h d r in k         ( d i s c i p l i n e c o d e , p a ra g ra p h 13)


9/91                                                  903
9.13         When a n o f f i c e r i s u n e x p e c t e d l y c a l l e d o u t f o r      d u tie s (ie
w here i t was r e a s o n a b le t h a t h e d id n o t f o r e s e e t h e                 lik e lih o o d
o f b e in g c a l l e d o u t f o r su ch d u t ie s ) h e sh o u ld b e                   a b l e a t no
d i s c r e d i t t o h i m s e l f t o s a y t h a t h e h a s h a d t o o m u ch           d r in k .

A lte r n a tiv e    charges

9.14         T here w i l l b e c a s e s w here a l t e r n a t i v e c h a r g e s un der th e
sam e p a r a g r a p h o r su b p a r a g r a p h o f t h e d i s c i p l i n e c o d e seem
e q u a lly a p p r o p r ia te .     F o r e x a m p l e , a n o f f i c e r m ay h a v e d e s t r o y e d
o r m u t ila t e d a p o l i c e docum ent e i t h e r                 ' w i l f u l l y and w ith o u t
p r o p e r a u t h o r it y ' o r 'th r o u g h la c k o f due c a r e ' (p a ra g ra p h 5(b)
o f t h e co d e) , and i t                m ay r e q u i r e a d i s c i p l i n e          h e a r in g to
d e te r m in e w h ich .       In such a c a s e t h e s e a l t e r n a t i v e s sh o u ld n o t
b e p r e fe r r e d a s s e p a r a te c h a r g e s; r a th e r , a s i n g l e c h a rg e sh o u ld
be p referred , to th e e f f e c t th a t th e o ffic e r                               ' w i l f u l l y and
w ith o u t p ro p er a u t h o r it y o r th ro u g h la c k o f due c a r e ' d e s tr o y e d
t h e d ocu m en t.         W here, h o w e v e r , a c h a r g e o f t h i s k in d i s fo u n d
p roved in o n ly one o f th e a lt e r n a t i v e a s p e c t s (eg w h ere, in th e
e x a m p le q u o te d h e r e , t h e p r e s i d i n g o f f i c e r i s s a t i s f i e d t h a t t h e
a c c u se d o f f i c e r d e s tr o y e d t h e docum ent 'th r o u g h la c k o f c a r e '
r a t h e r t h a n ' w i l f u l l y and w it h o u t p r o p e r a u t h o r i t y ' ) h e s h o u ld
i n d i c a t e t h i s w hen a n n o u n c in g h i s f i n d i n g and e n s u r e t h a t t h e
e n tr y in th e r ec o rd s a c c u r a te ly r e f l e c t s th a t fin d in g .

S c h e d u le 2 t o    th e P o lic e R e g u la tio n s        1979

9.15     T h is s c h e d u le p l a c e s c e r t a i n r e s t r i c t i o n s on t h e p r i v a t e
life   o f m em bers o f p o l i c e f o r c e s .              In th e o p in io n o f th e
S ecretary o f S ta te:

    a.      I t i s n o t a p p r o p r ia t e t o c h a r g e an o f f i c e r w it h b r e a c h o f
            p a ra g ra p h 2 o f t h e s c h e d u le i f h e tem p o ra ry l e a v e s h i s
            h om e f o r a t i m e a n d s t a y s e l s e w h e r e .    T h e r e m ay o r m ay n o t
            b e grounds fo r a ch arge under a n o th er p r o v is io n o f th e
            d i s c i p l i n e c o d e , b u t any su c h c h a r g e w i l l d ep en d on t h e
            c ir c u m s t a n c e s o f t h e p a r t i c u l a r c a s e : f o r e x a m p le , t h e
            o f f i c e r m ay b e l i a b l e t o a c h a r g e o f d i s o b e d i e n c e t o
            o r d e r s f o r f a i l i n g t o n o t i f y t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r o f an
            a d d r e s s a t w h ich h e c o u ld b e c o n t a c t e d .

    b.     P a r a g r a p h 2 o f t h e s c h e d u l e a p p l i e s o n l y t o a m em b er o f
           a p o lic e fo rce.                W here, t h e r e f o r e , a s a r e s u l t o f a
           p o s t i n g t o a d i f f e r e n t l o c a l i t y , an o f f i c e r i s r e q u ir e d
           t o m o v e t o o t h e r p r e m i s e s i n t h e n ew l o c a l i t y , i t i s n o t
           w it h in t h e pow er o f t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r t o r e q u ir e a l s o t h a t
           t h e o f f i c e r ' s s p o u s e and f a m ily s h o u ld l i v e a t t h o s e o t h e r
           p r e m ise s.

    c.     A c o - h a b it e e i s n o t a lo d g e r w it h in t h e term s o f p aragrap h
           3 o f sch e d u le 2,          e v e n t h o u g h h e o r s h e m ay m a k e a
           c o n t r ib u t io n t o th e h o u seh o ld e x p e n s e s .




9/91                                                904
DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS

R e sp o n sib ility      f o r a r r a n g in g th e h e a r in g

9.16          The r e s p o n s i b i l i t y f o r a r r a n g in g f o r t h e h e a r in g o f any
d i s c i p l i n a r y ch a rg e r e s t s w ith th e d ep u ty c h i e f o f f i c e r o f th e
force         concerned.              He w i l l     c o n sid e r th e q u e stio n          of   le g a l
r e p r e s e n t a t i o n ( s e e b e lo w and A nnex H ), f i x t h e d a t e and t im e ,
a r r a n g e f o r a cc o m m o d a tio n and f o r t h e t a k i n g o f a r e c o r d o f t h e
p r o c ee d in g s,       and e n s u r e     th a t     th e    accused      o ffic e r      and any
w i t n e s s e s ( i n c l u d i n g t h e c o m p la in a n t i n c a s e s a r i s i n g from a
c o m p la in t) a r e n o t i f i e d .      W here t h e P o l i c e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y
h a v e d ir e c t e d t h a t a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r ib u n a l b e h e ld , t h e d ep u ty
c h i e f o f f i c e r sh o u ld c o n s u lt th e A u th o r ity .               I t i s fo r th e
A u t h o r i t y t h e m s e l v e s t o d e c i d e w h ic h o f t h e i r m em bers s h o u l d s i t
on t h e t r i b u n a l , s u b j e c t t o t h e c o n d i t i o n t h a t t h o s e m em bers m u st
n o t p r e v i o u s l y h a v e had any in v o lv e m e n t w it h t h e c a s e . The c o s t s
o f s u c h a t r i b u n a l , o t h e r t h a n t h e e x p e n s e s o f A u t h o r i t y m em bers,
w i l l b e a c h a r g e on t h e p o l i c e fu n d . The p o w e r s and r e q u ir e m e n t s
o f th e A u th o r ity in r e la t io n                 to d is c ip lin a r y tr ib u n a ls are
d i s c u s s e d m ore f u l l y a t p a r a g r a p h s 9 . 2 0 - 9 . 2 1 .   F u r th e r g u id a n c e
o n a r r a n g i n g h e a r i n g s i s a t A n n e x H.

9.17          W h e r e a c h i e f o f f i c e r o t h e r t h a n t h e a c c u s e d ' s own c h i e f
o f f i c e r i s t o h e a r a c a s e u n d e r R e g u l a t i o n 14 o f t h e D i s c i p l i n e
R e g u la tio n s,        w h eth er      on    h is      own o r         as     a     c h a ir m a n of   a
d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l , t h e a r r a n g e m e n t s w i l l s t i l l b e m ade b y t h e
a c c u s e d o f f i c e r ' s own f o r c e , b u t t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r c o n d u c t i n g t h e
h e a r in g sh o u ld b e c o n s u lte d .

The d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r i n g

9.18          A nnex H c o n t a i n s n o t e s on t h e p r o c e d u r e s t o b e f o llo w e d
b e f o r e and a t t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r i n g , i n c l u d i n g t h e r i g h t s and
f a c i l i t i e s t o b e m ade a v a i l a b l e t o t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r a t a l l
sta g e s o f th e p ro cess.                The a d v i c e i n A nnex H ( a s i n t h i s
s e c t i o n ) i s d e s i g n e d t o f u r t h e r t h e t w in a im s o f b e i n g f a i r t o
t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r and g e t t i n g a t t h e t r u t h : t h e p r o c e d u r e s th e y
d e s c r i b e a r e in t e n d e d a s m eans t o t h i s e n d , n o t ( e x c e p t w h ere
th e y a r e l e g a l r e q u ir e m e n ts) a s en d s in t h e m s e lv e s .                 Thus a
d e p a r t u r e from th em w i l l b e j u s t i f i e d i f - b u t o n l y i f - i t c a n
b e show n t h a t t h e y l e d t o a t r u e r and f a i r e r r e s u l t th a n
o b s e r v in g th em .

9.19          In r e la t io n t o th e p r o v is io n o f f a c i l i t i e s to th e accu sed
o f f i c e r , t h e a d v i c e i n t h e f o l l o w i n g p a r a g r a p h s and i n A nnex H
c a n b e su m m a r ise d a s f o l l o w s :

    a.     h e and h i s ' f r i e n d ' s h o u ld b e g iv e n a d e q u a te d u ty tim e t o
           prepare h is d efen ce;

    b.     h e s h o u ld b e g iv e n c o p ie s o f a l l t h e e v id e n c e in good tim e
           b e fo r e th e h e a r in g ;

    c.     h e s h o u ld h a v e t h e r i g h t a t a l l s t a g e s t o c o n s u l t , and be
           r e p r e s e n t e d b y , a ' f r i e n d ' w h o may b e a r e p r e s e n t a t i v e o f

9/91                                               905
           a p o l i c e s t a f f a s s o c i a t i o n ; t o c o n s u l t a la w y e r b e f o r e t h e
           h e a r in g ; and n o t t o b e l i a b l e t o t h e p u n ish m e n ts o f
           d i s m i s s a l , r e q u ir e m e n t t o r e s i g n o r r e d u c t io n in rank
           u n le s s he h a s b een g iv e n th e o p p o r tu n ity a c t u a lly t o be
           r e p r e s e n t e d b y a la w y e r a t t h e h e a r in g .

    d.     h e a r in g s sh o u ld b e c a r r ie d o u t             in    accordance           w ith     th e
           r e q u ir e m e n ts o f n a tu r a l j u s t i c e .

H e a r in g b e f o r e a d i s c i p l i n a r y    tr ib u n a l

9.20          In        g e n e r a l,    th e     procedure a t a               h e a r in g    b efo re     a
d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l s e t up u n d e r s e c t i o n 94 o f t h e P o l i c e and
C r im in a l E v id e n c e A c t 1984 w i l l b e i n m o s t r e s p e c t s t h e sam e a s
th a t      fo r        a c h ie f o f f ic e r        s i t t i n g a lo n e .       E xcept       fo r th e
p u n ish m en t,        how ever,         d e c isio n s a t         th e h e a r in g a re        fo r th e
t r ib u n a l a s a w h o le, by a m a jo r ity i f n e c e s s a r y .                  I t i s im p o r ta n t
t h a t t h o s e p r e s e n t , i n p a r t i c u l a r t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r and t h e
c o m p la in a n t, s h o u ld b e s a t i s f i e d t h a t t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts
A u t h o r i t y m em bers h a v e t a k e n a f u l l p a r t i n t h e p r o c e e d i n g s . The
c h i e f o f f i c e r , a s c h a ir m a n , s h o u ld e n s u r e t h a t t h e o t h e r tw o
m em bers o f t h e t r i b u n a l h a v e t h e o p p o r t u n i t i e s t h e y n e e d t o a s k
q u e stio n s           of      th e p r e se n tin g      o f f ic e r , th e     accused         and any
w itn e sse s.         So f a r a s t h e d e c i s i o n on p u n ish m en t i s c o n c e r n e d ,
t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r s h o u ld s e e k and t a k e f u l l a c c o u n t o f t h e v ie w s
o f t h e A u t h o r i t y m em bers an d e n s u r e t h a t t h e y a r e a w a r e o f a n y
in f o r m a t io n w h ich h e w i l l t a k e i n t o a c c o u n t i n d e t e r m in in g
p u n ish m en t.

9.21         R e g u la tio n 18(9) o f th e D is c ip lin e R e g u la tio n s p r o v id e s
t h a t no in d ic a t i o n s h o u ld b e g iv e n t o any o th e r p e r s o n o f w h eth er
t h e d e c i s i o n r e a c h e d b y a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l w as u n a n im o u s o r
by a m a jo r ity .               A c c o r d in g ly , w here th e r e          is    any need fo r
d e lib e r a t io n t h i s sh o u ld ta k e p la c e in p r iv a t e .              In th e c a se o f
m ost p ro c e d u r a l d e c i s i o n s ,         how ever,       it     s h o u ld n o r m a lly b e
p o s s i b l e f o r t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l t o a g r e e on a c o u r s e o f
a c t io n w ith o u t th e n eed t o r e t i r e .

STANDARD OF PROOF

9.22         R e g u l a t i o n 23 (2 ) (b) o f t h e P o l i c e ( D i s c i p l i n e ) R e g u l a t i o n s
p r o v id e s t h a t th e r e q u ir e d sta n d a rd o f p r o o f in d is c ip l in a r y
p r o c e e d i n g s i s t h e sam e a s t h a t a t a c r i m i n a l t r i a l .              Thus in
o r d e r f o r an o f f i c e r t o b e fou n d g u i l t y a t a d i s c i p l i n a r y
h e a r i n g , t h e o f f e n c e m u st b e p r o v e d b ey o n d r e a s o n a b le d o u b t and
n o t , a s in c i v i l p r o c e e d in g s , on t h e b a la n c e o f p r o b a b i l i t i e s .

EVIDENCE

9.23         I t i s n o t n e c e ssa r y t o fo llo w e x a c tly th e p roced u res o f
a c r im in a l t r i a l , and in p a r t i c u l a r a d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r in g n eed
n o t b e bound by t e c h n ic a l r u le s o f e v id e n c e .         W here d o c u m e n ta r y
e v id e n c e (su c h a s c o p i e s and p la n s and t r a n s c r i p t s o f c o u r t
p r o c e e d in g s) a re a c c e p te d by b o th s id e s , i t i s n o t n e c e s s a r y t o
prove such e v id e n c e fo r m a lly .             G reat c a r e sh o u ld h ow ever, be
ta k en      w ith    hearsay        ev id e n c e , w h ich  is     to      be    d e fin e d    as

9/91                                                  906
u n s u b s t a n t ia t e d s t a t e m e n t s o f f e r e d b y w it n e s s e s b a se d upon w hat
som eone e l s e            has     s a id     and n o t upon p e r s o n a l k n o w led g e o r
o b se r v a tio n .        Such e v id e n c e s h o u ld b e a d m itte d o n ly u n d er t h e
fo llo w in g c o n d itio n s .          F i r s t , t h e r e s h o u l d b e r e a s o n s w h ic h m ake
i t im p r a c tic a b le fo r th e o r ig in a to r o f th e e v id e n c e ( i e th e
p e r s o n who p a s s e d t h e i n f o r m a t i o n t o t h e h e a r s a y w i t n e s s ) t o g i v e
e v i d e n c e h i m s e l f , f o r e x a m p le b e c a u s e h e h a s g o n e o v e r s e a s f o r
a p r o tr a c te d p e r io d .         S e c o n d ly , th e e v id e n c e s h o u ld c l e a r l y be
r e le v a n t to th e charge or ch arges.                      T h ir d ly , e v e r y e f f o r t sh o u ld
b e m ade n o t o n l y t o t e s t t h e r e l i a b i l i t y o f t h e e v i d e n c e , f o r
e x a m p le b y c o m p a r in g i t w it h t h e a v a i l a b l e d i r e c t e v i d e n c e , b u t
a ls o to a s s e s s th e r e l i a b i l i t y o f th e w itn e ss h im se lf in s o fa r as
th is is p o ssib le .            Even w h ere t h e s e c o n d i t i o n s a r e s a t i s f i e d , and
t h e e v id e n c e i s a d m itte d , th e p r e s id in g o f f i c e r sh o u ld t r e a t i t
w it h c a u t io n an d , in h i s s ta te m e n t o f f in d in g a n d /o r p u n ish m en t,
s h o u ld s p e c i f y t h e e x t e n t t o w h ich h e r e l i e d on i t in r e a c h in g
h is d e c isio n s.

9.24         S t a t e m e n t s t a k e n fro m a n y p e r s o n w h ic h i n c l u d e m a t e r i a l
n o t r e le v a n t t o th e d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e (s ) o r n o t c a p a b le o f
p r o o f s h o u ld , a s f a r a s p r a c t i c a b l e , b e e d it e d t o rem ove su ch
m a te r ia l.          The p u r p o s e o f t h i s i s t o a v o id p r e j u d i c i n g t h e
d is c ip lin a r y a u th o r ity by th e in tr o d u c tio n o f ex tra n eo u s m a tter.
I t s h o u l d b e b o r n e i n m in d t h a t b l a n k s p a c e s o r o v e r - m a r k i n g s i n
a cop y o f a sta te m e n t can th e m se lv e s in d ic a t e t h a t p r e j u d ic ia l
m a t e r i a l h a s b e e n rem oved o r h id d e n .                 The e d i t i n g      sh o u ld
t h e r e f o r e b e d o n e i n s u c h a way a s n o t t o r e v e a l t h a t i t h a s
ta k en p la c e ,          f o r e x a m p le b y r e t y p i n g  o f th e        fu ll,     e d ite d
sta tem en t.

REHABILITATION OF OFFENDERS ACT 1 9 7 4

9.25         E v id e n c e o f c r im in a l c o n v i c t i o n s w h ich a r e 's p e n t ' u n d er
t h e R e h a b i l i t a t i o n o f O f f e n d e r s A c t m ay b e g i v e n i n d i s c i p l i n a r y
p r o c e e d i n g s , a n d q u e s t i o n s m ay b e a s k e d t h e a n s w e r s t o w h i c h
w o u ld r e v e a l s u c h c o n v i c t i o n s (p a r a g r a p h 3 o f s c h e d u l e 3 t o t h e
R e h a b i l i t a t i o n o f O ffe n d e r s A ct 1974 (E x c e p tio n s ) O rder 1 9 7 5 ) .
But th e S e c r e ta r y o f S t a t e w ish e s th e p r a c t ic e in d is c ip l in a r y
p r o c e e d in g s t o be in acco rd a n ce w ith t h a t fo llo w e d in th e
c r im in a l c o u r ts in s im ila r c ir c u m sta n c e s.            A c c o r d in g ly i f e i t h e r
p a r ty a t a d is c ip lin a r y h e a r in g in te n d s t o r e f e r t o th e 'sp e n t'
c o n v ic tio n s        of    a w itn e ss       or to       ask      q u e stio n s      about      such
c o n v ic t io n s , h e sh o u ld f i r s t s e e k a u t h o r ity t o do s o , p r e fe r a b ly
a t o r b e fo r e th e b e g in n in g o f th e                   h e a r i n g , from t h e c h i e f
o f f i c e r o r d is c ip lin a r y tr ib u n a l h e a r in g th e c a s e .               A u th o r ity
s h o u ld b e g iv e n o n ly w here i t i s c o n s id e r e d t h a t th e i n t e r e s t s
o f j u s t i c e r e q u ir e th e e v id e n c e t o be a d m itte d .                The a d m is s io n
o f e v id e n c e about sp e n t c o n v ic tio n s d o es n o t a u to m a tic a lly
r e q u i r e t h e w it h d r a w a l from t h e p r o c e e d i n g s o f a n y t h i r d p a r t y ,
su c h a s t h e c o m p la in a n t in a c o m p la in ts c a s e .

PUNISHMENT

9 .2 6        S e c t i o n 102 o f t h e P o l i c e and C r im in a l E v id e n c e A c t 1984
p r o v id e s t h a t a p u n ish m en t o f d i s m i s s a l , r e q u ir e m e n t t o r e s i g n
o r r e d u c t i o n i n r a n k m ay n o t b e i m p o s e d a t a d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r i n g

9/91                                                907
u n le s s th e a ccu sed o f f i c e r h as b een g iv e n th e o p p o r tu n ity                       to
e le c t to be le g a lly          rep re se n ted a t th e h e a r in g .   T h is                       is
d i s c u s s e d a t A n n e x H.

9.27         R e g u l a t i o n 24 o f t h e D i s c i p l i n e R e g u l a t i o n s r e q u i r e s a
s e p a r a t e p u n is h m e n t t o b e im p o sed f o r e a c h o f f e n c e fo u n d p r o v e d .

9.28        I f a c h ie f o f f i c e r in te n d s t o ta k e in to a cco u n t th e
accused         officer's           annual       a p p r a is a l rep o rts        w hen     d e c id in g
p u n ish m en t, c o p ie s o f t h e r e p o r t s s h o u ld a l s o b e s u p p lie d t o t h e
accused o f f ic e r .            W here a w r i t t e n s t a t e m e n t o f c h a r a c t e r i s
p rep ared fo r u se a t th e h ea rin g in th e e v e n t o f a fin d in g o f
g u i l t a cop y m u st b e g iv e n t o t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r w ith t h e o th e r
d o c u m e n ts r e q u i r e d t o b e s e r v e d o n h im b y R e g u l a t i o n 1 0 ( 1 ) o f t h e
D is c ip lin e R e g u la tio n s.

P u n ish m e n t i n    'r e m itte d '   cases

9.29         A c h i e f o f f i c e r h e a r i n g a c a s e r e m i t t e d t o h im u n d e r
R e g u l a t i o n 1 4 t a k e s t h e d e c i s i o n a s t o f i n d i n g b u t m ay o n l y m a k e
a reco m m en d a tio n a s t o p u n ish m e n t.            The a c c u s e d o f f i c e r s h o u ld
b e in fo r m e d a t t h e c o n c l u s i o n o f t h e h e a r i n g w h a t c h a r g e o r
c h a r g e s h a v e b e e n p r o v e d , and t h e p r e s i d i n g o f f i c e r i s r e q u ir e d
b y R e g u la tio n 2 4 (5 ) t o p r o v id e a s soon a s p o s s i b l e a f t e r th e
h e a r in g a fo rm a l s ta te m e n t o f t h e c h a r g e ( s ) fou n d p r o v e d t o g e t h e r
w it h h i s rec o m m en d a tio n a s t o p u n ish m e n t.             T h is s h o u ld b e s e n t
t o t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r o f t h e f o r c e t o w h ich t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r
b e lo n g s , w ith a copy t o th e o f f i c e r h im s e lf .

9.30          In a c a s e r e m itte d under R e g u la tio n 14(2) or ( 7 ) , a f in a l
d e c i s i o n on p u n ish m en t c a n n o t b e r e a c h e d u n t i l t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r
who i s t o t a k e t h e d e c i s i o n r e c e i v e s a c o p y o f t h e t r a n s c r i p t .
N e v e r th e le s s th e S e c r e ta r y o f S t a t e w is h e s c h i e f o f f i c e r s t o do
e v e r y th in g p r a c t ic a b le t o red u ce th e d e la y b etw een a f in d in g o f
g u i l t a t t h e h e a r i n g an d t h e c o m m u n ic a tio n t o t h e o f f i c e r o f t h e
d e c i s i o n on p u n ish m en t.

CRIMINAL CONDUCT: TIMING OF DISCIPLINARY HEARING

9.31          W here a d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e o f c r i m i n a l c o n d u c t i s b r o u g h t
f o l l o w i n g a c r i m in a l c o n v i c t i o n (p a ra g ra p h 16 o f t h e d i s c i p l i n e
cod e) th e a c c u se d o f f i c e r sh o u ld b e a ffo r d e d r e a s o n a b le tim e t o
p rep are a p le a in m itig a tio n .                  I f n e c e s s a r y , a n o f f i c e r m ay b e
su sp en d ed p e n d in g t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r in g , s o t h e h e a r in g n eed
n o t im m e d ia te ly f o l l o w t h e r e l e v a n t c o u r t p r o c e e d in g s ; b u t t h e r e
m ay b e a d v a n t a g e s i n a n e a r l y h e a r i n g i f a n i m m e d i a t e c u s t o d i a l
o r a s u s p e n d e d s e n t e n c e h a s b e e n im p o s e d .            The c h i e f o f f i c e r
s h o u ld c o n s id e r c a r e f u l l y i n e a c h c a s e w h e th e r i t i s f a i r and
a p p r o p r ia te t o b r in g o r h e a r a c h a r g e o f c r im in a l c o n d u c t i f an
a p p e a l i s p e n d in g a g a in s t t h e c r im in a l c o n v ic t io n .

9 . 3 1 a R e g u l a t i o n 28 o f t h e D i s c i p l i n e R e g u l a t i o n s p r o v i d e s t h a t
a fin d in g o f g u i l t in r e s p e c t o f a ch arge o f c r im in a l con d u ct i s
a u to m a tic a lly s e t a s id e i f th e r e le v a n t c r im in a l c o n v ic tio n i s
itse lf      s e t a s i d e upon a s u c c e s s f u l a p p e a l by t h e                     o ffic e r
concerned.              S e c t i o n 3 o f t h e C r im in a l A p p eal A c t, h o w ev er,

9/91                                                908
p r o v id e s f o r t h e c o u r t , in s t e a d o f a llo w in g o r d is m is s in g an
a p p e a l, t o s u b s t i t u t e a v e r d ic t o f g u i l t y o f an a l t e r n a t i v e
o ffen ce.            S u ch a d e c i s i o n w o u ld n o t r e n d e r t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y
c o n v i c t i o n i n v a l i d , a s t h e c r i m in a l c o n v i c t i o n w o u ld s t i l l s t a n d .
H ow ever, w h ere a c o n v i c t i o n o f an o f f e n c e i s s u b s t i t u t e d w h ich
i s c o m p a r a t iv e ly t r i v i a l in r e l a t i o n t o t h e o f f e n c e f o r w h ich t h e
o f f i c e r o r form er o f f i c e r was o r i g i n a l l y c o n v ic t e d , t h e c h i e f
o f f i c e r m ay w i s h t o c o n s i d e r w h e t h e r t h e p u n i s h m e n t i n t h e
d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s m ig h t no lo n g e r b e a p p r o p r ia t e , and
w h e th e r , in o r d e r t o o v erco m e a n y p o s s i b l e i n j u s t i c e , h e m ig h t
a r r a n g e f o r t h e o f f i c e r o r form er o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d t o b e a d v is e d
to      lo d g e an a p p ea l t o            th e S ecreta ry o f S ta te a g a in st th e
c o n v ic tio n o f th e d is c ip lin a r y ch a rg e. In such circu m sta n ce s th e
S ecreta ry o f S ta te w i l l , i f n ecessa ry , a ccep t th e appeal out o f
tim e .

NEW TENANCIES WHILE AWAITING DISCIPLINARY HEARING

9.32         I t w i l l g e n e r a lly b e in a p p r o p r ia te t o a l l o c a t e th e te n a n c y
o f a c c o m m o d a tio n p r o v id e d b y t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y t o an o f f i c e r
a w a it in g a d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r in g on c h a r g e s w h ich m ig h t le a d t o
d i s m i s s a l o r r e q u ir e m e n t t o r e s i g n from t h e f o r c e .            S im ila r
c o n s id e r a t io n s a p p ly w here an o f f i c e r i s a w a itin g t r i a l on a
c r im in a l ch a rg e.

MEDICAL TREATMENT

9.33                  An o f f i c e r ' s m e d i c a l c o n d i t i o n i s a f a c t o r w h i c h m ay
v a l i d l y f ig u r e in th e d e c is io n w h eth er t o i n i t i a t e o r p ro cee d
w ith d is c ip lin a r y p r o ced u res.                I t i s , f o r e x a m p le , op en t o a
c h ie f o ffic e r          to d e c id e n o t to            in itia te      p r o c e e d in g s w here
e v id e n c e s u g g e s t s t h a t an o f f i c e r ' s m e d ic a l c o n d it io n p la y e d a
m a jo r r o l e i n t h e c o m m issio n o f t h e a l l e g e d o f f e n c e a g a i n s t
d i s c i p l i n e and w here t h e n a tu r e o f t h e o f f e n c e i s su c h t h a t i t
c a n n o t c l e a r l y b e show n t o b e i n t h e p u b l i c i n t e r e s t o r i n t h e
in te r e s ts o f th e fo rce or th e o f f ic e r concerned to in it i a t e
p r o c e e d i n g s . A s i m i l a r a p p r o a c h m ay b e a d o p t e d w h e r e i t i s c l e a r
t h a t an o f f i c e r ' s m e d ic a l c o n d it io n i s su ch t h a t t h e i n i t i a t i o n
o f p r o c e e d in g s m ig h t le a d t o h i s m e d ic a l breakdow n.                          W h ere
m e d ic a l e v id e n c e o f t h e k in d d e s c r ib e d a b o v e em erges o n ly a f t e r
c h a r g e s h a v e b e e n l a i d a g a i n s t an o f f i c e r , i t w o u ld b e o p en t o
a c h i e f o f f i c e r t o c o n s i d e r a b a n d o n in g p r o c e e d i n g s b e f o r e an y
d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r in g t a k e s p la c e by e x e r c i s i n g h i s pow er t o
w ith d r a w c h a r g e s u n d e r R e g u la t io n 9 ( 1 ) o f t h e P o l i c e ( D i s c i p l i n e )
R e g u la tio n s.        (C are s h o u ld b e t a k e n t o s e e k t h e c o n s e n t o f t h e
P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y u n d er s e c t i o n 9 3 ( 6 ) o f t h e A c t b e f o r e
w it h d r a w in g c h a r g e s w h ic h a r o s e from a c o m p l a i n t s m a t t e r ) .           No
s i m i l a r pow er t o w ith d r a w c h a r g e s e x i s t s w h ere a h e a r in g h a s
a lr e a d y begun.           In su ch a c a s e , an o f f i c e r ' s m e d ic a l c o n d it io n
m i g h t p r o v i d e c a u s e f o r a d j o u r n i n g a h e a r i n g a n d m ay i n a n y e v e n t
b e c o n s id e r e d in m i t i g a t i o n o f t h e p e n a lt y t o b e aw arded i f t h e
a l l e g a t i o n s a r e fou n d t o b e p r o v e d .

9.34         I f a t any s t a g e o f th e d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e s s an a c c u se d
o f f i c e r ' s m e d ic a l c o n d it io n (w h eth er o r n o t i t c o n t r i b u t e s t o t h e
a l l e g e d o f f e n c e o r m ig h t le a d t o a breakdow n i f t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y

9/91                                                909
p r o c e s s i s p u r su e d ) i s fo u n d t o b e su c h t h a t h e w o u ld n o r m a lly
b e g r a n te d m e d ic a l r e tir e m e n t, th e d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e s s sh o u ld
n o t n e c e s s a r ily p rev en t or d e la y r e tir e m e n t.       In such a c a s e , i t
w i l l b e fo r th e c h ie f o f f i c e r t o c o n s id e r w h eth er th e p u b lic
i n t e r e s t and t h e i n t e r e s t s o f t h e f o r c e and o f t h e o f f i c e r
c o n c e r n e d w o u ld b e b e t t e r s e r v e d b y m e d ic a l r e t i r e m e n t o r by
a llo w in g th e d is c ip lin a r y p ro ced u res t o ta k e t h e i r c o u r se .

INFORMATION TO THE POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY AS TO THE OUTCOME
OF DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS

9.35          S e c t io n 9 1 ( 2 ) o f t h e 1984 A ct r e q u ir e s a r e p o r t t o b e s e n t
t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y o f t h e o u tcom e o f a n y c a s e w h ic h i s
e x c l u d e d from r e f e r e n c e t o th em o n l y b e c a u s e c h a r g e s h a v e b e e n
p referred             and     th e    o ffic e r      has     p le a d e d   g u ilty      to     th em .
P a r tic u la r s       sh o u ld b e s u p p lie d o f th e d i s c i p l i n a r y           charges
p r e f e r r e d and o f an y p u n ish m e n t im p o se d .          I f th e ch arges r e la te d
to      c o n d u c t w h ich w as t h e            su b ject     o f a c o m p la in t and th e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n w as n o t s u p e r v is e d by t h e A u th o r ity , th e c h i e f
o f f i c e r s h o u ld a l s o sen d t h e A u th o r ity a cop y o f t h e c o m p la in t
 (or       of     th e    record       of     th e    c o m p la in t)    and    a    copy      of     th e
in v e s tig a tin g o f f i c e r ' s rep o rt.          Such a c t i o n s h o u ld n o t b e ta k e n
u n t i l any a p p ea l h a s b een d is p o s e d o f o r th e tim e f o r e n te r in g
an a p p ea l h a s p a ss e d .        T he A u t h o r i t y w o u ld n o t , h o w e v e r , know o f
t h e e v e n t u a l o u tco m e o f c a s e s o r i g i n a l l y r e f e r r e d t o th em u n d e r
s e c t i o n 90 w h ere d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s (w h e th er o r n o t p r e f e r r e d
a f t e r r e fe r e n c e t o th e A u th o r ity ) w ere d e n ie d by t h e o f f i c e r
c o n c e r n e d and t h e h e a r in g was n o t b e f o r e a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l .
For th e c o m p le te n e ss o f th e A u th o r ity 's in fo r m a tio n , t h e r e f o r e ,
c h i e f o f f i c e r s s h o u l d s u p p ly th em w i t h s i m i l a r d e t a i l s i n r e s p e c t
o f such c a s e s .             A c o n v e n i e n t way o f d o in g t h i s w o u ld b e b y
 s e n d i n g t o t h e A u t h o r i t y a c o p y o f t h e d i s c i p l i n e form w hen t h e
ca se i s c lo se d .

SUSPENDED OFFICERS

9.36         The S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e c o n s i d e r s t h a t an o f f i c e r s u sp e n d e d
under          th e    D isc ip lin e     R e g u la tio n s      r em a in s  su b ject        to     th e
d i s c i p l i n e c o d e and t h e P o l i c e R e g u la t io n s d u r in g t h e p e r io d o f
su sp e n sio n .          T h erefo re he         rem a in s        lia b le  to       d isc ip lin a r y
p r o c e e d i n g s f o r a n y o f f e n c e h e m ay c o m m i t d u r i n g t h e p e r i o d o f
su sp e n sio n .

9.37         S c h e d u le 6 t o t h e P o l ic e R e g u la tio n s 1979 d e a ls w ith
f i n a n c i a l p r o v i s i o n s r e l a t i n g t o p o l i c e o f f i c e r s s u s p e n d e d from
d u t y , and w i t h t h e r e c o v e r y o f f i n e s im p o sed u n d e r t h e D i s c i p l i n e
R e g u la tio n s.

PROBATIONERS

9.38         The p r o v i s i o n f o r a c h i e f o f f i c e r t o d i s p e n s e w it h t h e
s e r v i c e s o f a c o n s t a b le d u r in g h i s p e r io d o f p r o b a tio n s h o u ld n o t
b e u s e d a s an a l t e r n a t i v e m eans o f d i s m i s s i n g a p r o b a t io n e r w h ere
h e s h o u ld p r o p e r ly b e c h a r g e d w it h an o f f e n c e a g a i n s t d i s c i p l i n e .
W h ere d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d i n g s a r e a p p r o p r i a t e a n d j u s t i f i e d ,
th e y s h o u ld b e b ro u g h t; w here th e y a r e n o t b r o u g h t, a p r o b a tio n e r

9/91                                                910
sh o u ld n o t b e l e f t w ith th e im p r e ssio n t h a t h e h a s b een s u s p e c te d
o f an o f f e n c e and g i v e n no c h a n c e t o d e fe n d h i m s e l f a t a
d is c ip lin a r y h e a r in g .

RECORDS OF POLICE OFFICERS' FINGERPRINTS
9.39         The P o l i c e R e g u la t io n s p r o v id e f o r r e c o r d s t o b e k e p t o f
th e fin g e r p r in ts o f a l l se r v in g p o lic e o f f i c e r s .               But i t sh o u ld
b e c l e a r l y u n d e r s t o o d t h a t t h i s p r o v i s i o n i s m ade s o l e l y f o r t h e
p u rp ose o f e lim in a tin g th e fin g e r p r in ts o f p o lic e o f f ic e r s a t th e
s c e n e s o f c r im e s; t h i s f in g e r p r in t c o l l e c t i o n i s n o t t o be u sed
in o rd er t o p r o v id e e v id e n c e in any d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s
b r o u g h t a g a i n s t a m em b er o f a p o l i c e f o r c e .          In th e m a jo r ity o f
c a s e s w h ere f i n g e r p r i n t e v id e n c e i s d e s i r a b l e , i t w i l l p r o b a b ly
b e f o l l o w i n g a c r i m i n a l i n v e s t i g a t i o n w hen f i n g e r p r i n t s w i l l h a v e
b e e n ta k e n d u r in g t h e c o u r s e o f t h a t e n q u ir y and w i l l b e
a v a ila b le as e v id e n c e .




9/91                                                911
                                              SECTION 10

    COMPLAINTS AND D IS C IP L IN E ARRANGEMENTS FOR SENIOR OFFICERS
             (ABOVE THE RANK OF CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT)*

10.1         P a r t IX o f t h e P o l i c e a n d C r i m i n a l E v i d e n c e A c t 1 9 8 4
a s s i g n s t h e t a s k o f r e c o r d in g and i n v e s t i g a t i n g              c o m p la in ts
a g a in s t p o l i c e o f f i c e r s and t a k in g any su b se q u e n t d i s c i p l i n a r y
a c t io n t o th e " a p p r o p r ia te a u th o r ity " .             In th e c a se o f fo r c e s
o th e r th a n th e M e tr o p o lita n P o lic e , th e " a p p r o p r ia te a u th o r ity "
i s th e p o lic e a u th o r ity fo r th e f o r c e 's a rea .                    In th e c a se o f
D e p u t y A s s i s t a n t C o m m i s s i o n e r o r Com m ander o f t h e M e t r o p o l i t a n
P o l i c e , t h e " a p p r o p r ia t e a u t h o r it y " i s t h e C o m m issio n e r o f P o l i c e
o f t h e M e t r o p o l is ( o f f i c e r s o f A s s i s t a n t C o m m issio n e r ra n k and
a b o v e a r e a p p o i n t e d a n d m ay b e r e m o v e d b y H e r M a j e s t y a n d f a l l
o u t s id e t h e arran gem en ts d e s c r ib e d h e r e .            In t h i s s e c t io n o f th e
G u id a n ce r e f e r e n c e i s m ade, f o r c o n v e n ie n c e , s im p ly t o t h e p o l i c e
a u t h o r it y , b u t i t sh o u ld b e ta k en t o in c lu d e w here a p p r o p r ia te
t h e M e t r o p o l it a n C o m m issio n e r o r t h e D ep u ty C o m m issio n e r a c t i n g
in h is p la c e .            The s e c t i o n i s p r i n c i p a l l y a d d r e s s e d t o t h e
a p p r o p r ia te p o li c e a u th o r ity , in i t s c a p a c ity a s d is c ip lin a r y
a u t h o r it y , and t o t h e p o l i c e o f f i c e r a p p o in te d t o i n v e s t i g a t e a
 'c o m p la in t' a g a in s t a s e n io r o f f i c e r .           I t w i l l , how ever, a ls o
h a v e r e le v a n c e f o r th e t r ib u n a l a p p o in te d t o h e a r t h e c a s e
a g a i n s t a s e n i o r o f f i c e r and f o r t h e s o l i c i t o r a p p o in te d t o
p resen t th e ca se.                The r e l e v a n t r e g u l a t i o n s a r e t h e P o l i c e
 ( D is c ip lin e ) (S e n io r O ff ic e r s ) R e g u la tio n s 1985 (h e r e a f t e r c a l le d
s im p ly 't h e R e g u la t io n s ') .

10.2          T hose r e s p o n s ib le f o r a d m in is te r in g t h e s e n io r o f f i c e r s
d i s c i p l i n e s y s te m a r e rem in d ed t h a t b y v i r t u e o f s e c t i o n 105 o f
t h e P o l i c e an d C r im in a l E v id e n c e A c t 1 9 8 4 p o l i c e o f f i c e r s (an d
t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y w h ere a p p r o p r ia t e ) a r e r e q u ir e d
t o h a v e r e g a r d t o t h e G u id a n ce .        The S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e h o p e s
t h a t o t h e r s in v o lv e d in t h e c o m p la in ts and d i s c i p l i n e p r o c e s s
w i l l s i m i l a r l y t a k e a c c o u n t o f t h e G u id a n ce w h e re a p p l i c a b l e .

10.3           R e g u la tio n 4(1) h a s th e e f f e c t o f a p p ly in g t o s e n io r
o f f i c e r s t h e d i s c i p l i n e c o d e s e t o u t in S c h e d u le 1 t o t h e P o lic e
 (D is c ip lin e ) R e g u la tio n s 1985.           A lth o u g h i t h a s n o t b e e n th o u g h t
n e c e s s a r y t o fram e a s p e c i a l d i s c i p l i n e c o d e f o r s e n i o r o f f i c e r s ,
c l e a r l y som e o f t h e o f f e n c e s o r som e p a r t s o f t h e o f f e n c e s l i s t e d
w i l l n o t be a p p lic a b le to o f f ic e r s o f th a t rank.                    C are s h o u ld
th e r e fo r e be ta k en t o en su re th a t ch a rg es under th e d is c ip l in e
c o d e a r e n o t b r o u g h t a g a i n s t a s e n i o r o f f i c e r w h ich a r e o b v io u s ly
in a p p r o p r ia te .       Paragraphs 9 . 3 - 9 . 1 5 o f s e c t io n 9 above c o n ta in
g u i d a n c e o n m an y o f t h e c h a r g e s i n t h e d i s c i p l i n e c o d e a n d s h o u l d
b e c o n s u l t e d b e f o r e a n y d e c i s i o n i s m ade w h e t h e r a c h a r g e s h o u l d
b e b ro u g h t.           S e c t i o n 104 o f t h e 1984 A c t , w h ic h d e a l s w it h
d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s a g a i n s t a p o l i c e o f f i c e r who h a s b e e n
c o n v ic te d or a c q u itte d o f a c r im in a l o f f e n c e ,                m ay a l s o b e
r e le v a n t to th e p o lic e a u th o r ity 's d e c isio n .


*   But     see     paragraph         10.3         in    regard        to     g u id a n c e    on     th e
    fo r m u la tio n o f c h a r g e s .

9/91                                              1001
1 0 . 3 a I t i s t h e S e c r e ta r y o f S t a t e ' s v ie w t h a t t h e d is c h a r g e o f
i t s d i s c i p l i n a r y f u n c t io n s in r e l a t i o n t o s e n io r o f f i c e r s sh o u ld
be reg a rd ed by a p o l i c e a u th o r ity a s a j u d i c i a l fu n c tio n in
r e s p e c t o f w h ic h l e g a l a d v ic e s h o u ld b e s o u g h t a s a p p r o p r ia t e .
The p r o c e d u r e s a d o p te d b y t h e a u t h o r it y in t h i s r e g a r d s h o u ld a s
f a r a s p o s s i b l e r e f l e c t t h a t v ie w .        They s h o u ld p r e s e r v e s t r i c t
f a ir n e s s and im p a r t i a lit y t o a l l co n cern ed t o g e t h e r w ith s t r i c t
regard fo r th e r e le v a n t s ta tu to r y p r o v is io n s .                 In p a r tic u la r , i t
i s t h e v ie w           o f th e S e c r e ta r y o f S t a t e t h a t i t c o u ld b e h e ld t o
be co n tra ry               t o t h e r e q u ir e m e n ts o f n a t u r a l j u s t i c e           f o r an
a u t h o r i t y m em b er p e r s o n a l l y a g g r i e v e d b y a n y c o n d u c t o f a s e n i o r
o f f i c e r w h ic h h a s b e e n draw n t o t h e a t t e n t i o n o f t h e a u t h o r i t y
b y w ay o f a c o m p l a i n t m ade u n d e r t h e p r o v i s i o n s o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t
or o th e r w ise under th e p r o v is io n s o f th e P o lic e ( D is c ip lin e )
 (S e n io r O f f ic e r s ) R e g u la tio n s 1985 t o p a r t i c i p a t e in c e r t a in
d e c i s i o n s w h ich a r e r e q u ir e d t o b e ta k e n b y t h e a u t h o r i t y u n d er
th e se sta tu to r y p r o v isio n s.             T h e se d e c i s i o n s a r e : (a ) a d e c i s i o n
t o r e f e r t h e m a t t e r t o a n i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r , (b) a d e c i s i o n
t h a t d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s sh o u ld be ta k e n a g a in s t th e o f f i c e r
f o llo w in g an i n v e s t i g a t i o n ,         (c) any d e c i s i o n a s t o g u i l t o r
p u n is h m e n t upon an o f f i c e r ' s a d m is s i o n t h a t h e h a s c o m m itte d an
o ffen ce or               fo llo w in g th e r e c e ip t o f a r e p o r t o f a tr ib u n a l
e sta b lish e d           t o h e a r c h a r g e s a g a i n s t t h e o f f i c e r an d (d)               a
d e c i s i o n t o s u s p e n d t h e o f f i c e r from d u t y a s a r e s u l t o f t h e
a l l e g a t i o n m ade a g a i n s t h im .         W h ere t h e s i z e o f t h e m e m b e r s h i p
o f t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r it y p e r m its t h i s , th e y w i l l w ish t o c o n s id e r
w h eth er        th e     c o n fid e n tia lity       and      th o ro u g h n ess     w h ich       are    a
co n co m ita n t o f th e j u d i c i a l approach t o d i s c i p l i n e m a tte r s a re
n o t b e s t g u a r a n te e d b y d e l e g a t i n g t o a su b c o m m itte e o f t h e
a u t h o r it y a l l d e t a il e d c o n s id e r a tio n o f th e i s s u e s r e q u ir e d t o
b e ex a m in e d u n d e r t h e s t a t u t o r y p r o v i s i o n s .         A u t h o r i t i e s w h ich
d e te r m in e t o a d o p t t h i s ap p roach w i l l w ish t o h a v e c a r e f u l r eg a r d
t o th e sub c o m m itte e 's term s o f r e f e r e n c e t o a v o id m a tte r s
b e c o m in g s u b j e c t t o r e - e x a m i n a t i o n w hen t h e su b c o m m i t t e e ' s
 c o n c l u s io n s a r e r e p o r te d t o t h e w h o le a u t h o r i t y .          F u rth erm ore,
 i t i s t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e ' s v ie w t h a t p o l i c e o f f i c e r s a r e
 e n t i t l e d t o t h e p r iv a c y e n jo y e d b y l o c a l a u t h o r i t y e m p lo y e e s
 u n d e r p a r a g r a p h 1 o f P a r t 1 o f S c h e d u l e 12A t o t h e L o c a l
 G overnm ent A ct 1972.

10.3b         A d e c isio n        by       a    p o lic e   a u th o r ity     to     in itia te      an
i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f a c o m p la in t o r o th e r a l l e g a t i o n a g a in s t a s e n io r
o f f i c e r m u st b e r e g a r d e d a s a m a tte r o f l e g i t i m a t e p u b lic
in te r e st.          In i t s r e l a t i o n s w it h t h e m e d ia , h o w e v e r , t h e p o l i c e
a u t h o r it y w i l l w ish t o h a v e r e g a r d t o t h e j u d i c i a l n a tu r e o f t h i s
a s p e c t o f i t s f u n c t io n s and in p a r t ic u l a r t o t h e d a n g er t h a t th e
p r o c e e d in g s c o u ld b e h e ld t o b e p r e j u d ic e d b y w id e p u b l i c
d isc u ssio n           of    th e     m a tters       under       in v e s tig a tio n      and      th e
c ir c u m s ta n c e s su r ro u n d in g t h e a l l e g a t i o n s .   (W h ere, h o w e v e r , t h e
i n v e s t ig a t i o n i s b e in g co n d u cted under th e s u p e r v is io n o f th e
P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y , i n q u i r i e s a b o u t t h e p r o g r e s s o f t h e
i n v e s t ig a t i o n sh o u ld be r e fe r r e d t o th e A u t h o r it y ) .             In o th er
c a s e s , t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y w i l l f i n d i t h e l p f u l t o d e c i d e a t an
e a r l y s t a g e w ho s h o u l d c o n d u c t i t s r e l a t i o n s w i t h t h e m e d i a i n
t h e c o u r s e o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n and o f s u b s e q u e n t a c t i o n .       The
m em b er o r o f f i c e r s o a p p o i n t e d s h o u l d n o r m a l l y h a n d l e q u e s t i o n s

 9/91                                               1002
about such m a tters a s th e d e c is io n t o in v e s t ig a t e th e a lle g a t io n s
th a t    have     been    m ade,    th e   p o sitio n   of     th e   officer      under
in v e s tig a tio n , th e p ro g ress o f th e in v e s tig a tio n , and, a f t e r th e
in v e stig a tio n    rep o rt has been r e c e iv e d ,    th e a c tio n s     o f th e
a u th o r ity .

ACTION ON RECEIPT OP A COMPLAINT

10.4         S e c tio n 86(1)       of      the      1984     A ct      p la c e s    upon       p o lic e
a u t h o r i t i e s th e d u ty t o r e c o r d c o m p la in ts a g a in s t o f f i c e r s fo r
whom t h e y c o n s t i t u t e t h e a p p r o p r i a t e a u t h o r i t y .    T h ere a fte r th ey
a r e em pow ered           (b y s e c t i o n      86(2))    to      d e a l w ith       th e m atter
a cco r d in g t o t h e ir d is c r e t io n i f s a t i s f i e d th a t th e con d u ct
c o m p la in e d o f , e v e n i f p r o v e d , w o u ld n o t j u s t i f y a c r i m i n a l o r
d is c ip lin a r y     charge.          T h is i s      th e broad e q u iv a le n t o f th e
in f o r m a l r e s o l u t i o n p r o v i s i o n i n r e g a r d t o o f f i c e r s o f lo w e r
r a n k s, b u t i t w i l l b e n o te d t h a t t h e c o n s e n t o f t h e c o m p la in a n t
i s n o t r e q u ir e d b e f o r e a c a s e o f t h i s k in d i s h a n d le d b y in fo r m a l
m eans? i n t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e ' s v ie w i t s h o u l d b e o p e n t o
p o lic e      a u th o r itie s    to     ta k e     w h atever       a c tio n     th ey    c o n sid e r
a p p r o p r ia te in d e a lin g w ith su ch m a t t e r s , in c a s e s w here form al
p r o c e e d in g s a re n o t in d ic a te d .       Sub s e c t i o n (3 ) p r o v i d e s t h a t i n
any o th e r c a s e th e p o l i c e a u t h o r it y sh o u ld a p p o in t an o f f i c e r ( o f
a t l e a s t t h e r a n k o f t h e o f f i c e r c o m p la in e d o f ) from i t s f o r c e
o r fro m som e o t h e r f o r c e t o i n v e s t i g a t e t h e c o m p l a i n t ; an d i f a
c h i e f o f f i c e r i s a sk ed t o p r o v id e an o f f i c e r t o b e s o a p p o in te d ,
t h a t c h i e f o f f i c e r i s r e q u ir e d b y su b s e c t i o n (4 ) t o c o m p ly w it h
th e req u est.

10.5          S e c t i o n 8 4 ( 5 ) o f t h e 1984 A c t m akes i t c l e a r t h a t t h e
c o m p la in ts sy ste m i s n o t a p p lic a b le t o m a tte r s a f f e c t i n g th e
d ir e c tio n or c o n tr o l o f th e fo r c e by th e c h ie f o f f i c e r , or th e
p e r so n p erfo rm in g th e f u n c tio n s o f th e c h i e f o f f i c e r .                      The
c o m p la in t s s y s te m i s t h e m eans o f r e v ie w in g t h e c o n d u c t o f p o l i c e
o f f i c e r s , n o t a d e v i c e f o r c h a l l e n g i n g t h e ( l e g i t i m a t e ) way i n
w h ic h t h e d i s c r e t i o n v e s t e d i n th em h a s b e e n e x e r c i s e d .        P o lic e
a u t h o r i t i e s m ay w i s h t o r e p l y t h e m s e l v e s , a f t e r c o n s u l t i n g t h e
c h i e f o f f i c e r , t o c o m p la in ts a b o u t th e p o l i c i n g p o l i c y o f th e
fo r c e a r e a , o r to p a ss such m a tters t o th e c h ie f o f f i c e r t o d ea l
w ith ; b u t i t w i l l n o t be a p p r o p r ia te in such c a s e s t o h ave r e s o r t
t o t h e p r o v i s i o n s o f P a r t IX o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t .

THE INVESTIGATION                 OP    COMPLAINTS          AND     OTHER MATTERS              INVOLVING
SENIOR OFFICERS

10.6         W here t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y d e c i d e t h a t a c o m p l a i n t o r a n y
m a t t e r w h i c h i n d i c a t e s t h a t a s e n i o r o f f i c e r m ay h a v e c o m m i t t e d
a      c r im in a l     or     d isc ip lin a r y       o ffen ce          sh o u ld    be       fo r m a lly
i n v e s t ig a t e d , th e y w i l l c o n s id e r w h eth er i t               is n ecessary or
d e s ir a b le t o b r in g th e c a s e t o th e a t t e n t io n o f th e P o lic e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y .      S e c t i o n 8 7 ( 1 ) ( a ) ( i ) and R e g u la t io n 4 ( 1 )
o f t h e P o l i c e (C o m p la in ts ) (M an d atory R e f e r r a l s e t c ) R e g u l a t i o n s
1985 p r o v id e t h a t c e r t a i n c o m p la in ts a l l e g i n g s e r i o u s m isc o n d u c t
m u st b e r e f e r r e d t o t h e A u th o r ity w it h in tim e l i m i t s s e t o u t in
t h o s e R e g u la t io n s and in t h e P o l i c e                   (C o m p la in ts)     (G e n e r a l)
R e g u la tio n s 1985.             The A u t h o r i t y a r e , h o w e v e r ,         r e q u ir e d t o

9/91                                                1003
s u p e r v is e o n ly th e in v e s t ig a t io n o f a ll e g a t io n s t h a t d ea th or
s e r io u s in ju r y h as been cau sed by th e a c tio n s o f a p o lic e
o f f i c e r ? th e y have d is c r e tio n to su p e r v ise th e in v e s t ig a t io n o f
any m atter brought to t h e ir a tte n tio n by th e p o lic e a u th o r ity ,
a n d f u r t h e r m o r e m ay a s k t o h a v e s u b m i t t e d t o t h e m a n y o t h e r
c o m p la in t,     to    e n a b le th e d e c is io n        t o b e ta k en w h eth er t o
su p e r v ise th e in v e s t ig a t io n .     P o lic e a u t h o r it ie s a re r e q u ir e d by
t h e A c t t o co m p ly w i t h s u c h a r e q u e s t .        ( I t i s u n lik e ly th a t th e
A u th o r ity w i l l w ish t o c o n s id e r s u p e r v is io n in r e s p e c t o f a
c o m p la in t w h ich t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y h a s a lr e a d y d e c id e d t o t r e a t
o th e r w is e th a n by form al i n v e s t i g a t i o n .        B ut i f t h e A u t h o r it y do
co n c lu d e t h a t an i n v e s t ig a t i o n under t h e i r s u p e r v is io n i s c a l le d
f o r , t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y w i l l b e o b l i g e d t o c o m p ly w i t h t h a t
ju d g e m e n t.)      In d e c i d i n g t o i n v i t e t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y t o
c o n s id e r t h e s u p e r v is io n o f an i n v e s t i g a t i o n , p o l i c e a u t h o r i t i e s
w i l l w ish t o h a v e reg a r d t o th e r o l e o f th e A u th o r ity a s
p r o v id in g a p u b lic d e m o n str a tio n t h a t th e i n v e s t i g a t i o n h a s b een
p r o p e r ly co n d u cted .      I t m ay b e p a r t i c u l a r l y i m p o r t a n t t o p r o v i d e
t h a t p u b lic r ea ssu ra n ce in c a s e s in v o lv in g v e r y s e n io r o f f i c e r s
o f th e fo rce.

10.7         I f t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y s u p e r v i s e t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n
t h e y m ay c h o o s e t o e x e r c i s e t h e i r r i g h t , u n d e r s e c t i o n 8 9 ( 4 ) o f
t h e 1984 A c t, t o a p p ro v e t h e a p p o in tm e n t o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g
o f f i c e r o r , i f t h e a p p o in tm e n t h a s a lr e a d y b e e n m ade, t o a s k f o r
a n o th e r o f f i c e r t o b e a p p o in te d .

CONDUCT OP INVESTIGATIONS

10.8          R e g u la tio n      6 r e q u ir e s th a t th e in v e s t ig a t in g        o ffic e r
s h o u ld , a s soon a s i s p r a c t ic a b le (w ith o u t p r e j u d ic in g h i s o r any
o t h e r i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f t h e m a tte r ) i n w r i t i n g in fo r m t h e s e n i o r
o f f i c e r su b jec t to in v e stig a tio n o f th e rep o rt, a lle g a tio n or
c o m p l a i n t , a n d g i v e h im w r i t t e n n o t i c e - ( a ) i n f o r m i n g h i m t h a t
he i s n o t o b lig e d t o sa y a n y th in g c o n c e r n in g th e m a tte r , b u t th a t
h e m ay, i f h e s o d e s i r e s , m ake a w r i t t e n o r o r a l s t a t e m e n t t o t h e
i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r o r t o t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y ? an d (b) w a r n in g
h im t h a t i f h e m a k e s s u c h a s t a t e m e n t i t m ay b e u s e d i n a n y
su b seq u en t d is c ip lin a r y p r o c e e d in g s.

10.9          The p r o c e d u r e t o b e f o ll o w e d i n an y i n v e s t i g a t i o n i s
e n t i r e l y a m a tte r f o r th e o f f i c e r a p p o in te d t o c a r r y i t o u t,
s u b j e c t t o a n y d i r e c t i o n s g i v e n h im b y t h e C o m p l a in t s A u t h o r i t y
in th e c a s e o f in v e s t ig a t io n s under i t s s u p e r v is io n .              G eneral
g u id a n c e on t h e c o n d u c t o f c o m p la in ts i n v e s t i g a t i o n s i s g iv e n in
paragraphs 4 .1 6 - 4 .2 5 .

INVESTIGATING O FFIC ER 'S REPORT

10.10        When        th e     in v e s tig a tin g     officer       has    c o m p le te d       th e
in v e s t ig a t i o n o r h a s ta k en i t a s fa r a s he r e a so n a b ly ca n , he
s h o u ld su b m it a r e p o r t t o t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r it y              (o r t o th e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y w it h a co p y t o t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y , in t h e
c a se o f a su p e r v ise d in v e s t ig a t i o n ) .         W here i t b e c o m e s c l e a r t o
t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r in t h e c o u r s e o f a form al i n v e s t i g a t i o n
t h a t th e c o m p la in t i s ill- f o u n d e d o r t h a t th e e f f o r t in p u r su in g

9/91                                               1004
i t w o u l d b e d i s p r o p o r t i o n a t e i t i s o p e n t o h im t o p r e p a r e a n
e a r l y r e p o r t reco m m en d in g t o t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y ( o r t o t h e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y i f t h e c a s e h a s b e e n s u p e r v is e d ) t h a t i t i s
n o t w orth p u r su in g t h e m a tte r f u r t h e r .         ( I t w i l l be n o ted th a t,
u n d e r t h e new R e g u l a t i o n s , t h e a g r e e m e n t o f t h e C o m p l a in t s
A u th o r ity i s r e q u ir e d b e fo r e c o m p la in ts a r e t r e a t e d by th e p o li c e
a u th o r ity       as     anonym ous,           r e p e titio u s      or      in c a p a b le   of
in v e s tig a tio n ).

1 0 .1 0 a The i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r ' s r e p o r t ( i n c l u d i n g a c c o m p a n y in g
s t a t e m e n t s a n d e x h i b i t s ) , l i k e a n y o t h e r p o l i c e r e p o r t , i s m ad e
in c o n fid e n c e .      I t m u s t n o t , e i t h e r w h o l l y o r i n p a r t , b e m ad e
a v a i l a b l e t o p e r s o n s o t h e r t h a n a u t h o r i t y m em bers o f s t a f f and
m u st b e h a n d le d a t a l l t im e s a s a c o n f i d e n t i a l d ocu m en t.

ACTION ON RECEIVING INVESTIGATING O F FIC E R 'S REPORT

1 0 . 1 1 W here i t a p p e a r s t o t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y , o n r e c e i v i n g t h e
i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r ' s r e p o r t , t h a t a s e n i o r o f f i c e r m ay h a v e
c o m m itte d a d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e , t h e a u t h o r i t y a r e r e q u ir e d by
R e g u la tio n 7 (1 ) t o c o n s id e r w h eth er d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s need
to be ta k en .           In t h e c a s e o f a c o m p la in t (o r a n o th e r m a tte r w hose
i n v e s t i g a t i o n w as s u p e r v is e d b y t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y u n d er
th e p r o v isio n s o f s e c tio n                88 o f t h e 1984 A c t)              th e p o lic e
a u t h o r it y a r e r e q u ir e d by s e c t io n 9 0 (1 ) o f th e A ct t o sen d a copy
o f th e r e p o r t t o th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic P r o se c u tio n s u n le s s th e
report          s a tisfie s        th em     th a t     no    c r im in a l   offen ce       has    been
c o m m itte d .

1 0 .1 2 A t t h e en d o f an i n v e s t i g a t i o n w h ich t h e y h a v e s u p e r v is e d ,
t h e C o m p la in t s A u t h o r i t y a r e r e q u i r e d u n d e r s e c t i o n 89 o f t h e
1984 A c t , t o s u b m it t o t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y (and t h e c o m p la in a n t ,
w here p r a c t i c a b le t o do so ) a s ta te m e n t w h eth er t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n
w as o r w as n o t c o n d u c t e d t o t h e i r s a t i s f a c t i o n and s p e c i f y i n g any
r e s p e c t in w h ich             i t was n o t so c o n d u c te d .         No c r i m i n a l       or
d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s may b e b r o u g h t u n t i l t h i s s t a t e m e n t h a s b e e n
su b m itte d t o th e               p o lic e a u th o r ity - ex cep t in th e c a se                   of
p rop osed c r im in a l             charges         w here i t a p p ears t o th e D ir e c to r o f
P u b lic P r o se c u tio n s t h a t th e r e a re e x c e p tio n a l c ircu m sta n ce s
w h i c h m ake i t            u n d e sir a b le t o      a w a it th e     su b m issio n o f th e
sta tem en t.

1 0 .1 3 R e g u la tio n 7 (2 ) p r o v id e s t h a t , u n le s s t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r it y
d e c id e t h a t no d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s n eed b e ta k e n , th e y
s h o u ld in fo r m t h e s e n i o r o f f i c e r in w r i t i n g o f t h e r e p o r t ,
a l l e g a t i o n o r c o m p l a i n t a n d g i v e h im a w r i t t e n n o t i c e (a ) a s k i n g
h im w h e t h e r o r n o t h e a d m i t s t h a t h e h a s c o m m it t e d a n o f f e n c e ;
(b)       i n f o r m i n g h im t h a t h e i s         n ot o b lig e d to         sa y a n y th in g
c o n c e r n i n g t h e m a t t e r b u t t h a t h e m a y , i f h e s o d e s i r e s , m ak e a
w r itte n or o r a l sta tem en t to th e p o lic e a u th o r ity ;                        and (c)
w a r n i n g h im t h a t i f h e m a k e s s u c h a s t a t e m e n t i t m ay b e u s e d i n
any su b seq u en t d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s .

1 0 . 1 4 W here t h e s e n i o r o f f i c e r a d m i t s t h a t h e h a s c o m m it t e d an
o f f e n c e th e p o l i c e a u t h o r it y , h a v in g c o n s id e r e d th e r e p o r t o f th e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n , m ay e i t h e r ( a ) b r i n g d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s , o r (b )

9/91                                                1005
im p o se a p u n ish m e n t w it h o u t p r e f e r r i n g c h a r g e s and w i t h o u t a
h e a r in g , o r (c) i f s a t i s f i e d t h a t th e o f f e n c e , ev e n i f p ro v ed ,
w o u ld n o t j u s t i f y t h e i m p o s i t i o n o f a p u n is h m e n t, d e a l w i t h t h e
m a tter a cco r d in g t o t h e ir d is c r e t io n .

1 0 . 1 5 W here t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d d o e s n o t a d m it t h a t h e h a s
c o m m itte d an o f f e n c e b u t t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y , a f t e r t a k i n g i n t o
a c c o u n t a n y s t a t e m e n t h e may h a v e m a d e u n d e r R e g u l a t i o n 7 , a r e
n o t so s a t i s f i e d , th e y a r e r e q u ir e d by R e g u la tio n 9 t o b r in g
d is c ip lin a r y ch arges u n le ss th ey a re s a t is f ie d th a t th e o ffe n c e ,
even        if     proved,        w o u ld n o t    ju stify      th e     im p o sitio n      of      any
p u n i s h m e n t ( i n w h i c h c a s e t h e y m ay d e a l w i t h t h e m a t t e r a c c o r d i n g
to th e ir d is c r e tio n ).

1 0 .1 5 a R e g u la tio n 9 p r o v id e s f o r th e fo r m u la tio n o f c h a r g e s in
a c a s e w here th e p o l i c e a u th o r ity d e te r m in e s o r i s r e q u ir e d to
b r in g d is c ip l in a r y ch a rg es in th e c ir c u m sta n c e s d e s c r ib e d in
p aragrap h 1 0 .1 4 o r 1 0 .1 5 a b o v e.                  In such a c a s e th e p o lic e
a u t h o r i t y m u st i n s t r u c t an 'i n d e p e n d e n t s o l i c i t o r ' t o draw up t h e
o f f e n c e w it h w h ic h t h e o f f i c e r i s t o b e c h a r g e d and e n t e r i t on
th e       d isc ip lin e      form      p r e sc r ib e d     in    th e        S c h e d u le    to    th e
R e g u la tio n s.     The o f f e n c e o r o f f e n c e s s h o u ld b e a s s e t o u t i n t h e
D isc ip lin e       Code        (see     a lso     paragraph          1 0 .3 );        it     sh o u ld  be
a c c o m p a n ie d o n t h e sam e form b y s u c h p a r t i c u l a r s a s w i l l l e a v e
t h e o f f i c e r in no dou bt a s t o th e p r e c i s e o f f e n c e a l l e g e d .                The
o f f i c e r con cern ed w i l l th e n be ch arged by b e in g s e r v e d w ith a
co p y o f t h e d i s c i p l i n e form .

1 0 .1 5 b T h is R e g u l a t i o n d e f i n e s t h e 'in d e p e n d e n t s o l i c i t o r ' a s 'a
s o l i c i t o r who i s         n o t a m em ber,            o ffic e r     or serv a n t o f th e
a p p r o p r ia t e a u t h o r i t y o r o f any l o c a l a u t h o r i t y w h ich a p p o in t s
a n y m em b er o f t h e a p p r o p r i a t e a u t h o r i t y ' .        (R e g u la tio n 4 (2 ) h as
t h e e f f e c t o f e x c l u d i n g a s o l i c i t o r w ho i s a m em b er o f t h e
m e tr o p o lita n c i v i l s t a f f s w here t h e a p p r o p r ia te a u t h o r it y i s th e
C o m m issio n er o f P o l i c e o f t h e M e t r o p o l i s ) .          I t i s th e S ecreta ry
o f S t a t e ' s v i e w t h a t t h i s d e f i n i t i o n s e t s t h e m in im u m p r a c t i c a l
l i m i t a t i o n s on t h e c h o ic e o f t h e in d e p e n d e n t s o l i c i t o r .       In th e
i n t e r e s t s o f d e m o n s t r a b l e f a i r n e s s , a p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y m ay a l s o
w is h t o e x c l u d e from a p p o in tm e n t u n d e r t h i s R e g u l a t i o n any
s o lic ito r        w ho h a s       in     th e    recent p ast           had a p r o f e s s i o n a l
a s s o c i a t i o n w ith th e a u th o r ity i t s e l f o r w ith any l o c a l a u t h o r it y
w h ic h a p p o i n t s i t s m em bers o r w i t h t h e o f f i c e r s u b j e c t o f t h e
p ro c e e d in g s.

RIGHTS OF THE ACCUSED OFFICER

1 0 . 1 6 W here a s e n i o r o f f i c e r i s c h a r g e d w i t h an o f f e n c e h e m u st
b e p r e s e n t e d w it h c o p i e s o f t h e e v i d e n c e and in fo r m e d o f t h e d a t e
o f th e d is c ip lin a r y h ea rin g a s soon a s p o s s ib le a f t e r th e
d e c is io n t o p ro ceed w ith a d is c ip l in a r y ch a rg e.               T h is sh o u ld be
done a t l e a s t 21 d a y s b e f o r e t h e d a t e o f t h e h e a r in g .                  The
d i s c i p l i n a r y f o r m s e r v e d u p o n h im s h o u l d l e a v e h i m i n n o d o u b t
as to th e p r e c is e o ffen ce a lle g e d .

1 0 . 1 7 When t h e a b o v e p a p e r s a r e s e r v e d t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r s h o u l d
b e r e m i n d e d t h a t h e may c o n s u l t a n d b e r e p r e s e n t e d a t t h e h e a r i n g

9/91                                               1006
by     a lawyer.
1 0 .1 8 A ll r e a s o n a b le r e q u e s ts by th e a c c u se d o f f i c e r f o r th e
a tte n d a n c e o f w it n e s s e s sh o u ld be a cced ed t o .            T h is p r o v is io n
sh o u ld a p p ly e q u a lly in t h o s e c a s e s w here by v i r t u e o f R e g u la tio n
8 (1 ) no d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r in g i s t o b e h e ld and t h e w i t n e s s e s a r e
t h e r e f o r e b e in g c a l le d o n ly t o su p p o rt th e a ccu sed o f f i c e r ' s p le a
o f m itig a tio n .           Such r e q u e s t s by an a c c u s e d o f f i c e r sh o u ld
n o r m a l l y b e m ade i n w r i t i n g t o t h e a p p r o p r i a t e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y
a t l e a s t 14 d a y s b e f o r e t h e d a t e s e t f o r h i s h e a r i n g .

R ESPONSIBILITY FOR ARRANGING THE HEARING

1 0 .1 9      The r e s p o n s i b i l i t y f o r a r r a n g in g t h e h e a r in g o f any
d i s c i p l i n a r y ch arge r e s t s w ith th e a p p r o p r ia te p o li c e a u th o r ity .
T hey w i l l , i n c o n s u l t a t i o n w it h t h e t r i b u n a l m em bers, f i x t h e
d a t e and tim e f o r t h e h e a r in g .         They w i l l a l s o a r r a n g e f o r t h e
t a k i n g o f a r e c o r d o f t h e p r o c e e d i n g s , and e n s u r e t h a t t h e
a c c u s e d o f f i c e r and any w i t n e s s e s ( i n c l u d i n g t h e c o m p la in a n t in
c a s e s a r i s i n g from a c o m p la in t ) a r e n o t i f i e d .

HEARING BY A TRIBUNAL (REGULATION 1 2 )

1 0 .2 0 T h is R e g u la tio n p r o v id e s t h a t th e c a s e a g a in s t a s e n io r
o f f i c e r sh o u ld b e h eard by a t r ib u n a l c o n s i s t i n g o f a s i n g l e
p e r s o n a p p o in t e d b y t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y from a l i s t o f p e r s o n s
n o m in a te d b y t h e Lord C h a n c e llo r .         He w i l l b e a s s i s t e d b y o n e o r
m ore a s s e s s o r s       a p p o in te d by th e p o l i c e          a u th o r ity w ith h is
a p p r o v a l.    O ne o f t h e a s s e s s o r s m u s t b e a s e r v i n g o r f o r m e r c h i e f
o f f i c e r , b u t t h e R e g u l a t i o n p r e c l u d e s t h e a p p o in tm e n t a s an
a s s e s s o r o f a p e r s o n w h o i s o n e o f HM I n s p e c t o r s o f C o n s t a b u l a r y ;
t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r o f t h e f o r c e c o n c e r n e d ; a m em ber, o f f i c e r o r
s e r v a n t o f t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y c o n c e r n e d ; o r a m em ber, o f f i c e r
o r s e r v a n t o f a n y l o c a l a u t h o r i t y w h i c h a p p o i n t s a n y m em b er o f
th e p o lic e          a u th o r ity .      T h is e n a b le s      in    s u ita b le  cases       an
a d d i t i o n a l ' l a y ' a s s e s s o r t o b e a p p o i n t e d who h a s e x p e r i e n c e o f
l o c a l a u t h o r it y m a t t e r s , p r o v id e d t h a t h e i s n o t c o n n e c te d w ith
th e p o lic e or lo c a l a u th o r ity concerned.

PROCEDURE AT HEARING

1 0 .2 1 R e g u la tio n 1 3 (1 ) p r o v id e s t h a t th e d is c ip l in a r y h e a r in g
s h a ll be in p r iv a te .       I t i s s u g g e s t e d t h a t t h e sam e d e g r e e o f
p r iv a c y i s fo llo w e d in th o s e c a s e s w here, by v ir t u e o f R e g u la tio n
8 (1 ) , t h e r e a r e t o b e no d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s b u t t h e p o l i c e
a u th o r ity a re t o h ea r e v id e n c e in m it ig a t io n .

1 0 . 2 2 S t a t e m e n t s t a k e n from w i t n e s s e s o r o t h e r p e r s o n s b y an
i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r w h ich a r e p r o v id e d t o an a c c u s e d o f f i c e r
u n d er R e g u la t io n 11 s h o u ld n o t b e p la c e d b e f o r e t h e t r i b u n a l in
advance o f th e h e a r in g .              At th e h e a r in g th e t r ib u n a l sh o u ld be
p r o v id e d o n ly w it h t h e d i s c i p l i n e form , i n d i c a t i n g t h e c h a r g e s
to be heard.                 I f d u r in g t h e p r o c e e d in g s t h e a c c u se d o r h i s
r e p r e s e n t a t i v e o r t h e s o l i c i t o r p r e s e n t i n g t h e c a s e a g a i n s t h im
w i s h e s t o i n t r o d u c e i n t o e v i d e n c e a w r i t t e n s t a t e m e n t from a
w i t n e s s who i s c a l l e d t o g i v e e v i d e n c e h e s h o u l d b e a l l o w e d t o

9/91                                              1007
do s o .        W here t h e w i t n e s s i s n o t c a l l e d t o g i v e e v i d e n c e ,           any
s t a t e m e n t from a w i t n e s s s h o u l d b e c o n s i d e r e d o n l y i f                   th e
r e q u ir e m e n t s o f R e g u la t io n 11 h a v e b e e n f u l f i l l e d .

EVIDENCE

1 0 .2 3 I t i s t h e v ie w o f t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e t h a t i t i s n o t
n e c e ssa r y to fo llo w e x a c tly th e p roced u res o f a c r im in a l t r i a l ,
and in p a r t i c u l a r a d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r in g n eed n o t b e bound by
te c h n ic a l r u le s o f ev id e n c e .           W h ere d o c u m e n t a r y e v i d e n c e ( s u c h
a s c o p i e s o f p la n s and t r a n s c r i p t s o f c o u r t p r o c e e d in g s ) a r e
a c c e p te d by b oth s id e s ,              it    is    n o t n e c e s s a r y t o p ro v e such
e v id e n c e fo r m a lly .          G reat c a r e sh o u ld , h ow ever, be ta k en w ith
h e a r s a y e v id e n c e , w h ich i s t o b e d e f in e d a s u n s u b s t a n t ia t e d
s t a t e m e n t s o f f e r e d by w i t n e s s e s b a se d upon w hat som eone e l s e h a s
s a i d and n o t upon p e r s o n a l k n o w led g e o r o b s e r v a t i o n .                     Such
e v id e n c e sh o u ld be a d m itte d o n ly u n der t h e f o llo w in g c o n d it io n s .
F i r s t , t h e r e s h o u l d b e r e a s o n s w h i c h m ake i t i m p r a c t i c a b l e f o r
t h e o r i g i n a t o r o f t h e e v i d e n c e ( i e t h e p e r s o n who p a s s e d t h e
in fo r m a tio n on t o th e h e a r sa y w itn e s s ) t o g iv e e v id e n c e h im s e lf ,
f o r ex a m p le b e c a u s e h e h a s d i e d i n t h e m ea n tim e.              S e c o n d ly , th e
e v id e n c e sh o u ld c l e a r l y be r e le v a n t t o th e ch a rg e o r c h a r g e s.
T h ir d ly ,       e v e r y e f f o r t s h o u l d b e m ad e n o t o n l y t o t e s t t h e
r e l i a b i l i t y o f t h e e v i d e n c e , f o r e x a m p le b y c o m p a r in g i t w i t h t h e
a v a ila b le d ir e c t ev id e n c e , but a ls o to a s s e s s th e r e l i a b i l i t y o f
th e w itn e ss h im se lf in s o fa r as t h is i s p o s s ib le .                         Even w here
t h e s e c o n d i t i o n s a r e s a t i s f i e d and t h e e v i d e n c e i s a d m it t e d , t h e
t r ib u n a l sh o u ld t r e a t i t w ith c a u tio n and, in i t s r e p o r t t o th e
p o l i c e a u t h o r it y , sh o u ld s p e c i f y t h e e x t e n t t o w h ich i t r e l i e d
on i t        in r e la tio n to            its      reco m m en d a tio n on f i n d i n g a n d /o r
p u n ish m en t.

STANDARD OF PROOF

1 0 .2 4     R e g u la tio n     18(2 )     of    th e    P o lic e (D isc ip lin e )    (S e n io r
O f f ic e r s ) R e g u la tio n s 1985 p r o v id e s t h a t th e r e q u ir e d stan d ard
o f p r o o f i n a d i s c i p l i n a r y c a s e i s t h e sam e a s t h a t a t a c r i m i n a l
tr ia l.       Thus in o r d e r f o r a s e n i o r o f f i c e r t o b e fo u n d g u i l t y a t
a d isc ip lin a r y          h e a r in g ,  t h e o f f e n c e m ust b e p r o v e d beyon d
r e a s o n a b le d o u b t and n o t , a s in c i v i l p r o c e e d in g s , on t h e b a la n c e
o f p r o b a b ilitie s.

ADJOURNMENTS

1 0 . 2 5 T h e h e a r i n g m ay b e a d j o u r n e d f r o m t i m e t o t i m e a s may
appear n e c e ssa r y , e it h e r b r ie f ly or u n t il a la t e r d a te .                        If
d u r i n g t h e h e a r i n g o f a c a s e f a c t s e m e r g e w h ic h e s t a b l i s h a p r im a
f a c i e c r im in a l c a s e , th e t r ib u n a l sh o u ld i f n e c e s s a r y ad jou rn th e
h e a r in g t o c o n s id e r w hat a c tio n i s a p p r o p r ia te a s a r e s u l t .

CONCLUSION OF HEARING

1 0 .2 6 As soon a s p o s s i b l e a f t e r th e c o n c lu s io n o f t h e h e a r in g th e
t r i b u n a l s h o u ld su b m it a r e p o r t t o t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y , t o g e t h e r
w it h t h e t r a n s c r i p t o f t h e h e a r i n g , g i v i n g t h e i r reco m m en d a tio n
on f i n d i n g and p u n ish m e n t.        I t i s th e v ie w o f th e S e c r e ta r y o f

9/91                                               1008
S t a t e t h a t t h e p o l i c e a u th o r ity sh o u ld a s a m a tte r o f c o u r se
r e g a r d t h e r e p o r t o f t h e t r i b u n a l a s b in d in g on th em a s t o
f in d in g b u t t h a t , w here th e fin d in g i s one o f g u i l t , i t i s w ith in
t h e i r d i s c r e t i o n t o a c c e p t o r r e j e c t t h e rec o m m en d a tio n a s t o
p u n ish m en t.

1 0 . 2 7 I f a p u n is h m e n t i s im p o se d b y t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y t h e
a c c u s e d o f f i c e r s h o u ld b e in fo rm ed t h a t h e h a s t h e r i g h t o f
a p p e a l a g a i n s t b o th f i n d i n g and p u n ish m en t t o t h e S e c r e t a r y o f
S ta te.        I f he in d ic a t e s t h a t he in te n d s t o a p p e a l, a copy o f th e
t r a n s c r i p t o f t h e h e a r i n g s h o u l d b e s u p p l i e d t o h im .

MEDICAL TREATMENT

1 0 . 2 8 An o f f i c e r ' s m e d i c a l c o n d i t i o n i s         a f a c t o r w h i c h may
v a l i d l y f ig u r e in th e d e c is io n w h eth er t o i n i t i a t e o r p ro ceed
w ith d is c ip lin a r y p ro ced u res.                I t i s , f o r ex a m p le , op en t o a
p o l i c e a u t h o r it y t o d e c id e n o t t o i n i t i a t e p r o c e e d in g s w here
e v id e n c e s u g g e s t s t h a t an o f f i c e r ' s m e d ic a l c o n d it io n p la y e d a
m a jo r r o l e i n t h e co m m issio n o f t h e a l l e g e d o f f e n c e a g a i n s t
d i s c i p l i n e and w h ere t h e n a tu r e o f t h e o f f e n c e i s su c h t h a t i t
c a n n o t c l e a r l y b e show n t o b e i n t h e p u b l i c i n t e r e s t o r i n t h e
in t e r e s t s o f th e fo r c e or th e o f f ic e r concerned to i n i t i a t e
p r o c e e d i n g s . A s i m i l a r a p p r o a c h m ay b e a d o p t e d w h e r e i t i s c l e a r
t h a t an o f f i c e r ' s m e d ic a l c o n d it io n i s su ch t h a t t h e i n i t i a t i o n
o f p r o c e e d in g s m ig h t le a d t o h i s m e d ic a l breakdow n.                           W h ere
m e d ic a l e v id e n c e o f t h e k in d d e s c r ib e d a b o v e em erges o n ly a f t e r
c h a r g e s h a v e b e e n l a i d a g a i n s t an o f f i c e r , i t w o u ld b e o p en t o
a p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y t o c o n s i d e r a b a n d o n in g p r o c e e d in g s b e f o r e any
d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r in g t a k e s p la c e by e x e r c i s i n g t h e i r pow er t o
w ith d r a w c h a r g e s u n d e r R e g u l a t i o n 10 o f t h e P o l i c e ( D i s c i p l i n e )
 (S e n io r O f f ic e r s ) R e g u la tio n s .         No s i m i l a r p o w e r t o w i t h d r a w
ch a rg es e x i s t s w here a h e a r in g h as a lr e a d y begun.                        In such a
c a s e , an o f f i c e r ' s m e d ic a l c o n d i t i o n m ig h t p r o v id e c a u s e f o r
a d j o u r n i n g a h e a r i n g a n d may i n a n y e v e n t b y c o n s i d e r e d i n
m i t i g a t i o n o f t h e p e n a lt y t o b e aw arded i f t h e a l l e g a t i o n s a r e
fo u n d t o b e p r o v e d .

1 0 .2 9 I f a t any s t a g e o f t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e s s an a c c u se d
o f f i c e r ' s m e d ic a l c o n d it io n (w h eth er o r n o t i t c o n t r ib u t e d t o th e
a l l e g e d o f f e n c e o r m ig h t le a d t o a breakdow n i f t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y
p r o c e s s i f p u r su e d ) i s fo u n d t o b e s u c h t h a t h e w o u ld n o r m a lly
b e g r a n te d m e d ic a l r e tir e m e n t, th e d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e s s sh o u ld
n o t n e c e s s a r ily p rev en t or d e la y r e tir e m e n t.       In such a c a s e , i t
w i l l b e f o r th e p o l i c e a u th o r ity t o c o n s id e r w h eth er th e p u b lic
i n t e r e s t and t h e i n t e r e s t s o f t h e f o r c e and o f t h e o f f i c e r
c o n c e r n e d w o u ld b e b e t t e r s e r v e d by m e d ic a l r e t i r e m e n t o r by
a llo w in g th e d is c ip lin a r y p roced u res to ta k e t h e ir co u r se .

SUSPENSION          (REGULATIONS 2 3 AND 2 4 )

1 0 . 3 0 T h e s e R e g u l a t i o n s l a y down t h e c r i t e r i a w h i c h m u s t b e
s a t i s f i e d b e fo r e a d e c is io n t o suspend a s e n io r o f f i c e r i s tak en
by a p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y and r a t i f i e d b y t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts
A u th o r ity .       In th e g r e a t m a jo r ity o f c a s e s th e d e c is io n t o
s u s p e n d w i l l n o t h a v e im m e d ia te e f f e c t . The R e g u la t io n s p r o v id e

9/91                                               1009
th a t once th e d e c is io n t o suspend a s e n io r o f f i c e r h as been
t a k e n , t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r it y w i l l n o t i f y t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y
o f th a t d e c is io n : th e A u th o r ity w i l l th en be r e q u ir e d t o n o t if y
th e p o lic e a u th o r ity a s soon a s p r a c t ic a b le o f t h e ir endorsem ent
 (o r o th e r w is e ) o f t h a t d e c i s i o n , b u t th e s u s p e n s io n w i l l n o t ta k e
e f f e c t u n t il th e p o lic e a u th o r ity have r e c e iv e d n o t if ic a t io n o f
t h a t en d orsem en t.

1 0 .3 1 T h e r e m ay, h o w e v e r , b e r a r e c a s e s o f u r g e n c y w h e r e i t w o u ld
b e w rong t o l e a v e t h e s e n i o r o f f i c e r i n p o s t w h i l e t h e C o m p la in ts
A u th o r ity rev ie w th e d e c is io n under th e p ro ced u re d e s c r ib e d in
t h e p r e v i o u s p a ra g ra p h ( f o r e x a m p le , i f h e h a s b e e n a r r e s t e d f o r
a s e r io u s c r im in a l o f f e n c e ) .       I n s u c h a c a s e t h e s u s p e n s i o n may
tak e       effect       im m e d ia te ly ,    su b ject        to       th e     p r o v iso   th a t      th e
C o m p la in t A u t h o r i t y ' s r a t i f i c a t i o n o f t h e s u s p e n s i o n m u st b e
r e c e i v e d w i t h i n 24 h o u r s o r t h e s u s p e n s i o n w i l l c e a s e t o h a v e
effect.          W h eth er o r n o t t h e d e c i s i o n t o s u s p e n d h a s b e e n t a k e n
by th e p o l i c e a u t h o r it y o r ( in th e c a s e o f d ep u ty o r a s s i s t a n t
c h ie f c o n s ta b le s ) by th e c h ie f c o n s ta b le , th e r e s p o n s i b i l i t y fo r
o b t a i n i n g t h e C o m p la in t A u t h o r i t y ' s r a t i f i c a t i o n o f t h a t d e c i s i o n
l i e s w ith th e p o li c e a u th o r ity .

1 0 .3 2 O nce a s e n i o r o f f i c e r ' s s u s p e n s i o n h a s b e e n a p p r o v e d , o r
r a t i f i e d b y t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y , t h a t s u s p e n s io n s h a l l
rem a in i n e f f e c t u n t i l t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y d i r e c t t h a t i t
be l i f t e d ; th e p o li c e a u th o r ity d e c id e t o l i f t th e su sp e n sio n ;
i t i s d e c id e d t h a t th e o f f i c e r s h a l l n o t be ch arged w ith a
d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e ; o r t h e o f f i c e r h a s b e e n s o c h a r g e d and
e i t h e r a l l t h e c h a r g e s h a v e b een d is m is s e d o r a p u n ish m en t h a s
b een im p o sed .




9/91                                                 1010
                                              SECTION 11

                                     DISCIPLINARY APPEALS

1 1 .1       S e c t i o n 103 o f t h e P o l i c e and C r im in a l E v id e n c e A c t 1984
s u b stitu te d          new       p r o v isio n s   r e la tin g     to      a p p e a ls  fo r  th o se
p r e v i o u s l y e x i s t i n g i n s e c t i o n 37 and S c h e d u le 5 t o t h e P o l i c e
A ct 1964.              R e f e r e n c e s in t h i s s e c t i o n , t o s e c t i o n 37 and t o
S c h e d u l e 5 a r e t h e r e f o r e r e f e r e n c e s t o t h e p r o v i s i o n s a s am ended
by th e 1984 A c t.                T he P o l i c e ( A p p e a l s ) R u l e s 1 9 8 5 a r e m ade u n d e r
t h e p r o v i s i o n s o f S c h e d u l e 5 an d a p p l y t o a l l a p p e a l s m ade u n d e r
s e c tio n       37,      in c lu d in g a p p e a ls by s e n io r             o ffic e r s   from t h e
d e c is io n s o f t h e ir p o lic e a u th o r ity .

NOTICE OF APPEAL

1 1 .2      R u le 4 a l l o w s an a p p e l l a n t a t o t a l p e r i o d o f 50 d a y s in
w h ic h t o su b m it a f u l l y d ocu m en ted a p p e a l (p a r a g r a p h 3 ) , th o u g h
a N o t i c e o f A p p e a l m u s t b e s u b m i t t e d w i t h i n a p e r i o d o f 22 d a y s
 (p aragrap h 2 ) .         I n s u c h c a s e s t h e p e r i o d r u n s from and i n c l u d e s
t h e d a t e on w h ich t h e a p p e ll a n t w as n o t i f i e d i n w r i t i n g o f t h e
p u n ish m en t on t h e c h a r g e in q u e s t io n : o r , w h ere t h e a p p e l l a n t h a s
a lr e a d y e x e r c is e d a r ig h t o f ap p eal t o h is c h ie f o f f i c e r , th e
d a t e on w h ich h e w as n o t i f i e d o f t h e d e c i s i o n on h i s a p p e a l
 (p aragrap h 2 ) .

1 1 .3        U n d e r p a r a g r a p h 4 , a n a p p e l l a n t m u s t , w i t h i n t h e sam e
s p e c i f i e d p e r i o d s , sen d c o p ie s o f t h e n o t i c e o f a p p e a l and o f a l l
t h e r e l a t e d d ocu m en ts t o h i s           own c h i e f o f f i c e r ;     or    i f th e
a p p e ll a n t i s a s e n i o r o f f i c e r a s d e f in e d in R u le 3 (1 ) ( o t h e r th a n
a m em b er o f t h e M e t r o p o l i t a n P o l i c e            force)     to      h is   p o lic e
a u th o r ity .

1 1 .4     U nder p a ra g ra p h 5 e i t h e r o r b o th           o f t h o s e p e r i o d s m ay b e
exten d ed by th e S e c r e ta r y o f S ta te i f                  he is s a t is f ie d       on th e
a p p lic a tio n o f th e a p p e lla n t, th a t i t i s          j u s t and r i g h t t o do s o .
A n y s u c h a p p l i c a t i o n s h o u l d m ak e c l e a r    t h e g ro u n d s on w h ich i t
i s m ade.

1 1 .5     Paragraph 3 p r o v id e s t h a t i f , h a v in g su b m itte d a n o t ic e
o f a p p e a l w i t h o u t a l l t h e p r e s c r i b e d w r i t t e n s t a t e m e n t s , an
a p p e lla n t f a i l s t o su b m it t h o s e s t a t e m e n t s w it h in t h e p e r io d o f
5 0 d a y s o r s u c h l o n g e r p e r i o d a s may h a v e b e e n g r a n t e d u n d e r
paragraph 5, th e S ecre ta r y o f S ta te w i l l be e n t it le d to regard
t h e a p p e a l a s h a v in g b e e n w ith d r a w n .

NOTIFICATION TO OFFICER CONCERNED OF RIGHT TO APPEAL

1 1 .6       The S e c r e t a r y o f s t a t e c o n s i d e r s t h a t i n a l l c a s e s , an
o f f i c e r d e a l t w ith f o r an o f f e n c e a g a in s t d i s c i p l i n e s h o u ld , a t
t h e c o n c l u s io n o f t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s b e in fo rm ed in
w r i t i n g o f h i s r i g h t o f a p p e a l t o t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e and t h e
p e r i o d d u r in g w h ic h s u c h a p p e a l m u st b e m ade.          F u rth er, t h a t in
c a s e s in t h e c a te g o r y r e f e r r e d t o in p a ra g ra p h 1 1 .1 3 b e lo w , th e
o f f i c e r s h o u ld b e r em in d e d o f t h e p r o v i s i o n s o f p a r a g r a p h 3 (1 )
o f S c h e d u le 5 t o t h e P o l i c e A ct 1 9 6 4 , w hereby a l l su ch a p p e a ls

9/91                                              1101
m u st b e r e f e r r e d t o a t r i b u n a l i f t h e a p p e l l a n t s o r e q u e s t s , and
b e in fo r m e d t h a t i f h e w o u ld l i k e h i s c a s e t o b e r e m i t t e d t o an
a p p e a l t r i b u n a l h e s h o u l d s a y s o w hen s u b m i t t i n g h i s a p p e a l .

WITHDRAWAL AND AMENDMENT OF NOTICE OF APPEAL ETC ,

1 1 .7       R u le 7 ( 1 ) a ll o w s an a p p e l l a n t t o a p p ly t o w ith d r a w h i s
a p p e a l.    U nder R u le 7 (2 ) (r e a d w it h R u le 4 (4 ) an a p p e l l a n t m ust
s e n d c o p i e s o f a n a p p l i c a t i o n u n d e r p a r a g r a p h 1 t o h i s ow n c h i e f
o f f i c e r , and t o su c h o t h e r p e r s o n a s i s t h e r e s p o n d e n t by v i r t u e
o f a d ir e c t io n g iv e n by th e S e c r e ta r y o f S ta te (s e e paragraph
1 1 .1 0 ).     W here an a p p e a l h a s b e e n r e m i t t e d t o a n a p p e a l t r i b u n a l
t h e a p p e l l a n t m ust a l s o ( u n l e s s h e i s aw are t h a t t h e t r i b u n a l ' s
r e p o r t h as b een su b m itte d t o t h e S e c r e ta r y o f S ta te ) sen d c o p ie s
o f t h e a p p l i c a t i o n t o t h e ch a ir m a n o f t h e t r i b u n a l .

1 1 .8       P a r a g r a p h s 7 ( 3 ) and 7 ( 4 ) o f t h e R u le s p r o v id e f o r t h e
S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e t o a l l o w t h e am endm ent o f a n o t i c e o f a p p e a l
or su p p o rtin g            sta tem en t,   o r o f a r e s p o n s e o r a cco m p a n y in g
d o c u m e n t. W here a n a p p e a l t r i b u n a l h a s b e e n a p p o i n t e d an d i t h a s
n o t b e e n r e p o r t e d , t h e d i s c r e t i o n t o a l l o w s u c h am endm ent r e s t s
i n s t e a d w i t h t h e ch a ir m a n o f t h e t r i b u n a l .

RESPONDENT

S e n io r O f f ic e r s

1 1 .9       U nder p a ra g ra p h 2 (1 ) o f S c h e d u le 5 o f t h e P o l i c e A ct 1 9 6 4 ,
t h e r e s p o n d e n t o f an a p p e a l b y a s e n i o r o f f i c e r o f a c o u n ty o r
c o m b in e d p o l i c e f o r c e ( o r b y a s e n i o r o f f i c e r o f t h e C i t y o f
L o n d o n p o l i c e f o r c e ) w i l l b e t h e o f f i c e r ' s own p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y .
As r e g a r d s an a p p e a l by a M e t r o p o lit a n s e n i o r o f f i c e r , u n der
p a r a g r a p h 2 ( 2 ) , t h e C o m m issio n er o f P o l i c e o f t h e M e t r o p o l is w i l l
n o r m a lly b e t h e r e s p o n d e n t.

O th er O f f i c e r s

1 1 . 1 0 U n d e r p a r a g r a p h 2 ( 2 ) o f S c h e d u l e 5 , t h e r e s p o n d e n t m ay b e
e i t h e r t h e o f f i c e r ' s own c h i e f o f f i c e r , o r s u c h o t h e r p e r s o n a s
t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e may d i r e c t .         T h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e may
in e it h e r c a s e , d ir e c t th a t th e resp on d en t a c t in c o n s u lta tio n
w i t h s u c h o t h e r p e r s o n o r p e r s o n s a s may b e s p e c i f i e d .                The
r e s p o n d e n t w i l l n o r m a l l y b e t h e a p p e l l a n t ' s ow n c h i e f o f f i c e r ,
b u t t h e R u l e a l l o w s a r e s p o n d e n t o t h e r t h a n t h e a p p e l l a n t ' s own
c h i e f o f f i c e r in o r d e r t o c o v e r c a s e s w here th e d i s c i p l i n a r y
h e a r in g was by a c h i e f o f f i c e r o f a n o th e r f o r c e u n d er R e g u la tio n
14 o f t h e P o l i c e ( D i s c i p l i n e ) R e g u l a t i o n s 1 9 8 5 , ( o r b y a t r i b u n a l
u n d e r s e c t i o n 93 o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t c h a i r e d b y s u c h a n o t h e r c h i e f
o ffic e r ).

1 1 . 1 1 T h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e h a s i n m in d t h a t h i s d e c i s i o n o n t h e
q u e s t i o n o f who s h o u l d b e t h e r e s p o n d e n t , an d a l s o w h e t h e r t h e
resp o n d en t sh o u ld be d ir e c t e d t o c o n s u lt o th e r p e r s o n s , w i l l as
a g en era l r u le be as fo llo w s:

    a.     The r e s p o n d e n t w i l l ,   su b ject to       (c)   b e lo w , b e t h e o f f i c e r

9/91                                              1102
           who p r e s i d e d a t t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r i n g a t w h i c h t h e
           a p p e ll a n t w as fou n d g u i l t y , w h e th e r h e s a t a lo n e o r a s
           c h a ir m a n o f a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l and w h e th e r o r n o t h e
           i s t h e a p p e l l a n t ' s own c h i e f o f f i c e r .      W here, i n a c a s e
           w h i c h w a s r e m i t t e d u n d e r R e g u l a t i o n 14 o f t h e P o l i c e
            ( D is c ip lin e ) R e g u la tio n s 1985, th e a p p ea l i s a g a in s t b oth
           f i n d i n g and p u n ish m e n t, t h e r e s p o n d e n t w i l l b e d i r e c t e d
           t o a c t i n c o n s u l t a t i o n w i t h t h e a p p e l l a n t ' s ow n c h i e f
           o f f i c e r in t h o s e a r e a s w here, a s o f f i c e r c o n d u c tin g th e
           o r i g i n a l d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r i n g , h e m ade a r e c o m m e n d a tio n
           a s t o t h e p u n ish m en t t o b e im p o sed .            W here, h o w e v e r , t h e
           r e s p o n d e n t im p o se d p u n ish m e n t i n a r e m i t t e d c a s e , no su c h
           d ir e c t io n w i l l be g iv e n .

    b.     W here t h e c a s e w a s h e a r d b y a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l , and
           th e      appeal        is     a g a in st    fin d in g   and      p u n ish m en t,     th e
           r e s p o n d e n t ( a s a t (a) a b o v e ) w i l l b e d i r e c t e d t o a c t i n
           c o n s u l t a t i o n w i t h t h e o t h e r m em bers o f t h e t r i b u n a l a n d ,
           i n s u c h a c a s e w h e r e t h e a p p e l l a n t i s a m em b er o f t h e
           M e t r o p o lit a n p o l i c e f o r c e and t h e r e s p o n d e n t i s an o f f i c e r
           o f t h a t f o r c e o t h e r th a n t h e C o m m issio n er h i m s e l f , t h e
           resp on dent w ill a ls o be d ir e c te d to a c t in c o n s u lta tio n
           w it h t h e C o m m issio n er.

    c.     W h e r e , i n a c a s e w h i c h w a s r e m i t t e d u n d e r R e g u l a t i o n 14
           o f th e P o lic e ( D is c ip lin e ) R e g u la tio n s 1985, th e ap p eal
           i s a g a i n s t p u n ish m en t o n ly , t h e r e s p o n d e n t w i l l b e t h e
           a p p e l l a n t ' s ow n c h i e f o f f i c e r .

1 1 . 1 1 a W here t h e r e s p o n d e n t i s d i r e c t e d t o a c t i n c o n s u l t a t i o n
w i t h t h e o t h e r m em bers o f a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l h i s r e s p o n s e
sh o u ld r e f l e c t th e c o l l e c t i v e v ie w o f th e f u l l t r i b u n a l.       It is
b o th in a p p r o p r ia te and, in th e v ie w o f th e S e c r e ta r y o f S t a t e ,
in c o n s is t e n t w ith th e p r o v is io n s o f R e g u la tio n 1 8 (9 ) o f th e
P o lic e ( D is c ip lin e ) R e g u la tio n s 1985 fo r a r e sp o n se t o c o n ta in
t h e s e p a r a t e s u b m i s s i o n o f a s i n g l e m em b er i n a n y c a s e w h e r e t h e
d e c i s i o n s u b j e c t o f t h e a p p e a l was r e a c h e d by a m a jo r ity d e c i s i o n
under th a t R e g u la tio n .

1 1 .1 2 P aragraph 1 1 .1 8 d e s c r ib e s a p p r o p r ia te arran gem en ts o f th e
co n ten ts       of        a resp on se o f           an a p p e a l     a g a in st   fin d in g    and
p u n ish m en t.          I t i s , o f c o u r s e , open t o a c h i e f o f f i c e r t o se e k
le g a l a d v ic e        in th e p rep a ra tio n o f        h is resp on se (ju s t as i t is
open t o an a p p e lla n t t o s e e k su ch a d v ic e in t h e p r e p a r a t io n o f
h i s a p p e a l ) .I n t h e o r d i n a r y c a s e          ( i e w here th e resp o n d e n t i s
t h e a p p e l l a n t ' s own c h i e f o f f i c e r )      th e c h ie f o f f ic e r concerned
w i l l n o d o u b t , b e a r i n g i n m in d R u l e 1 0 , a c t i n c o n s u l t a t i o n w i t h
th e c le r k o f h is p o lic e a u th o r ity .               A t t e n t i o n i s h o w e v e r draw n
t o p a r a g r a p h (3) o f R u le 1 0 , w h ic h i s o f p a r t i c u l a r im p o r ta n c e
w h e r e t h e c a s e i s o n e i n w h i c h R e g u l a t i o n 14 o f t h e P o l i c e
 (D isc ip lin e )          R e g u la tio n s 1985 a p p l i e s .        I t i s th e v ie w o f th e
S ecretary o f              S ta te t h a t , in such a c a s e , i t i s d e s ir a b le th a t
n e ith e r     th e        a p p e lla n t's c h ie f o f f ic e r nor h is              own p o l i c e
a u t h o r it y sh o u ld b e in v o lv e d in t h e a rran gem en ts f o r o b ta in in g
le g a l a d v ic e or in th e m atter o f th e c o n te n t o f th e r e sp o n se ,
e x c e p t t o t h e e x t e n t t h a t i t m ay b e n e c e s s a r y f o r t h e m t o p r o v i d e

9/91                                             1103
s t r i c t l y f a c t u a l in fo r m a tio n , o r t o be            a d v ise d   of    th e    co sts
l i k e l y t o b e in c u r r e d by th e resp o n d en t.

APPEAL TRIBUNALS

R e m i s s i o n o f C a s e s b v Home S e c r e t a r y

1 1 .1 3 P aragrap h 3 (1 ) o f S c h e d u le 5 t o t h e 1964 A c t, r e q u ir e s th e
S e c r e ta r y o f S t a t e t o a p p o in t a t r i b u n a l t o c o n s id e r an a p p e a l
w h e r e e i t h e r , i t a p p e a r s t o h im t h a t t h e c a s e c a n n o t b e p r o p e r l y
d eterm in ed w ith o u t t a k in g e v id e n c e , o r t h e a p p e lla n t h a s b een
p u n is h e d b y way o f d i s m i s s a l , r e q u ir e m e n t t o r e s i g n o r r e d u c t i o n
i n ra n k and t h e a p p e l l a n t h a s r e q u e s t e d t h a t a t r i b u n a l b e
a p p o in te d .      T h is r e q u ir e m e n t d o e s n o t , h o w ev er, i n h i b i t t h e
S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e from a l l o w i n g an a p p e a l w i t h o u t r e f e r r i n g i t
t o a tr ib u n a l i f he c o n sid e r s th e r e a re s u f f i c i e n t grounds fo r
d o in g s o .

1 1 .1 4 P aragrap h 3 (6 )            o f S c h e d u le 5 m akes p r o v i s i o n f o r t h e
S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e t o r e q u ir e an a p p e a l t r i b u n a l t o d e a l i n i t s
r e p o r t o n a n a p p e a l w i t h a n y p a r t i c u l a r m a t t e r h e m ay s p e c i f y .
R u le 1 5 ( 1 ) (d) p r o v i d e s f o r t h e t r i b u n a l t o c o m p ly w i t h s u c h a
r e q u ir e m e n t.    The a p p e l l a n t and t h e r e s p o n d e n t w i l l n o r m a lly b e
n o t i f i e d w h e n e v e r t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e m akes a r e q u ir e m e n t o f
t h i s k in d in a p a r t i c u l a r c a s e .

On W r i t t e n o r O r a l E v i d e n c e

1 1 .1 5 P aragrap h 5 (1 ) (c) o f S c h e d u le 5 t o t h e 1964 A c t, e x p r e s s ly
c o n t e m p l a t e s t h a t t h e R u l e s m ay e n a b l e a n a p p e a l t r i b u n a l t o d e a l
w ith a c a s e on w r it t e n e v id e n c e o r r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s , in s t e a d o f
h o ld in g an o r a l h e a r i n g .

1 1 .1 6 P aragraph 3 (8 ) o f S c h e d u le 5 p r o v id e s t h a t t h e a p p e a l
tr ib u n a l w i l l h o ld a h e a r in g i f th e S e c r e ta r y o f S t a t e r e q u ir e s
th is.      Paragraph 3 (9 ) p r o v id e s t h a t th e y w i l l a ls o h o ld a h e a r in g
i n a l l o t h e r c a s e s u n l e s s i t a p p e a r s t o th em u n n e c e s s a r y t o do
so.     B e fo r e r e a c h in g a d e c is io n under p aragraph 3 (9 ) n o t t o h o ld
a h e a r in g , th e t r ib u n a l i s r e q u ir e d by paragraph 3 (1 0 ) t o a ffo r d
t h e r e s p o n d e n t a n d t h e a p p e l l a n t a n o p p o r t u n i t y t o m ake w r i t t e n
o r , i f e i t h e r s o r e q u e s t s , o r a l r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s i n t h e m a t t e r and
a ls o t o c o n sid e r th o se r e p r e se n ta tio n s.

1 1 .1 6 a R u le 8 o f t h e P o l i c e (A p p ea ls) R u le s 1985 p r o v id e s t h a t ,
w h ere a h e a r i n g i s h e ld i n r e s p e c t o f an a p p e a l a g a i n s t b o th
f i n d i n g and p u n ish m e n t on a p a r t i c u l a r c h a r g e t h e h e a r i n g w i l l
b e b y way o f a r e - h e a r i n g o f t h e c h a r g e i f t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e
s o d i r e c t s ; w h e th e r t o p r o c e e d b y way o f a r e - h e a r i n g o f t h e
charge i f th e S ecreta ry o f S ta te does n ot so d ir e c t i s a t th e
d i s c r e t i o n o f t h e t r i b u n a l . When a n a p p e a l i s a g a i n s t p u n i s h m e n t
o n ly , any h e a r in g t h a t t a k e s p la c e w i l l n o r m a lly b e c o n f in e d t o
m a tte r s r e l e v a n t t o p u n ish m en t.        P aragraph 3 (1 1 ) o f S c h e d u le 5
p r o v i d e s t h a t w hen an o r a l h e a r i n g t a k e s p l a c e t h e a p p e l l a n t and
th e respondent have th e r ig h t to le g a l or o th er r e p r e se n ta tio n
b efo re th e tr ib u n a l.            T h is r i g h t e x te n d s t o a h e a r in g o f o r a l
r e p r e s e n t a t io n s under paragraph 3 (1 0 ) o f th e S c h e d u le .

9/91                                              1104
DOCUMENTATION TO BE SENT TO APPEAL TRIBUNAL
1 1 .1 7 R u le 6 (2 ) a p p l i e s w here an a p p e a l i s a g a in s t b o th f in d in g
and p u n ish m e n t.            I t p r o v id e s th a t th e S e c r e ta r y o f S ta te s h a ll
w i t h h o l d f r o m t h e m e m b e r s o f a n a p p e a l t r i b u n a l s o m uch o f t h e
r e s p o n d e n t ' s s t a t e m e n t an d d o c u m e n ts a s a p p e a r t o h im t o r e l a t e
t o t h e a p p e l l a n t ' s c h a r a c t e r and r e c o r d o f s e r v i c e u n t i l a f t e r
t h e t r i b u n a l h a s c o m p le te d i t s e x a m in a t io n o f and form ed i t s
o p in io n on t h e f i n d i n g and i s a b o u t t o c o n s id e r t h e q u e s t i o n o f
p u n ish m en t.       In p r a c t i c e , t h i s i s a c h ie v e d a d m in is t r a t iv e ly by
b u n d l i n g p a p e r s r e l a t i n g t o t h e f i n d i n g s e p a r a t e l y from t h o s e
r e l a t i n g t o t h e p u n ish m en t and a r r a n g in g f o r t h e f o r c e p r o v id in g
a cco m m o d a tio n and s e r v i c e s t o t h e t r i b u n a l t o p r e s e n t t h e b u n d le
r e l a t i n g t o p u n is h m e n t t o t h e m em bers a t t h e a p p r o p r i a t e t i m e s .

1 1 .1 8 I t w i l l b e h e l p f u l , t h e r e f o r e , i n t h e c a s e o f an a p p e a l
a g a in s t b oth      f i n d i n g and p u n ish m e n t,        if     th e c h ie f o ffic e r
concerned w ill              c o m p ile h i s    r e s p o n s e u n d e r R u le 5 and t h e
t r a n s c r ip t o f th e r e le v a n t d is c ip lin a r y p ro c e e d in g s a s fo llo w s

     a.     Two s e p a r a t e s t a t e m e n t s s h o u l d b e p r e p a r e d , o n e s t a t e m e n t
            d e a l i n g w it h t h e q u e s t i o n o f t h e f i n d i n g , and t h e o t h e r
            s ta te m e n t d e a li n g w ith t h e q u e s t io n o f p u n ish m en t.

    b.      The t r a n s c r i p t s h o u ld b e p r e p a r e d i n tw o s e p a r a t e p a r t s ,
            o n e p a r t c o v e r i n g t h e h e a r i n g up t o and i n c l u d i n g t h e
            d e c i s i o n on f in d in g ,          and t h e o t h e r p a r t c o v e r in g t h e
            r e m a i n d e r o f t h e p r o c e e d i n g s . W here a n a p p e a l h a s a l r e a d y
            b e e n made t o a c h i e f o f f i c e r , t h e t r a n s c r i p t s o f t h e
            h e a r i n g s b e f o r e b o t h t h e o r i g i n a l d i s c i p l i n e a u t h o r i t y and
            t h e a p p e l l a t e a u t h o r i t y , s h o u ld b e s e p a r a t e d i n t h i s way.

STATEMENTS IN LIEU OF ORAL EVIDENCE

1 1 . 1 9 T h e p r o v i s i o n i n R u l e 13 c o n c e r n i n g t h e a d m i s s i o n o f
w r i t t e n s t a t e m e n t s i n l i e u o f o r a l e v i d e n c e f o l l o w t h e sam e l i n e s
a s t h o s e i n c l u d e d i n t h e P o l i c e ( D i s c i p l i n e ) R e g u l a t i o n s 1985 and
th e P o lic e ( D is c ip lin e ) (S e n io r O f f ic e r s ) R e g u la tio n s 1985.

GIVING OF REASONS

1 1 . 2 0 T h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e i s now r e q u i r e d u n d e r p a r a g r a p h 4 ( 1 )
o f S c h e d u le 5 t o t h e 1964 A c t , t o p r o v id e t h e a p p e l l a n t and
resp o n d en t w ith a w r itte n sta te m e n t o f h i s r e a so n s fo r h is
d e te r m in a tio n o f th e a p p e a l.           In t h e c a s e o f an a p p e a l w h ich h a s
b e e n r e f e r r e d t o a t r i b u n a l , and w here t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e h a s
a c c e p t e d t h e t r i b u n a l ' s reco m m en d a tio n s, t h i s r e q u ir e m e n t w i l l
b e m et b y s e n d in g t o t h e a p p e l l a n t , and r e s p o n d e n t , a c o p y o f t h e
t r i b u n a l ' s r e p o r t s e t t i n g o u t t h e r e a s o n f o r i t s reco m m en d a tio n s.
In a l l o th e r c a s e s , a s e p a r a te w r itte n sta te m e n t s e t t i n g o u t th e
r e a s o n s fo r h i s d e te r m in a tio n o f th e a p p ea l w i l l be p r o v id e d .


TAXING OF APPELLANT'S COSTS

1 1 .2 1   It   is,    of   course,       open t o       any a p p e lla n t t o       ta k e w h atever

9/91                                               1105
le g a l a d v ic e or a s s is t a n c e      h e c h o o s e s , i n t h e p r e p a r a t i o n and
p r e s e n t a t io n o f h is a p p e a l,    b u t w h ere t h o s e c o s t s a r e t o b e m et
ou t o f th e p u b lic p u rse, i t            i s im p lic it th a t o n ly such c o s t s as
a re c o n sid e r e d r e a so n a b le w     i l l b e m et.

    " U n d e r p a r a g r a p h 4 ( 3 ) o f S c h e d u l e 5 t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e may
    d i r e c t t h e m anner i n w h ich an y c o s t s r e l a t e d t o an a p p e a l
    s h a ll be taxed .           When a r e q u e s t f o r t a x a t i o n i s r e c e i v e d ( a n d
    i t i s h o p e d t h a t s u c h a r e q u e s t w o u ld b e m ade o n l y a f t e r
    d is c u s s io n l o c a l l y w ith th e a p p e lla n t 's le g a l r e p r e s e n t a t iv e s
    h a s f a i l e d t o p rod u ce agreem en t on a f i g u r e a c c e p t a b le t o b o th
    s i d e s ) , i t i s t h e p r a c t i c e t o p a s s t h e m a t t e r t o a T a x in g
    M a s te r o f t h e Suprem e C o u r t f o r c o n s i d e r a t i o n . "




 9/91                                             1106
                                                ANNEX A

 NOTES ON PART IX OF THE POLICE AND CRIMINAL EVIDENCE ACT 1984
S e c t i o n 83 a b o l i s h e s t h e P o l i c e C o m p l a in t s B o a r d a n d e s t a b l i s h e s
t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y .      S c h e d u le 4 t o t h e A ct s e t s o u t
th e        A u th o r ity 's     c o n stitu tio n         and       m e m b e r sh ip  and        m akes
a d m i n i s t r a t i v e and o t h e r p r o v i s i o n s .

S e c tio n      84    d e fin e s     th e term s    " c o m p la in t” and         " a p p ro p ria te
a u t h o r it y " and im p o se s on t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r o f a f o r c e a d u ty t o
t a k e p r e l i m i n a r y s t e p s w hen h e r e c e i v e s a c o m p l a i n t .

S e c t i o n 85 s e t s o u t a p r o c e d u r e t o b e f o l l o w e d t o e s t a b l i s h an
i n v e s t i g a t i o n i n t o a c o m p la in t a b o u t t h e co n d u c t o f an o f f i c e r
o f t h e rank o f c h i e f s u p e r in te n d e n t o r b e lo w .         The c h i e f o f f i c e r
i s f i r s t r e q u ir e d t o c o n s id e r w h eth er th e c o m p la in t i s ca p a b le
o f r e s o l u t i o n u n der t h e in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n p r o c e d u r e .  O n ly i f
i t i s n o t o r i f t h e in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n p r o c e d u r e s f a i l d o e s he
h a v e t o a p p o in t an o f f i c e r t o i n v e s t i g a t e t h e c o m p la in t fo r m a lly .
The s e c t i o n p e r m i t s t h e o f f i c e r a p p o in t e d t o a c h i e v e fo r m a l
r e s o l u t i o n o r t o i n v e s t i g a t e th e c o m p la in t fo r m a lly t o be o f th e
rank o f c h ie f in s p e c to r o r ab ove.

S e c t i o n 86 s e t s o u t t h e p r o c e d u r e t o b e f o ll o w e d b y a p o l i c e
a u t h o r it y t o d e a l w ith c o m p la in ts a g a in s t o f f i c e r s o f above th e
rank o f c h ie f s u p e r in te n d e n t.         W h i l s t n o p r o v i s i o n i s m ade f o r
an in fo r m a l r e s o l u t i o n        procedure,          it   is     open t o       a p o lic e
a u t h o r it y t o d e a l a t i t s d i s c r e t i o n w ith a c o m p la in t i f i t i s
s a t i s f i e d t h a t t h e c o n d u c t c o m p la in e d o f , e v e n i f p r o v e d , w o u ld
j u s t i f y n e it h e r d is c ip lin a r y nor c r im in a l p r o c e e d in g s a g a in s t th e
o f f ic e r concerned.

S e c t i o n 87 p r o v i d e s t h a t c o m p l a i n t s a l l e g i n g t h a t t h e c o n d u c t i n
q u e s t i o n r e s u l t e d i n t h e d e a t h o f , o r s e r i o u s i n j u r y t o som e
p e r s o n , and c e r t a i n o t h e r c o m p la in ts d e f in e d i n r e g u l a t i o n s ( s e e
t h e P o l i c e (C o m p la in ts)         (M a n d a to ry R e f e r r a l s e t c ) R e g u l a t i o n s
1985) m ust b e r e f e r r e d t o t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y .                 In
a d d it io n , i t i s open             t o th e a p p r o p r ia te a u t h o r it y t o r e f e r any
o th e r c o m p la in t t o             th e A u th o rity ;        it is       a ls o open t o th e
A u th o r ity t o r e q u ir e         t h e s u b m i s s i o n o f a c o m p l a i n t t o th e m . The
s e c t i o n d e f i n e s " s e r i o u s i n j u r y " a s "a f r a c t u r e , d a m a g e t o a n
i n t e r n a l o r g a n , im p a ir m e n t o f b o d i l y f u n c t i o n , a d e e p c u t o r a
deep la c e r a t io n " .

S e c t i o n 88 p e r m i t s t h e a p p r o p r i a t e a u t h o r i t y t o r e f e r t o t h e
P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y any m a tte r w h ich i s n o t a c o m p la in t
b u t w h i c h a p p e a r s t o i n d i c a t e t h a t a n o f f i c e r m ay h a v e c o m m i t t e d
a c r im in a l o f f e n c e o r an o f f e n c e a g a in s t d i s c i p l i n e i f i t a p p ea rs
t o th e a p p r o p r ia te a u th o r ity t h a t th e m a tter ou gh t t o be r e fe r r e d
by       reason      of      i t s g ra v ity    or      of   any        o th er     e x c e p tio n a l
cir c u m sta n c e s.

S e c t i o n 89 r e q u i r e s t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y t o s u p e r v i s e
t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f c e r t a i n s e r i o u s c o m p la in t s and p e r m its t h e
A u th o rity t o s u p e r v is e th e in v e s t ig a t io n o f o th e r m a tters i f th ey

9/91                                                A1
c o n sid e r th a t i t i s d e s ir a b le in th e p u b lic in t e r e s t th a t th ey
sh o u ld do s o .         I t a l l o w s t h e A u t h o r it y t o a p p r o v e t h e a p p o in tm e n t
o f an i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r and, in a c c o r d a n c e w ith r e g u l a t io n s
m ade b y t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e ,                 to   im p o se r e s t r i c t i o n s o r
c o n d itio n s in r e s p e c t o f p a r tic u la r in v e s t ig a t io n s .                W here t h e
in v e s t ig a t io n i s su p e r v ise d by th e A u th o r ity , th e in v e s t ig a t in g
o f f i c e r m ust su b m it h i s r e p o r t t o t h e A u t h o r it y and sen d a cop y
t o t h e a p p r o p r ia t e a u t h o r i t y . The A u t h o r i t y , h a v in g r e c e i v e d t h e
rep o rt,        su b m it t o t h e a p p r o p r ia t e a u t h o r i t y an 'a p p r o p r ia t e
s ta te m e n t'.             T h is      statem en t         w ill     in d ic a te      w h eth er       th e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n w as c a r r i e d o u t t o t h e A u t h o r i t y ' s s a t i s f a c t i o n and
w i l l b e c o p i e d t o t h e p e r s o n b y , o r o n b e h a l f o f , whom t h e
c o m p la in t w as m ade.                No d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s m ay b e b r o u g h t
b e fo r e th e a p p r o p r ia te sta te m e n t h as b een su b m itte d t o th e
a p p r o p r ia te a u t h o r it y .         In a d d itio n , u n le s s th e D ir e c to r o f
P u b lic         P r o se c u tio n s      fe e ls      th a t      th ere        are       e x c e p tio n a l
c i r c u m s t a n c e s a t t a c h e d t o t h e c a s e , t h e D i r e c t o r m ay n o t b r i n g
c r im in a l p r o c e e d in g s b e fo r e th e a p p r o p r ia te sta te m e n t h a s been
su b m itte d .

S e c t i o n 90 r e q u i r e s a p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y t o s u b m it t o t h e D i r e c t o r
o f P u b l i c P r o s e c u t i o n s a n y r e p o r t draw n up on t h e c o n d u c t o f a
s e n i o r o f f i c e r u n l e s s i t i s s a t i s f i e d by t h e r e p o r t t h a t no
c r im in a l o f f e n c e h a s b e e n c o m m itte d .          The s e c t i o n r e q u i r e s a
c h i e f o f f i c e r who r e c e i v e s a r e p o r t c o n c e r n i n g t h e c o n d u c t o f an
o f f i c e r o f t h e ran k o f c h i e f s u p e r in te n d e n t o r b e lo w t o c o n s id e r
f i r s t w h e t h e r t h e r e p o r t i n d i c a t e s t h a t a c r i m i n a l o f f e n c e may
h a v e b e e n c o m m itte d b y t h a t o f f i c e r an d , i f s o , t o c o n s i d e r
w h eth er th e o f f e n c e in d ic a te d i s su ch t h a t th e o f f i c e r o u g h t t o
be ch arged w ith i t .                I f h e c o n s id e r s b o th t h a t an o f f e n c e h as
b e e n c o m m itte d and t h a t t h e o f f i c e r s h o u ld b e c h a r g e d w it h i t ,
t h e s e c t i o n r e q u i r e s h im t o s e n d a c o p y o f t h e r e p o r t t o t h e
D ir e c to r o f P u b lic P r o s e c u tio n s .         A fte r th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic
P r o se c u tio n s h as d e a lt w ith th e q u e stio n o f c r im in a l p r o c e e d in g s,
t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r i s r e q u ir e d t o s e n d t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts
A u t h o r i t y a m em orandum i n d i c a t i n g w h e t h e r h e h a s p r e f e r r e d
d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s i n r e s p e c t o f t h e c o n d u c t w h ich w as t h e
s u b j e c t o f th e in v e s t ig a t i o n and, i f n o t, h i s r e a so n s f o r n o t
d o in g s o . S im il a r ly , i f th e c h i e f o f f i c e r d e c id e s t h a t , a lth o u g h
a c r im in a l o f f e n c e h a s b een co m m itte d , t h e o f f i c e r s h o u ld n o t be
ch a rg ed w it h i t h e m u st sen d t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y a
m em orandum i n d i c a t i n g w h e t h e r h e p r o p o s e s t o p r e f e r d i s c i p l i n a r y
ch a rg es in r e s p e c t o f th e conduct in q u e stio n and, i f n o t, h is
r e a so n s f o r n o t d o in g s o .        M o r e o v e r , a s i m i l a r m em orandum m u s t
b e s e n t t o t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y w h ere t h e c h i e f
o f f i c e r c o n s id e r s th a t th e r e p o r t d i s c l o s e s no c r im in a l o ffe n c e ;
in su c h a c a s e h e m ust i n d i c a t e t o t h e A u t h o r it y w h e th e r h e h a s
p r e fe r r e d d is c ip lin a r y ch a rg es in r e s p e c t o f th e con d u ct in
q u e s t io n and i f n o t h i s r e a s o n s f o r n o t d o in g s o .         W h ere a c h i e f
o f f ic e r in d ic a te s th a t he p rop oses to p r e fe r d is c ip lin a r y charges
o r h a s d o n e a lr e a d y i t w i l l b e h i s d u ty t o p r e f e r them o r p r o c e e d
w i t h t h e m a s t h e c a s e may b e .              The s e c t i o n a l s o r e q u i r e s t h e
c h i e f o f f i c e r t o se n d t o t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y a cop y
o f t h e c o m p la in t and o f t h e r e p o r t o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n w h ere t h e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n was n o t s u b j e c t t o s u p e r v is io n b y t h e A u th o r ity .


9/91                                                  A2
S e c t i o n 9 1 p r o v i d e s t h a t n o mem orandum n e e d s t o b e s e n t t o t h e
P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y i f d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s h a v e b een
p r e f e r r e d i n r e s p e c t o f t h e c o n d u c t i n v e s t i g a t e d and i f t h e
a c c u s e d h a s a d m it t e d t h e c h a r g e s and h a s n o t w ith d r a w n h i s
a d m issio n .       In su c h a c a s e t h e ou tcom e o f t h e p r o c e e d in g s ,
t o g e t h e r w it h a co p y o f t h e c o m p la in t and t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n , h a s
t o b e r e p o r t e d t o t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y .

S e c t i o n 92 em p o w ers t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in t s A u t h o r i t y t o d i r e c t a
c h ie f o f f i c e r t o send to th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic P r o se c u tio n s a
c o p y o f t h e r e p o r t o f an i n v e s t i g a t i o n w h ere a c h i e f o f f i c e r h a s
a lr e a d y c o n s id e r e d t h a t r e p o r t and d e te r m in e d n o t t o r e f e r t h e
c o n te n ts to th e D ir e c to r .       I t im p o se s a d u ty on t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r
t o c o m p ly w i t h an y s u c h d i r e c t i o n .

S e c t i o n 93 em pow ers t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in t s A u t h o r i t y t o recom m end,
and s u b s e q u e n t ly d i r e c t , t h a t a c h i e f o f f i c e r s h o u ld p r e f e r
d is c ip lin a r y         charges         on    th e    b a sis   of   th e   report       of    an
i n v e s t i g a t i o n w here th e c h i e f o f f i c e r h a s in d ic a t e d t h a t he
e it h e r h as n o t p r e fe r r e d or p ro p o ses n o t t o p r e fe r such ch a rg es.
I t im p o s e s a d u t y on t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r t o c o m p ly w i t h an y s u c h
d ir e c tio n .         I n a d d i t i o n t h e s e c t i o n em pow ers t h e A u t h o r it y t o
g iv e a c h ie f o f f i c e r p e r m issio n n o t t o p r e f e r ch a rg es o r n o t to
p r o c e e d w it h c h a r g e s w h ich h a v e b e e n l a i d .

S e c t i o n 94 p r o v i d e s t h a t w h e r e t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in t s A u t h o r i t y
d ir e c t th a t d is c ip lin a r y ch arges s h a ll be p r e fe r r e d a g a in s t th e
o f f i c e r o r , in any o th e r c a s e w here th e y c o n s id e r i t t o be
d e s ir a b le by rea so n o f any e x c e p tio n a l c ir c u m sta n c e s a f f e c t i n g
th e c a s e , th e h e a rin g w i l l be b e fo r e a t r ib u n a l.             The s e c t i o n
a l s o d e a l s w it h t h e c o n s t i t u t i o n and m anner o f w o r k in g o f su c h
tr ib u n a ls.

S e c t i o n 95 p r o v i d e s t h a t p o l i c e a u t h o r i t i e s and i n s p e c t o r s o f
c o n sta b u la r y , in c a r r y in g o u t t h e ir d u t ie s in r e s p e c t t o th e
a d eq u a cy and e f f i c i e n c y o f p o l i c e f o r c e s , s h o u ld k eep t h e m s e lv e s
i n f o r m e d o f t h e w o r k i n g o f t h e p r o v i s i o n s o f P a r t IX o f t h e A c t .

S e c t i o n 96 e n a b le s t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y t o a g r e e t o
arran gem en ts             fo r      th e      h a n d lin g       of      c o m p la in ts     a g a in st
c o n sta b u la r ie s       m a in ta in e d      by       b o d ie s     o th er      th an     p o lic e
a u th o r itie s.           If     such       arran gem en ts          are     not     en tered      in to
v o l u n t a r i l y , t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e h a s t h e d i s c r e t i o n t o im p o se
th em b y o r d e r .

S e c t i o n 9 7 r e q u i r e s t h e P o l i c e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y t o m ake
a n n u a l r e p o r t s t o t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e and t o sen d a cop y t o
ea ch p o l i c e a u th o r ity t o g e th e r w ith any r e le v a n t in fo r m a tio n
r e la tin g to th a t a u th o r ity 's area.                   In a d d itio n , th e S e c re ta r y
o f S t a t e m ay c a l l f o r r e p o r t s f r o m t h e A u t h o r i t y o n m a t t e r s
r e l a t i n g g e n e r a l l y t o t h e i r f u n c t i o n s an d t h e A u t h o r i t y m ay, o f
t h e i r ow n i n i t i a t i v e r e p o r t t o t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e o n m a t t e r s
co m in g t o t h e i r n o t i c e .       R e p o r ts o f t h e l a t t e r k in d a r e c o p ie d
t o t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y and t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d .

S ectio n    98 p l a c e s r e s t r i c t i o n s   on t h e d i s c l o s u r e o f in f o r m a t io n

9/91                                                  A3
b y A u t h o r i t y s t a f f and m em bers.          Any u n a u t h o r i s e d d i s c l o s u r e   is
a c r im in a l o ffe n c e .

S e c t i o n 99 p e r m i t s t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e t o m ake r e g u l a t i o n s a s
t o t h e p r o c e d u r e t o b e f o l l o w e d u n d e r P a r t IX o f t h e A c t .           It
a l s o p l a c e s u p o n t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e t h e d u t y t o m ake c e r t a i n
s p e c if ic r e g u la tio n s.

S e c t i o n 100 s e t s o u t t h e p r o c e d u r e s t o b e f o llo w e d in                m a k in g
r e g u la tio n s.       In p a r t ic u l a r a d r a f t h a s t o b e p r o v id e d          to th e
P o l i c e A d v is o r y B oard f o r E n g la n d and W a le s.

S e c t io n 101 p r o v id e s c e r t a in m o d if ic a t io n s t o th e S e c r e ta r y o f
S t a t e ' s e x i s t i n g p o w e r t o m ak e d i s c i p l i n a r y r e g u l a t i o n s u n d e r
s e c t i o n 33 o f t h e P o l i c e A c t 1 9 6 4 .    In p a r t ic u la r i t r e q u ir e s th e
r e g u la t io n s t o p r o v id e fo r r a c i a l l y d is c r im in a t o r y b e h a v io u r t o
b e m ade a s p e c i f i c d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e .          The s e c t i o n a l s o
p erm its d e le g a tio n            o f c e r ta in  f u n c t i o n s u n d e r t h e A c t and
r e q u i r e s r e g u l a t i o n s t o b e made d e a l i n g w i t h s u c h m a t t e r s .

S e c t i o n 102 p r o v i d e s t h a t , on t h e h e a r i n g o f a d i s c i p l i n a r y
c h a r g e , an o f f i c e r o f t h e ran k o f c h i e f s u p e r in t e n d e n t o r b e lo w
may n o t b e p u n i s h e d b y d i s m i s s a l , r e q u i r e m e n t t o r e s i g n o r
r e d u c t io n in rank u n le s s h e h a s b een g iv e n an o p p o r tu n ity t o be
l e g a l l y rep r e se n te d a t th e h e a r in g .       S u c h r e p r e s e n t a t i o n m ay b e
e it h e r by c o u n se l or by a s o l i c i t o r .               In an y o t h e r c a s e , an
o f f i c e r m ay o n l y b e r e p r e s e n t e d a t t h e h e a r i n g o f a d i s c i p l i n a r y
c h a r g e b y a n o t h e r m em b er o f a p o l i c e f o r c e .     The s e c t i o n r e q u i r e s
r e g u l a t i o n s t o b e made s e t t i n g o u t p r o c e d u r e s t o im p le m e n t t h e
r e q u ir e m e n ts o f th e s e c t i o n .    I t a l s o p r o v id e s t h a t i f an o f f i c e r
h as been g iv e n th e o p p o rtu n ity t o be l e g a l l y r e p r e se n te d a t a
h e a r i n g t h e c a s e a g a i n s t h im m ay b e p r e s e n t e d b y c o u n s e l o r a
s o l i c i t o r w h eth er o r n o t he i s a c t u a ll y so r e p r e s e n te d .

S e c t i o n 103 s u b s t i t u t e s f o r t h e e x i s t i n g s e c t i o n 37 o f t h e P o l i c e
A c t 1 9 6 4 an d S c h e d u l e 5 t o t h a t A c t new p r o v i s i o n s r e l a t i n g t o
a p p e a ls   to    th e       S ecreta ry        of      S ta te     a g a in st    fin d in g s     at
d is c ip lin a r y h e a r in g s.

S e c t i o n 1 0 4 s a f e g u a r d s a n o f f i c e r w ho h a s a l r e a d y b e e n c h a r g e d
and e i t h e r a c q u i t t e d o r c o n v i c t e d o f a c r i m i n a l o f f e n c e a g a i n s t
b e in g c h a r g e d w it h a d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e w h ich i s i n s u b s ta n c e
t h e sam e.       T h e s e c t i o n a l s o p r o v i d e s t h a t n o s t a t e m e n t m ad e i n
th e      course       of    in fo r m a l   r e so lu tio n     of    a c o m p l a i n t m ay b e
a d m issib le        in     subsequent          c r im in a l,    c iv il    or      d isc ip lin a r y
p ro cee d in g s u n le s s i t         c o n s i s t s o f o r in c lu d e s an a d m issio n
r e la tin g     to     a m a tt e r w h ich d o e s n o t            fa ll    to     be r e so lv e d
in fo r m a lly .

S e c t i o n 105 p r o v id e s f o r t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e t o i s s u e g u id a n c e
t o c h i e f o f f i c e r s and t o o t h e r p o l i c e o f f i c e r s c o n c e r n in g t h e
d i s c h a r g e o f t h e i r f u n c t i o n s u n d e r P a r t IX o f t h e A c t a n d
o th e r w is e in c o n n e c tio n w ith d i s c i p l i n e .            I t r e q u ir e s p o lic e
o f f i c e r s t o h ave r e g a r d t o any su ch g u id a n c e in th e d is c h a r g e o f
th e ir fu n c tio n s.       T h e g u i d a n c e may n o t b e i s s u e d i n r e l a t i o n t o
th e h a n d lin g o f a p a r t ic u la r c a s e .          F a i l u r e on t h e p a r t o f any

9/91                                               A4
p o l i c e o f f i c e r t o h a v e r e g a r d t o t h e g u id a n c e when d e t e r m i n i n g
w h e th e r an o f f i c e r h a s c o m m itte d an o f f e n c e a g a i n s t d i s c i p l i n e
o r t h e p u n ish m en t w h ich s h o u ld b e aw arded f o r su c h an o f f e n c e
s h a l l be a d m is s ib le in e v id e n c e in any a p p e a l.              The s e c t i o n a l s o
r e q u i r e s t h e P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y t o h a v e r e g a r d t o any
g u i d a n c e g i v e n t o th em b y t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e on m a t t e r s
a f f e c t i n g t h e p r e f e r r i n g and w ith d r a w in g o f d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s .




9/91                                                A5
                                                ANNEX B
           NOTES ON THE POLICE (DISCIPLINE) REGULATIONS 1985
R e g u la tio n 1 p r o v id e s fo r th e R e g u la tio n s t o            com e i n t o     f o r c e on
29 A p r i l 1 9 8 5 .

R e g u la tio n 2 rev o k es th e p r e v io u s d i s c i p l i n e r e g u la tio n s e x c e p t
w here an o f f i c e r h a s b een ch a rg ed w ith a d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e
b e f o r e 29 A p r i l 1 9 8 5 .      I t p r o v i d e s i n p a r t i c u l a r t h a t , w h e re an
o f f i c e r h a s n o t b een ch a rg ed w ith an o f f e n c e b u t w h ere, in h i s
c a s e , a c t i o n h a s a l r e a d y b e e n t a k e n b e f o r e 29 A p r i l 1 9 8 5 f o r t h e
p u rp o se o f t h e 1977 r e g u l a t io n s th e n a c t i o n a lr e a d y ta k e n w i l l
h a v e e f f e c t on 29 A p r i l 1985 an d t h e r e a f t e r a s i f i t h ad b e e n
c a r r ie d o u t f o r th e p u rp ose o f th e c o r r e sp o n d in g p r o v is io n in th e
new r e g u l a t i o n s .       I t a l s o p r o v id e s t h a t th e 1977 p r o v is io n s
r e l a t i n g t o s u s p e n s i o n and t o p u n ish m e n t s h a l l c o n t i n u e t o h a v e
e f f e c t w here an o f f i c e r h a s b een c h a rg ed w it h an o f f e n c e b e f o r e
29 A p r i l 1 9 8 5 .

R e g u la tio n 3 p r o v id e s t h a t n o th in g in t h e r e g u la t io n s h a l l a p p ly
t o an o f f e n c e c o m m itte d o r a l l e g e d t o h a v e b e e n c o m m itte d b y a
se n io r o f f ic e r .

R e g u la tio n   4 is     an i n t e r p r e t i v e   p r o v isio n .

R e g u l a t i o n 5 p r o v i d e s t h a t an o f f i c e r c o m m its a d i s c i p l i n a r y
o f f e n c e i f h e c o m m its o n e o f t h e o f f e n c e s i n t h e D i s c i p l i n e Code
w h ich i s s e t o u t in S c h e d u le 2 t o t h e r e g u l a t i o n s .

R e g u la tio n 6 p r o v id e s f o r t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f c o m p la in ts by
m em bers o f t h e p u b l i c and o f i n t e r n a l r e p o r t s o r a l l e g a t i o n s .
The A c t i t s e l f p r o v i d e s f o r t h e a p p o in tm e n t o f i n v e s t i g a t i n g
o f f i c e r s in th e c a s e o f c o m p la in ts.          W here a n i n t e r n a l r e p o r t o r
a l l e g a t i o n i s r e c e i v e d f r o m w h i c h i t a p p e a r s t h a t a n o f f i c e r may
h a v e c o m m i t t e d a n o f f e n c e t h e n t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r m ay d e c i d e i n
t h e f i r s t in s t a n c e t h a t no d i s c i p l i n a r y p r o c e e d in g s a r e n e c e s s a r y
and n e e d n o t i n su c h a c a s e a p p o in t an i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r .
T h e r e g u l a t i o n s p r o v i d e t h a t t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r m ay b e a
m em b er o f t h e p o l i c e f o r c e c o n c e r n e d o r , i f t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r o f
som e o t h e r f o r c e a g r e e s t o p r o v i d e an i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r , a
m em b er o f t h a t f o r c e ; h e s h o u l d b e o f a t l e a s t t h e r a n k o f c h i e f
in s p e c t o r ; and h e s h o u ld b e o f a t l e a s t t h e rank o f t h e o f f i c e r
su b ject to in v e s tig a tio n .               N e ith e r in th e c a se o f in te r n a l
r e p o r t s o r a l l e g a t i o n s n o r i n t h e c a s e o f c o m p l a i n t s m ay t h e
in v e s tig a tin g o f f ic e r be th e c h ie f o f f ic e r o f th e p o lic e fo rce
c o n c e r n e d o r a n y m em b er o f t h e p o l i c e f o r c e c o n c e r n e d s e r v i n g i n
t h e sam e s u b d i v i s i o n o r b r a n c h a s t h e o f f i c e r s u b j e c t t o
in v e s tig a tio n .

R e g u la tio n      7 p r o v id e s  for    th e     o ffic e r w ho i s  su b ject      to
in v e s t ig a t io n t o be g iv e n w r itte n n o t ic e o f th e n a tu re o f th e
a l l e g a t i o n s a g a i n s t h im a n d a l l o w s h im t o m a k e a s t a t e m e n t
c o n c e r n in g th em .

R e g u la tio n    8    d e a ls    w ith     th e      fo r m u la tio n   and      p r e fe r r in g   of

9/91                                                  B1
d isc ip lin a r y charges.           T h is d u ty r e s t s w ith t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r
(b u t s e e R e g u la t io n 15) s u b j e c t t o any r e q u ir e m e n t t o r e f e r t h e
r e p o r t o f an in v e s t i g a t i o n      in t o a c o m p la in t t o th e P o lic e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y . A d i s c i p l i n e form h a s t o b e s e r v e d on t h e
a c c u s e d : i t i s t o b e i n a form s e t o u t i n S c h e d u le 2 t o t h e
r e g u la tio n s.

R e g u la t io n 9 a ll o w s f o r t h e w ith d r a w a l o f c h a r g e s b e f o r e t h e y a r e
heard.

R e g u l a t i o n 10 p r o v i d e s f o r d o c u m e n ts t o b e g i v e n t o t h e a c c u s e d
o ffic e r .       He s h o u l d b e s u p p l i e d w i t h a c o p y o f a n y s t a t e m e n t m ade
b y h im t o g e t h e r w i t h w i t n e s s e s '           sta tem en ts,         a copy o f th e
o r ig in a l      c o m p la in t and a l s o        o f a n y s t a t e m e n t m ade b y t h e
c o m p l a i n a n t , e v e n t h o u g h i t m ay c o n t a i n c o m p l a i n t s o r a l l e g a t i o n s
a g a i n s t h im w h i c h a r e n o t t h e s u b j e c t o f t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e ,
and an y s t a t e m e n t w h ic h , i n t h e e v e n t o f a f i n d i n g o f g u i l t , w i l l
b e a d m itte d a s c h a r a c te r e v id e n c e in r e l a t i o n t o th e o f f i c e r
co n cern ed t o a s s i s t th e o f f i c e r c o n d u c tin g th e h e a r in g o r a c h i e f
o f f i c e r t o d e t e r m in e t h e p u n ish m e n t t o b e im p o sed o r recom m ended.
The r e g u l a t i o n p r o v i d e s t h a t t h e s e d o cu m en ts w i l l b e s u p p l i e d t o
t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r a t l e a s t 21 d a y s b e f o r e t h e d a t e s e t f o r t h e
h ea rin g o f th e c h a rg es.            An e x c e p t i o n t o t h i s t i m e l i m i t i s m ad e
w here th e a c c u se d o f f i c e r             is   d e ta in e d    in pu rsu an ce o f th e
se n te n c e o f a co u rt or has r e c e iv e d a suspended se n te n c e o f
im p riso n m en t and w h e re, h a v in g b e e n s u p p li e d w it h t h e d ocu m en ts
in th e c a s e , he d oes n ot e l e c t to be le g a lly re p r e se n te d a t a
h e a r i n g and w h ere t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r i s s a t i s f i e d t h a t i t w o u ld
be a p p r o p r ia te fo r th e h e a r in g t o ta k e p la c e b e fo r e th e e x p ir y
o f a p e r i o d o f 2 1 d a y s f r o m t h e d a t e o n w h i c h t h e m em b er i s
charged.             Paragraph 4 o f th e r e g u la t io n p e r m its th e o f f i c e r
c o n d u c tin g th e h e a r in g , w ith th e c o n s e n t o f th e a c c u s e d , t o a llo w
any o th e r docum ent n o t c o p ie d t o th e a c c u se d o f f i c e r p r io r t o th e
h e a r in g t o b e adduced in e v id e n c e .

R e g u l a t i o n 11 p r o v i d e s t h a t t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r s h a l l b e i n v i t e d
t o s t a t e i n w r i t i n g on t h e d i s c i p l i n e form w h e t h e r h e a d m it s o r
d e n ie s th e c h a r g e , w h eth er he w is h e s t o be l e g a l l y r e p r e s e n te d
in a c a s e w h ere i t i s a p p r o p r ia t e and w h e th e r h e p r o p o s e s t o c a l l
w it n e s s e s and, i f he w ish e s th e c h i e f o f f i c e r con cern ed t o ta k e
s t e p s t o s e c u r e t h e a t t e n d a n c e o f s u c h w i t n e s s e s , t h e i r nam es and
ad d resses.          The r e g u l a t i o n a l s o p r o v i d e s t h a t w h e r e a n y s u c h
w i t n e s s i s a m em b er o f a p o l i c e f o r c e h e s h a l l b e o r d e r e d t o
a tten d th e h ea rin g o f th e c a s e .

R e g u la tio n    12     p r o v id e s  th at      th e    o ffic e r     r e sp o n sib le     for
fo r m u la tin g c h a r g e s a g a in s t th e a ccu sed o f f i c e r s h a l l g iv e th a t
o f f i c e r an o p p o r tu n ity t o e l e c t t o b e l e g a l l y r e p r e s e n t e d a t th e
h e a r in g i f h e i s s a t i s f i e d t h a t , on a f i n d i n g o f g u i l t , t h e
p u n ish m en t o f d i s m i s s a l , r e q u ir e m e n t t o r e s i g n o r r e d u c t i o n in
rank sh o u ld b e a v a il a b le t o th e o f f i c e r c o n d u c tin g t h e h e a r in g .

R e g u l a t i o n 13 p r o v i d e s f o r t h e c h a r g e t o b e h e a r d b y t h e c h i e f
o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d (b u t s e e a l s o R e g u la t io n 16) o r , in t h e c a s e
o f th e M e tr o p o lita n P o lic e , by th e a p p r o p r ia te o f f i c e r or a
d i s c i p l i n a r y b o a r d ( s e e S c h e d u l e 4) e x c e p t w h e r e t h e c a s e h a s

9/91                                                  B2
b een r e m itte d t o a n o th e r c h i e f o f f i c e r o r w here a tr ib u n a l i s t o
be h e ld .         W here t h e r e i s a d i s c i p l i n a r y b o a r d o r t r i b u n a l ,
r e f e r e n c e s in th e r e g u la t io n s t o th e o f f i c e r c o n d u c tin g th e
h e a r in g a re t o be u n d ersto o d a s r e fe r e n c e s t o th e board or
tr ib u n a l.

R e g u l a t i o n 14 p r o v i d e s a num ber o f d e t a i l e d i n s t a n c e s o f c a s e s
w h e r e t h e h e a r i n g o f d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s s h o u l d o r m ay b e
rem itte d to an oth er o f f ic e r .

Paragraph 2 o f th e r e g u la tio n p r o v id e s th a t a c h ie f o f f i c e r w i l l
rem it t o a n o th er c h ie f o f f i c e r any c a se i f he i s in t e r e s t e d in
t h e ou tcom e o t h e r w is e th a n i n h i s c a p a c i t y a s c h i e f o f f i c e r , i f
h e i s a m a t e r ia l w i t n e s s , o r i f , upon h i s c o n s id e r a t i o n o f a c a s e
in w h ic h t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r h a s n o t b e e n g iv e n an o p p o r t u n it y
f o r l e g a l r e p r e s e n t a t i o n , h e form s t h e v ie w t h a t , on a f in d in g
o f g u i l t , t h e p u n ish m en t o f d i s m i s s a l , r e q u ir e m e n t t o r e s i g n o r
r e d u c tio n in rank sh o u ld be a v a il a b le t o th e o f f i c e r c o n d u c tin g
th e h e a r in g .

W here, i n a c c o r d a n c e w it h R e g u la t io n 1 6 , t h e h e a r i n g i s b e in g
p r e s id e d o v e r by an o f f i c e r b e lo w t h e ran k o f c h i e f o f f i c e r , th e
o f f i c e r ta k in g th e h e a r in g i s r e q u ir e d by p aragraph 4 o f th e
r e g u la t io n t o r em it th e c a s e t o th e c h ie f o f f i c e r i f he i s
in t e r e s t e d in th e c a s e o th e r w is e th an a s th e p r e s id in g o f f i c e r ,
i f he i s a m a te r ia l w it n e s s , or i f he c o n s id e r s h i s pow ers o f
p u n ish m en t t o b e i n s u f f i c i e n t f o r t h e c a s e . In th e l a t t e r c a s e ,
th e o f f i c e r r e m ittin g th e c a s e sh o u ld n o t g iv e t o th e c h ie f
o f f i c e r t o whom t h e c a s e i s r e m i t t e d a n y i n d i c a t i o n o f h i s
a s s e s s m e n t o f t h e c a s e o r o f t h e p u n ish m en t t h a t o u g h t t o b e
im p o se d .

Paragraph 7 o f th e r e g u la tio n p r o v id e s t h a t th e c h ie f o f f i c e r
c o n d u c t i n g t h e h e a r i n g m ay r e m i t t h e c a s e t o a n o t h e r c h i e f
o ffic e r if ,        f o r any r e a so n f a l l i n g o u t s id e t h o s e l i s t e d in
paragraph 2, he c o n s id e r s i t a p p r o p r ia te so t o do.

R e g u l a t i o n 15 p r o v i d e s f o r t h e t a s k o f d e c i d i n g w h e t h e r a p o l i c e
o f f i c e r s h o u ld be ch a rg ed w ith an o f f e n c e t o b e d e le g a t e d t o , in
t h e C i t y o f London P o l i c e f o r c e an a s s i s t a n t c o m m is s io n e r o r a
com m ander, i n t h e M e t r o p o l i t a n P o l i c e f o r c e t o a com m ander o r
a b o v e o r c h i e f s u p e r in t e n d e n t o r a b ove d e p e n d in g upon w h e th e r th e
c h a r g e a r i s e s from a c o m p la i n t o r o t h e r w i s e , and i n a n y o t h e r
p o l i c e f o r c e t o a d e p u ty c h i e f c o n s t a b l e o r t o an a s s i s t a n t c h i e f
c o n sta b le .

R e g u l a t i o n 16 a l l o w s f o r t h e t a s k o f p r e s i d i n g a t a d i s c i p l i n a r y
h e a r in g t o be d e le g a te d t o a d ep u ty c h i e f c o n s t a b le .           I t m akes
e q u i v a l e n t p r o v i s i o n f o r t h e C i t y o f London P o l i c e .           I t a lso
p r o v i d e s t h a t t h e o f f i c e r t o whom t h e h e a r i n g w o u l d b e d e l e g a t e d
i n a n o r m a l c a s e may n o t h e a r a c h a r g e i f h e h a s a c t e d a s a n
i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r , i f h e h a s d e c id e d on t h e n a tu r e o f th e
c h a r g e s t o b e l a i d in t h e c a s e o r i f h e h a s ta k e n p a r t in any
a ttem p t t o a c h ie v e th e in fo rm a l r e s o l u t i o n o f a c o m p la in t.

P a r a g r a p h 5 o f t h e r e g u l a t i o n p r o h i b i t s a n o f f i c e r w ho c o n d u c t s

9/91                                               B3
(2t& l*o
a h e a r i n g u n d e r t h i s r e g u l a t i o n from im p o s in g p u n is h m e n t s           of
d i s m i s s a l , r e q u ir e m e n t t o r e s i g n o r r e d u c t io n in ran k .

R e g u l a t i o n 17 a p p l i e s w h e r e a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l i s t o b e
h e l d . P a ra g ra p h (2) p r o v id e s t h a t w h ere t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r r e m it s
t h e c a s e t o a n o th e r c h i e f o f f i c e r h e i s t o in fo r m t h e P o l i c e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y t h a t h e h a s d on e s o and t h a t t h e o t h e r c h i e f
o f f i c e r w i l l t h e r e f o r e b e t h e ch a ir m a n o f t h e t r i b u n a l .          The
r e g u la t io n a ls o p r o v id e s t h a t , in th e M e tr o p o lita n P o lic e , th e
c h a i r m a n o f t h e t r i b u n a l may b e a n a s s i s t a n t c o m m i s s i o n e r o r
d e p u ty a s s i s t a n t c o m m is s io n e r n o m in a te d b y t h e c o m m is s io n e r . The
P o l i c e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y a r e r e q u ir e d t o in fo r m t h e c h i e f
o f f i c e r o f t h e f o r c e c o n c e r n e d (an d , w h ere a p p r o p r ia t e , t h e c h i e f
o f f i c e r w ho i s t o c h a i r t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l ) w ho t h e t w o
A u t h o r i t y m em bers o n t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l w i l l b e .

R e g u l a t i o n 18 p r o v i d e s f o r t h e p r o c e d u r e a t a d i s c i p l i n a r y
h e a r in g .      Such a h e a r in g s h a l l b e i n p r i v a t e .      A m em b er o f a n y
p o l i c e f o r c e m ay a c t a s p r e s e n t i n g o f f i c e r a s m ay a c o u n s e l o r
a s o l i c i t o r in a p p r o p r ia te c a s e s .   Paragraph 4 o f th e r e g u la tio n
p e r m its c o u n s e l o r a s o l i c i t o r p r e s e n t in g t h e c a s e and any
r e p r e s e n t a t iv e s o f th e a ccu sed o f f i c e r t o be a s s i s t e d by a
s e r v i n g m em b er o f a p o l i c e f o r c e .    T h is w i l l p e r m it t h e a c c u se d
o f f i c e r ' s f r i e n d on t h e on e hand and t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r
on t h e o t h e r t o b e p r e s e n t t o a s s i s t t h e p e r s o n p r e s e n t i n g t h e
c a s e on e i t h e r s i d e .       In a d d itio n th e o f f i c e r c o n d u c tin g th e
h e a r i n g m ay, i f t h e a c c u s e d o r h i s r e p r e s e n t a t i v e d o e s n o t
o b j e c t , a l l o w a n y m em b er o f a p o l i c e f o r c e , m e m b e r s o f t h e P o l i c e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y o r any s o l i c i t o r t o a t t e n d t h e h e a r in g .

R e g u l a t i o n 19 m a k es s p e c i a l p r o v i s i o n f o r t h e i n t r o d u c t i o n o f
sta tem en ts in to d is c ip lin a r y h ea r in g s in l i e u o f o r a l e v id e n c e .
I t a llo w s th e a d m issio n in e v id e n c e o f a w r it t e n s ta te m e n t
w i t h o u t t h e m aker b e i n g c a l l e d a s a w i t n e s s i f t h e e v i d e n c e i n
i t w o u ld h a v e b e e n a d m i s s i b l e i f g i v e n o r a l l y .        A copy o f such
a s t a t e m e n t m ust b e g iv e n t o t h e o t h e r s i d e a t l e a s t 21 d a y s (o r
an a g r e e d s h o r t e r p e r io d ) b e f o r e a h e a r in g ; u n l e s s t h e o t h e r s i d e
o b j e c t w i t h i n 14 d a y s ( o r a n a g r e e d s h o r t e r p e r i o d ) t h e s t a t e m e n t
w i ll be a d m issib le .              The    o f f i c e r c o n d u c tin g th e      h e a r i n g may
n e v e r t h e l e s s a d m it w r i t t e n e v id e n c e a d d u ced b y o n e s i d e a t t h e
h e a r i n g w i t h t h e a g r e e m e n t o f t h e o t h e r s i d e . W here a w r i t t e n
s ta te m e n t i s adduced, t h e o f f i c e r c o n d u c tin g th e                  h e a r i n g may
n e v e r t h e l e s s a s k t h e o r a l e v i d e n c e b e g i v e n b y t h e p e r s o n w ho
m ad e t h e s t a t e m e n t .       I f i t i s n o t h e m ay t h e n d i s r e g a r d t h e
w r itte n ev id e n c e .

R e g u la tio n   20 a l l o w s   f o r t h e a d jou rn m en t o f t h e h e a r in g .

R e g u la tio n   21 a llo w s f o r h e a r in g s      in th e ab sen ce o f th e accu sed
in c e r ta in     c ircu m sta n ce s.

R e g u l a t i o n 2 2 p r o v i d e s t h a t a c o m p l a i n a n t m ay b e p r e s e n t a t a
d is c i p l i n a r y h e a r in g w h ile any w it n e s s ( in c lu d in g th e a ccu sed )
i s b e in g ex a m in e d o r c r o s s - e x a m in e d a b o u t t h e f a c t s r e l a t i n g t o
t h e c h a r g e ; p r o v id e d t h a t w here a c o m p la in a n t i s t o g i v e e v id e n c e
he sh o u ld n o t be a llo w e d t o a tte n d b e fo r e he g iv e s h i s e v id e n c e .

9/91                                                B4
T hus a c o m p la in a n t i s n o t e n t i t l e d t o b e p r e s e n t w hen p u n is h m e n t
i s b e i n g c o n s i d e r e d o r w h e r e t h e r e a r e no w i t n e s s e s o r w hen t h e
a ccu sed p le a d s g u i l t y .           W here t h e a c c u s e d g i v e s e v i d e n c e t h e
c o m p l a i n a n t m ay a s k h i m q u e s t i o n s e i t h e r t h r o u g h t h e p r e s i d i n g
o f f i c e r o r , a t t h e p r e s i d i n g o f f i c e r ' s d i s c r e t i o n , d i r e c t l y . The
p r e s i d i n g o f f i c e r m ay d i s a l l o w q u e s t i o n s w h i c h h e c o n s i d e r s t o
b e i r r e l e v a n t o r fo r m u la te d i n an u n d e s ir a b le m anner.

R e g u l a t i o n 23 m a k es i t c l e a r t h a t t h e p o w e r t o d e t e r m i n e f i n d i n g
r e s t s in a l l c a s e s w ith th e o f f i c e r c o n d u c tin g th e h e a r in g o f th e
ch a rg e. Paragraph 2 o f th e r e g u la tio n p r o v id e s t h a t th e c r im in a l
sta n d a r d o f p r o o f s h a l l a p p ly a t d i s c i p l i n e h e a r in g s .

R e g u la t io n 24 d e a l s w it h p u n ish m e n t.            I t s e t s out th e d iffe r e n t
p u n i s h m e n t s t h a t m ay b e a w a r d e d a n d p r o v i d e s t h a t , i n g e n e r a l ,
t h e p u n ish m e n t s h a l l b e im p o sed b y t h e o f f i c e r c o n d u c t in g t h e
h e a r i n g . T h e r e a r e tw o e x c e p t i o n s : u n d e r p a r a g r a p h 3 w h e r e a c a s e
h a s b e e n r e m i t t e d u n d e r R e g u l a t i o n 14 t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r h e a r i n g
t h e c a s e w i l l m ake o n l y a r e c o m m e n d a tio n a s t o p u n is h m e n t a n d ,
w h e r e a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l i s h e l d , t h e c h a ir m a n ( i e t h e c h i e f
o f f i c e r ) w i l l d e te r m in e t h e p u n ish m en t a f t e r c o n s u l t i n g t h e o th e r
m em bers o f t h e t r i b u n a l .         U nder p a ra g r a p h 5 t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r t o
whom a c a s e h a s b e e n r e m i t t e d m u s t , h a v i n g h e a r d t h e c a s e , s e n d
t h e s t a t e m e n t o f t h e c h a r g e h e h a s fou n d p ro v ed t o g e t h e r w it h a
s t a t e m e n t o f t h e f a c t s i n s o f a r a s t h e y a r e r e l e v a n t t o p u n ish m en t
and h i s rec o m m en d a tio n a s t o p u n ish m e n t t o t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r ' s
own c h i e f o f f i c e r .       T hat c h i e f o f f i c e r sh o u ld be p r o v id e d w ith
a t r a n s c r i p t o f t h e h e a r i n g and h e s h o u ld d e c i d e on and im p o se
a p u n ish m en t w it h o u t undue d e la y .              P a r a g r a p h 6 m akes c l e a r t h a t
in       im p o sin g p u n ish m en t r e g a r d m ust b e had t o                     th e     accused
o f f i c e r ' s r e c o r d o f s e r v i c e a n d m ay b e h a d t o o t h e r e v i d e n c e a n d
t h a t t h e a c c u s e d m ay a d d u c e e v i d e n c e a s t o c h a r a c t e r .      Paragraph
9 o f t h e r e g u l a t i o n p r o v id e s t h a t w h ere an i n t e r n a l a p p e a l l i e s
t o t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r t h e p u n ish m e n t im p o se d b y t h e d e p u ty c h i e f
o f f i c e r s h a l l n o t t a k e e f f e c t u n l e s s and u n t i l t h e p e r i o d f o r
g iv in g n o t ic e o f a p p ea l h as e x p ir e d o r , w here su ch n o t i c e i s
g iv e n , th e a p p ea l h a s b een d eterm in e d .

R e g u la t io n 25 p r o v id e s t h a t a r e d u c t i o n i n r a t e o f p ay o r a f i n e
m ay n o t b e i m p o s e d f o r a n o f f e n c e o f c r i m i n a l c o n d u c t .      I t a lso
p r o v i d e s t h a t t h e p u n i s h m e n t o f r e d u c t i o n i n r a t e o f p a y m ay n o t
b e s u c h a s w o u ld r e d u c e t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r ' s p a y b e lo w t h e
m in im u m o f t h e s c a l e a p p l i c a b l e t o h i s r a n k a n d d e f i n e s a l i m i t
on t h e s i z e o f an y f i n e w h ic h m ig h t b e im p o s e d .               (A p u n i s h m e n t
o f r e d u c tio n in r a t e o f pay sh o u ld n o t be e x p r e s s e d a s a
r e d u c t i o n o f a c e r t a i n num ber o f i n c r e m e n t s o r a s a r e d u c t i o n t o
a s p e c i f i e d s a l a r y ( t h e r e a s o n f o r t h i s i s t h a t i t m ig h t h a v e th e
e f f e c t o f p r e v e n t in g t h e paym ent o f any in c r e m e n t u n t i l t h e
p e r i o d o f p u n ish m e n t i s o v e r and w o u ld a l s o p r e v e n t a s s i m i l a t i o n
t o a n y new s c a l e o f p a y w h ic h m i g h t b e a w a r d e d g e n e r a l l y ) .         The
p u n ish m en t o f r e d u c t io n in r a t e o f p ay s h o u ld a lw a y s b e e x p r e s s e d
a s a r e d u c tio n by a s p e c i f i e d a m ou n t).

R e g u la t io n 26 p r o v id e s t h a t w here a h e a r in g h a s b ee n c o n d u c te d
by an o f f i c e r        to  whom t h e       c a s e h as b een d e le g a te d under
R e g u l a t i o n 1 6 , and w h e r e t h e c h a r g e h a s b e e n fo u n d p r o v e d and

9/91                                                B5
  p u n i s h m e n t i m p o s e d , t h e a c c u s e d o f f i c e r may a p p e a l t o h i s c h i e f
  o f f i c e r a g a i n s t b o th t h e f i n d i n g and t h e p u n ish m en t o r a g a i n s t
  t h e p u n ish m en t o n ly .         N o tic e o f ap p eal has to be g iv e n w ith in 2
  d a y s o f t h e d ay on w h ich t h e a c c u s e d w as n o t i f i e d                          o f th e
  p u n ish m en t.        He m u s t f u r n i s h t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r w i t h a s t a t e m e n t
  s e t t i n g o u t t h e g ro u n d s o f h i s a p p e a l w it h in 21 d a y s f o ll o w i n g
  t h e day on w h ich e i t h e r h e r e c e i v e s t h e t r a n s c r i p t o f t h e r e c o r d
  o f p r o c e e d in g s a t th e o r i g in a l h e a r in g w here h e h a s ask ed t o be
  s u p p l i e d w i t h s u c h a t r a n s c r i p t o r , w h e r e h e h a s m ade n o s u c h
  r e q u e s t , f o l l o w i n g t h e day on w h ich h e g a v e n o t i c e o f a p p e a l.
  E ith e r th e p e r io d fo r g iv in g n o tic e or th e p e r io d fo r in d ic a tin g
  g r o u n d s o f a p p e a l may b e e x t e n d e d b y t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r i f h e i s
  s a t i s f i e d th a t by rea so n o f th e s p e c ia l c ir cu m sta n c e s o f th e c a se
  i t i s j u s t and r i g h t t o do s o .                The r e g u l a t i o n p r o v id e s t h a t t h e
  a p p e l l a n t m ay a t t e n d t h e p r o c e e d i n g s a n d c o n d u c t h i s a p p e a l
  e it h e r in p erso n or by a fr ie n d .                    He o r h i s r e p r e s e n t a t i v e may
  m ak e o r a l o r w r i t t e n r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s i n s u p p o r t o f t h e a p p e a l a n d
  i s a l l o w e d t o a d d u c e o n l y new e v i d e n c e w h ic h c o u l d n o t h a v e b e e n
  ad d u ced a t t h e h e a r in g a t w h ich t h e c h a r g e w as fo u n d p r o v e d .
  W i t n e s s e s g i v i n g o r a l e v i d e n c e a t a n a p p e a l m ay b e c r o s s - e x a m i n e d
  and t h e o f f i c e r c o n s i d e r i n g t h e a p p e a l , m ay, a t h i s d i s c r e t i o n ,
  a d m it w r i t t e n e v i d e n c e .        The r e g u l a t i o n a l s o p r o v id e s t h a t a
  v e r b a tim r e c o r d o f a p p e l l a t e p r o c e e d in g s s h o u ld b e ta k e n and a
  t r a n s c r i p t i o n o f t h e r e c o r d m ade an d s u p p l i e d t o t h e d e f e n d a n t
  f o r t h e p u rp o se o f an a p p ea l t o t h e S e c r e ta r y o f S t a t e i f th e
  a p p e lla n t ask s fo r one.             P a r a g r a p h 12 o f t h e r e g u l a t i o n p r o v i d e s
  t h a t , o n a n i n t e r n a l a p p e a l t h e o f f i c e r c o n d u c t i n g t h e a p p e a l may
  n o t aw ard an y p u n ish m e n t g r a v e r th a n t h e p u n ish m e n t aw ard ed a t
  th e o r ig in a l h e a r in g .

  R e g u l a t i o n 2 7 p r o v i d e s t h a t t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r m ay s u s p e n d a n
  o f f i c e r fro m m em b e r sh ip o f h i s f o r c e an d fro m h i s o f f i c e a s
  c o n s ta b le w here a r e p o r t, a l l e g a t i o n o r c o m p la in t i s r e c e iv e d
  f r o m w h i c h i t a p p e a r s t h a t t h e o f f i c e r may h a v e c o m m i t t e d a
  d is c ip lin a r y or c r im in a l o ffe n c e .             The c h i e f o f f i c e r ' s pow er t o
  s u s p e n d a n o f f i c e r may b e e x e r c i s e d a t a n y t i m e a f t e r t h e r e c e i p t
  o f t h e r e p o r t , a l l e g a t i o n o r c o m p la i n t up t o t h e t im e w hen e i t h e r
  i t i s d e c id e d t h a t th e o f f i c e r s h a l l n o t be ch arged w ith a
  d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e o r , w h e r e c h a r g e s h a v e b e e n p r e f e r r e d , when
  a l l t h e c h a r g e s h a v e b een d is m is s e d o r p u n ish m en ts h a v e b een
  im p o se d o r an a p p e a l h a s b e e n d e t e r m i n e d .                  The r e g u l a t io n
  p r o v id e s t h a t s u s p e n s io n s h a l l rem a in i n f o r c e u n t i l e i t h e r i t
  i s d e c id e d t h a t th e o f f i c e r s h a l l n o t be ch arged , o r he h as been
  s o c h a r g e d a n d h a s b e e n d e a l t w i t h , o r a n y a p p e a l h e m ay m a k e h a s
  been d eterm in e d , o r th e c h i e f o f f i c e r d e c id e s t h a t t h e s u s p e n s io n
  s h a ll be lif t e d .

  R e g u la t io n 28 a p p l i e s w h ere an o f f i c e r i s fo u n d g u i l t y o f a
  ch arge o f c r im in a l con d u ct fo llo w in g a c o n v ic tio n in a co u r t o f
  a c r im in a l c h a r g e and s u b s e q u e n tly a p p e a ls s u c c e s s f u l l y a g a in s t
  h is c o n v ic tio n .         In such a c a s e , t h i s r e g u la tio n h as th e e f f e c t
  o f s e t t in g a s id e th e d is c ip lin a r y c o n v ic tio n w h ils t a llo w in g th e
  c h i e f o f f i c e r t o c h a r g e t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d w i t h som e o t h e r
v d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e , h a v in g r e g a r d t o s e c t i o n 104 o f t h e A c t,
  w h ich r e l a t e s t o d o u b le je o p a r d y .


   9/91                                                B6
R e g u la tio n    29 r e q u i r e s t h e k e e p in g o f a f o r c e d i s c i p l i n e     book.

S c h e d u le   1 c o n ta in s   th e   D i s c i p l i n e Code.

S c h e d u le 2 c o n t a in s    th e d is c ip lin e     form .

S c h e d u le 3 m akes t h e n e c e s s a r y a d a p t a t i o n s o f t h e r e g u l a t i o n s f o r
th e M e tr o p o lita n P o lic e .




9/91                                               B7
                                                 ANNEX C
   NOTES ON THE POLICE (COMPLAINTS)                            (GENERAL) REGULATIONS 1985
R e g u la tio n 1 p r o v id e s     fo r th e r e g u la tio n s to           com e i n t o   f o r c e on
29 A p r il 1 9 8 5 .

R e g u la tio n   2 is     an i n t e r p r e t a t i o n   p r o v isio n .

R e g u la t io n 3 r e q u i r e s t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y t o fo rw a rd any
c o m p la in t th e y h ave r e c e iv e d t o th e a p p r o p r ia te a u t h o r it y , u n le s s
t h i s w o u ld b e a g a i n s t t h e c o m p la i n a n t ' s w i s h e s o r seem s t o t h e
A u th o r ity to be u n n e cessa r y .       Paragraph 2 p erm its th e A u th o r ity
t o forw ard a c o m p la in t a g a in s t th e c o m p la in a n t's w is h e s i f th e y
a re s a t i s f i e d th a t th e p u b lic in t e r e s t so r e q u ir e s .

R e g u la t io n 4 p r o v id e s a tim e l i m i t o f 7 d a y s f o r t h e C o m p la in ts
A u th o r ity t o n o t i f y th e a p p r o p r ia te a u t h o r it y w h eth er o r n o t th e y
w i l l s u p e r v i s e an i n v e s t i g a t i o n .     The t im e l i m i t n o r m a lly r u n s
from t h e d ay on w h ic h t h e A u t h o r i t y r e c e i v e t h e c o m p la in t o r n o n ­
c o m p la in t m a t t e r r e f e r r e d t o th em , b u t i f t h e A u t h o r it y r e q u e s t s
f u r t h e r in f o r m a tio n , o r t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n i s d e la y e d p e n d in g th e
o u tc o m e o f r e l a t e d c r i m i n a l p r o c e e d i n g s , t h e t i m e l i m i t r u n s from
t h e t im e when t h e A u t h o r i t y r e c e i v e t h e i n f o r m a t i o n r e q u e s t e d o r
n o t i f i c a t i o n o f t h e t r i a l o u tcom e.

R e g u la tio n 5 o b lig e s th e a p p r o p r ia te a u th o r ity t o m eet th e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y ' s r e a s o n a b le r e q u ir e m e n ts f o r in fo r m a tio n
and d ocu m en ts r e l a t i n g t o c o m p la in ts o r n o n -c o m p la in t m a tte r s
r e f e r r e d t o th em f o r s u p e r v i s i o n .     T h is a p p lie s w h eth er o r n o t
th e A u th o r ity have d ecid e d t o s u p e r v is e th e in v e s t ig a t io n .

R e g u la tio n 6 r e q u ir e s th e in v e s t ig a t in g o f f i c e r to keep th e
C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y in fo r m e d o f any c o n s u l t a t i o n h e p r o p o s e s t o
have       w ith      th e   D ir e c to r     of   P u b lic  P r o se c u tio n s     about        an
in v e s t ig a t io n under th e A u th o r ity 's s u p e r v is io n ,            and o f t h e
ou tcom e.

R e g u la t io n 7 a ll o w s t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y , i n t h e i r s t a t e m e n t
t o t h e a p p r o p r ia te a u t h o r it y a f t e r s u p e r v is in g an i n v e s t i g a t i o n ,
t o e x p l a i n why t h e y a r e s a t i s f i e d w i t h i t s c o n d u c t , a n d t o
m e n tio n any m a t t e r s w h ich t h e y t h in k s h o u ld e i t h e r b e b r o u g h t t o
t h e a t t e n t i o n o f t h e a p p r o p r ia te a u t h o r it y , t h e c o m p la in a n t or
t h e o f f i c e r who w a s t h e s u b j e c t o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n , o r b e d e a l t
w ith in th e p u b lic i n t e r e s t .

R e g u la t io n 8 r e q u i r e s t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y t o d e a l w it h a
c a s e w i t h o u t u n d u e d e l a y w h e n a m em orandum i s s e n t t o t h e m u n d e r
S e c t i o n 90 o f t h e A c t .        P a ra g ra p h 2 d e a l s w it h a c a s e i n w h ich
th e c h ie f o f f ic e r has n ot p referred d is c ip lin a r y ch arges or does
n o t p r o p o se t o p r e f e r su c h c h a r g e s and t h e A u t h o r it y a c c e p t h i s
d e c i s i o n : in su c h a c a s e t h e A u t h o r it y s h a l l in fo r m t h e c h i e f
o f f i c e r and, i f t h i s i s r e a s o n a b ly p r a c t i c a b l e , t h e co m p la in a n t
o f t h e ir a ccep ta n ce o f h is d e c is io n .           P aragraph 3 a p p lie s w here
a c h ie f          o ffic e r ,   w ith    th e A u th o r ity 's     le a v e ,  w ith d r a w s   a
d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e a g a i n s t an o f f i c e r :  in such a c a se th e

9/91                                                 Cl
A u t h o r it y m u st in fo r m t h e c o m p la in a n t          an d p r o v i d e h im w i t h a n y
a p p r o p r ia te e x p la n a tio n . Paragraph 4               r e lie v e s th e A u th o rity o f
t h e d u ty t o n o t i f y t h e c o m p la in a n t             o f m a tters f a l l i n g under
p a r a g r a p h s 2 and 3 w here t o do s o                       w o u ld n o t b e r e a s o n a b ly
p r a c tic a b le .

R e g u la tio n 9 p r o v id e s fo r c o p ie s o f c o m p la in ts t o b e s u p p lie d to
a c o m p l a i n a n t o r t o t h e o f f i c e r a g a i n s t whom t h e c o m p l a i n t w a s
m ad e u p o n a r e q u e s t m a d e i n w r i t i n g .       Paragraph 2 p r o v id e s fo r
th e     req u est to        b e r e f u s e d w here c o m p lia n c e w ith            it    m ig h t
p r e j u d ic e any c r im in a l i n v e s t i g a t i o n o r p r o c e e d in g s p e n d in g a t
t h e t im e o f t h e r e q u e s t o r w h ere c o m p lia n c e w o u ld b e c o n t r a r y t o
t h e p u b l ic i n t e r e s t and t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e a g r e e s t h a t th e
r e q u e s t s h o u ld n o t b e c o m p lie d w it h .     W here a r e q u e s t f o r a c o p y
o f a c o m p l a i n t i s r e f u s e d , n o f u r t h e r r e q u e s t m ay b e m a d e w i t h i n
6 m on ths o f t h e r e f u s a l .

R e g u la tio n    10 p r o v i d e s t h a t c o m p l a i n t s o f d e a t h o r s e r i o u s
in j u r y , w h o se i n v e s t i g a t i o n t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y a r e r e q u ir e d
t o s u p e r v is e u n d er s e c t i o n 8 7 ( 1 ) ( a ) ( i ) o f t h e 1984 A c t, m ust be
r e f e r r e d t o th em b y t h e en d o f t h e d a y a f t e r i t b e c o m e s c l e a r t o
th e a p p r o p r ia te a u th o r ity             th a t se c tio n  87(1)(a)(i)           a p p lie s.
Paragraph 2 p r o v id e s th e                     sam e t i m e l i m i t      fo r    referra l of
c o m p la i n t s " c a l l e d in " b y t h e A u t h o r i t y u n d e r s e c t i o n 8 7 ( 2 ) .

R e g u l a t i o n 11 p r o v i d e s t h a t t h e p r o v i s i o n s o f P a r t IX o f t h e A c t
s h a l l n o t a p p l y w h e r e t h e c o m p l a i n a n t o r h i s s o l i c i t o r o r som e
o th er p erso n a c tin g a s h is a u th o r ise d a g en t g iv e s n o t if ic a t io n
in w r i t i n g t h a t h e w ith d r a w s t h e c o m p la in t o r d o e s n o t w an t any
fu r th e r s te p s tak en in con sequence o f i t .                     Paragraph 2 r e q u ir e s
t h e a p p r o p r ia t e a u t h o r it y t o fo rw a rd t o t h e C o m p la in ts A u th o r it y
a copy o f any n o t i f i c a t i o n g iv e n under t h i s                  r e g u la tio n i f th e
c o m p la in t was fo rw a rd ed t o              th e a p p r o p r ia te     a u th o r ity by th e
A u t h o r i t y o r h a s b e e n r e f e r r e d t o t h e A u t h o r i t y u n d e r s e c t i o n 87
o f th e A ct or h as been s e n t to th e A u th o rity under s e c t io n 90(9)
o f th e A ct.

R e g u la tio n    12     r e q u ir e s   th e    k e e p in g     of    a    fo rce     c o m p la in ts
r e g iste r .

R e g u l a t i o n 13 p e r m i t s a c h i e f o f f i c e r t o d e l e g a t e h i s f u n c t i o n s
u n d er c e r t a i n p a r t s o f t h e A c t and u n d er t h e r e g u l a t i o n s r e l a t i n g
t o c o m p la in ts.       D e l e g a t i o n m ay b e t o a n a s s i s t a n t c o m m i s s i o n e r
o r com m ander i n t h e C i t y o f London p o l i c e ,                       t o an a s s i s t a n t
c o m m issio n e r o r d e p u ty a s s i s t a n t c o m m issio n e r i n t h e M e t r o p o lit a n
P o l i c e and t o a d ep u ty c h i e f c o n s t a b le o r a s s i s t a n t c h i e f
c o n s ta b le in any o th e r f o r c e .          I n n o c a s e m ay d e l e g a t i o n b e t o
a n o f f i c e r w ho h a s a c t e d a s i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r i n r e l a t i o n t o
t h e c o m p l a i n t i n q u e s t i o n o r w ho h a s a c t e d i n r e l a t i o n t o i t i n
any a tte m p t t o r e s o l v e i t in f o r m a lly .




9/91                                                C2
                                                ANNEX D
NOTES ON THE POLICE                (COMPLAINTS) (MANDATORY REFERRALS ETC)
                                      REGULATIONS 1 9 8 5

R e g u la tio n 1 p r o v id e s     fo r th e r e g u la tio n s to        com e i n t o    f o r c e on
29 A p r i l 1 9 8 5 .

R e g u la tio n 2 i s an i n t e r p r e t a t i o n p r o v is io n .     The d e f i n i t i o n o f
" c o m p la in t" i n c l u d e s a c o m p la in t a g a i n s t a p o l i c e o f f i c e r o f any
rank.

R e g u la t io n 3 m eans t h a t t h e r e g u l a t i o n s do n o t a p p ly t o any
c o m p l a i n t m ade b e f o r e 29 A p r i l 1 9 8 5 , o r t o a n y c o m p l a i n t o r n o n ­
c o m p l a i n t m a t t e r r e l a t e d t o c o n d u c t w h i c h o c c u r r e d b e f o r e 29
A p r il 1985.

R e g u la tio n 4 p r o v id e s t h a t , in a d d itio n t o c o m p la in ts o f d ea th
o r s e r i o u s in j u r y w h ich m u st b e r e f e r r e d t o t h e C o m p la in ts
A u th o rity       under       se c tio n    87(1)(a)(i)          of    th e     1984 A c t,        th e
a p p r o p r ia t e a u t h o r it y m ust a l s o r e f e r any c o m p la in t a l l e g i n g
a s s a u l t o c c a s i o n i n g a c t u a l b o d i l y harm ,        co r r u p tio n , or th e
c o m m issio n o f a s e r i o u s a r r e s t a b l e o f f e n c e , s o t h a t t h e A u t h o r it y
can d e c id e w h eth er o r n o t t o s u p e r v is e i t s i n v e s t i g a t i o n .           The
c o m p la in t m ust b e r e f e r r e d by t h e end o f t h e d ay a f t e r i t f i r s t
becom es c le a r t o th e a p p r o p r ia te a u th o r ity t h a t t h i s r e g u la tio n
a p p lie s to i t .

R e g u la t io n 5 g i v e s t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y c e r t a i n p o w ers in
r e la tio n        to     in v e s tig a tio n s     w h ich    th ey        are    to    su p e r v ise .
P a r a g r a p h 1 e x t e n d s t h e a m b it o f t h e i r pow er u n d e r s e c t i o n 8 9 ( 4 )
o f t h e 1 9 8 4 A c t , s o a s t o a l l o w th em t o a p p r o v e o r v e t o t h e
c h o i c e o f an i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r i n n o n -c o m p la in t m a t t e r s w h ich
th e y have d ecid e d t o s u p e r v is e .             Paragraph 2 g iv e s th e A u th o rity
p ow er t o im p o se s u c h r e a s o n a b l e r e q u ir e m e n t s a s t o t h e c o n d u c t
o f t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n a s a p p e a r t o th em t o b e n e c e s s a r y .            T h is
pow er i s s u b j e c t t o t h e r e s e r v a t i o n t h a t t h e A u t h o r it y m ust
o b ta in th e c o n sen t o f th e D ir e c to r o f P u b lic P r o se c u tio n s fo r
r e q u i r e m e n t s o n m a t t e r s o f c r i m i n a l e v i d e n c e , a n d m u s t n o t m ak e
any r e q u ir e m e n t r e l a t e d t o t h e r e s o u r c e s a c h i e f o f f i c e r i s t o
p r o v i d e f o r an i n v e s t i g a t i o n b e f o r e c o n s u l t i n g h im a n d h a v i n g
r e g a r d t o a n y r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s h e may m a k e .




9/91                                               D1
                                                ANNEX E
NOTES ON THE POLICE (DISPENSATION FROM REQUIREMENT TO INVESTIGATE
COMPLAINTS) REGULATIONS 1 9 8 5 (FORMERLY THE POLICE (ANONYMOUS,
REPETITIOUS ETC. COMPLAINTS) REGULATIONS 1 9 8 5 ) .

T he P o l i c e (A nonym ous, R e p e t i t i o u s e t c C o m p la in t s ) R e g u l a t i o n s
1 9 8 5 w e r e am ended b y t h e P o l i c e ( D i s p e n s a t i o n from R e q u ir e m e n t
t o I n v e s t i g a t e C o m p l a in t s ) R e g u l a t i o n s 1 9 9 0 , w h i c h cam e i n t o
f o r c e on 1 J u ly 1990.

R e g u la tio n 1      p r o v i d e s f o r t h e R e g u l a t i o n s t o com e i n t o f o r c e i n
1985.

R e g u la t io n 2 i s an i n t e r p r e t a t i o n p r o v is io n .     The d e f i n i t i o n o f
" c o m p la in t" i n c l u d e s a c o m p la in t a g a i n s t a p o l i c e o f f i c e r o f any
rank.

R e g u la tio n      3      c o n ta in s th e su b sta n ce o f th e s e R e g u la tio n s.
P a r a g ra p h (1) p r o v id e s t h a t w h ere t h e a p p r o p r ia t e a u t h o r i t y i s
o f t h e o p i n i o n t h a t a c o m p la in t i s anonym ous o r r e p e t i t i o u s , o r
i s v e x a t i o u s , o p p r e s s i v e o r o t h e r w is e an a b u se o f t h e p r o c e d u r e s
fo r d e a lin g w ith c o m p la in ts, or i s in c a p a b le o f in v e s t ig a t i o n a s
d e f i n e d b y p a r a g r a p h s 2 , 3 and 4 o f t h e S c h e d u le r e s p e c t i v e l y ) ,
o r i f t h e c o m p l a i n t h a s b e e n m a d e m o r e t h a n 12 m o n t h s a f t e r t h e
i n c i d e n t w h ic h g a v e r i s e t o i t , and t h a t e i t h e r no g o o d r e a s o n
f o r t h e d e l a y h a s b e e n g i v e n , o r t h a t i n j u s t i c e w o u ld b e l i k e l y
t o b e c a u s e d b y t h e d e l a y , t h e y may r e q u e s t t h e C o m p l a i n t s
a u t h o r i t y t o d i s p e n s e w i t h t h e r e q u i r e m e n t o f P a r t IX o f t h e 1 9 8 4
A c t ; t h i s m ay b e d o n e a t a n y s t a g e o f d e a l i n g w i t h t h e c o m p l a i n t .
P a ra g ra p h (2) s p e c i f i e s t h e in f o r m a t io n t h a t i s t o b e s u p p lie d
t o t h e C o m p l a in t s A u t h o r i t y w hen m a k in g t h e r e q u e s t .       Paragraph
 (3)      g iv e s    th e     C o m p la in ts   A u th o rity       Pow er t o       m ake s u c h       a
d isp e n sa tio n        and r e q u ir e s      th en to          c o n su lt   th e   a p p r o p r ia te
a u t h o r i t y b e f o r e r e j e c t i n g a r e q u e s t , and p a r a g r a p h (4) r e q u ir e s
t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r it y t o n o t i f y t h e a p p r o p r ia t e a u t h o r it y and,
w h ere t h e C o m p la in ts A u t h o r i t y a g r e e t o t h e r e q u e s t , t o in fo r m
t h e c o m p la in a n t u n le s s t h i s i s n o t r e a s o n a b ly p r a c t i c a b l e .

The S c h e d u le c o n t a i n s d e f i n i t i o n s f o r t h e o p e r a t i o n o f r e g u l a t i o n
3.      P a r a g r a p h 1 e x p l a i n s r e f e r e n c e s w i t h i n t h e S c h e d u l e t o "an
in j u r e d p e r s o n o t h e r th a n t h e c o m p la in a n t" and t o " a c t io n n o t
b e in g r e a so n a b ly p r a c tic a b le " .             P a r a g r a p h s 2 and 3 d e f i n e an
"anonym ous              c o m p la in t" ,      a     " r e p e titio u s       c o m p la in t"    and    an
" in f o r m a lly r e s o l v e d c o m p la in t" f o r t h e p u r p o s e s o f r e g u l a t io n
3.       P a r a g r a p h 4 s e t s o u t t h e c i r c u m s t a n c e s i n w h i c h i t may b e
sa id       to       be      "not      r e a so n a b ly     p r a c tic a b le      to     co m p le te th e
i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f a c o m p la in t" .




9/91                                                El
                                                ANNEX F

TIMING OF INVESTIGATION OF A COMPLAINT WHERE THERE ARE PENDING
                     CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

In v e stig a tio n s     B efore th e T r ia l

1.            A common t y p e o f c a s e w h e r e p r o b l e m s o f t i m i n g m ay a r i s e
i s o n e i n w h ic h t h e c o m p la in t and a l l e g a t i o n s in v o l v e d in i t a r e
d i r e c t l y o r c l o s e l y a s s o c i a t e d w it h c r i m in a l p r o c e e d i n g s w h ich
a r e p e n d in g .     In such a c a s e , sa v e in e x c e p tio n a l circu m sta n ce s
o f t h e k in d m e n tio n e d i n p a ra g ra p h 6 b e lo w , i t i s s u g g e s t e d t h a t
t h e c o m p la in t sh o u ld b e r eg a r d e d a s b e in g in e f f e c t sub j u d ic e
and t h a t i n v e s t i g a t i o n s h o u ld o r d i n a r i l y b e d e f e r r e d u n t i l t h e
c o n c lu sio n o f th e t r i a l .          The d e s i r a b i l i t y o f i d e n t i f y i n g a l l
p o s s i b l e w i t n e s s e s a s s o o n a s p o s s i b l e an d t a k i n g fro m them
s ta te m e n ts r e le v a n t t o th e c o m p la in t i s a p p r e c ia te d b u t in th e
norm al c a s e         it      is   o u tw e ig h e d  by th e          o th er  c o n sid e r a tio n s
m e n tio n e d i n p a r a g r a p h s 2 t o 5 b e lo w .

2.          F ir st,     th e   in v e stig a tio n      u su a lly      b e g in s  w ith        th e
c o m p la in a n t b e in g in t e r v ie w e d and q u e s t io n e d a s t o t h e d e t a i l s
o f h i s c o m p l a i n t an d a s t a t e m e n t b e i n g t a k e n from h im , p r o v i d e d
h e d e s i r e s t o m ake o n e .      An i n q u i r y o f t h i s n a t u r e o f n e c e s s i t y
in v o l v e s a p r o b in g e x a m in a tio n o f t h e c o m p la in a n t on m a tte r s
t o u c h in g upon o f f e n c e s w it h w h ic h h e h a s b e e n c h a r g e d and w h ich
a re s t i l l s u b je c t t o d e te r m in a tio n by th e c o u r t.

3.            Such     an      in q u ir y   is      open t o        c r itic ism        in     th a t it
f a c i l i t a t e s t h e o b t a i n i n g o f i n c r i m i n a t i n g s t a t e m e n t s from t h e
c o m p la in a n t, and t h e e x p o s in g o f h i s d e f e n c e t o t h e p e n d in g
p r o c e e d in g s.     The u n d e s i r a b i l i t y o f su c h a c o u r s e i s u n d e r lin e d
by t h e te r m s o f " p a r a g ra p h 1 7 . 5 o f t h e Code o f P r a c t i c e f o r t h e
D ete n tio n ,       T r e a tm e n t and Q u e s t io n in g          of   P erso n s by P o lic e
O ffic e r s" .

4.           S e c o n d ly ,     th e    in te r v ie w    m ig h t   w e ll    in v o lv e      th e
i d e n t i f i c a t i o n o f w i t n e s s e s whom t h e d e f e n c e p r o p o s e t o c a l l .
I f th e in v e s t ig a t i o n i s p u rsued th e in v e s t ig a t i n g o f f i c e r w i l l
need       to       in te r v ie w    th ese     w itn e sse s   w ith   a v ie w       to   ta k in g
s t a t e m e n t s from th em .

5.          T h i r d l y , t h e c o m p la in a n t w o u ld r e q u i r e t o b e c a u t io n e d
b e f o r e b e i n g q u e s t i o n e d , c e r t a i n l y i f a n y s t a t e m e n t s m a d e b y h im
an d i n d e e d b y a n y p o s s i b l e w i t n e s s e s a r e t o b e m ade a v a i l a b l e t o
t h e p r o s e c u t i n g s o l i c i t o r f o r u s e b y t h e p r o s e c u t i o n . To c a u t i o n
t h e c o m p l a i n a n t i n t h e s e c i r c u m s t a n c e s c o u l d w e l l i n h i b i t h im
from s u p p ly i n g an y in f o r m a t i o n and c o u ld b e r e g a r d e d a s h a v in g
t h e e f f e c t o f d i s c o u r a g i n g h im f r o m p u r s u i n g h i s c o m p l a i n t .

6.           T h er e m ay, h o w e v e r , b e e x c e p t i o n a l c i r c u m s t a n c e s w h ere i t
i s p r o p e r t o p r o c e e d w ith t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f t h e c o m p la in t
p r o v id e d t h a t t h e c o m p la in a n t i s l e g a l l y r e p r e s e n t e d and t h a t i t
is     c le a r      th a t th e s o l ic it o r      r e p r e s e n t i n g h im ,     w h ile     fu lly
a p p r e c i a t i n g t h e p r e j u d ic e w h ich c o u ld r e s u l t t o h i s c l i e n t w ere
he     to      be      in te r v ie w e d    p r io r  to     th e       d eterm in a tio n      of    th e

9/91                                                FI
proceedings, indicates that he nonetheless      desires that the
complaint should be investigated immediately.     One such example
might be if the complaint appears so cogent     that it makes the
deputy chief constable doubtful after taking    legal advice (see
paragraph 8 below), whether it is proper to     continue with the
prosecution at all.
7.     Where a complaint is investigated before trial the report
of the investigation would, where this is necessary by virtue of
section 49(3) of the 1964 Act, be sent to the Director of Public
Prosecutions.   It may be that the Director would not feel it
right to give any decision as to proceedings being taken against
the police officer or officers concerned until the pending
proceedings had been disposed of but, dependent on the nature of
the complaint and of the evidence available in support of it, the
Director might think it right to give advice as to the
desirability of continuing with the pending proceedings against
the complainant.
8.     The Secretary of State advises that the solicitor for the
prosecution and where appropriate counsel should in all cases be
informed at an early stage of any relevant complaint and of its
nature. The deputy chief constable may care to seek their advice
as to when the investigation should take place, seeking further
advice from the Director in cases of difficulty.

9.    To sum up, it is suggested that in the type of case
mentioned in paragraph 1 above:

  a. if the complainant is not legally represented, he should
  not, save in exceptional circumstances, be interviewed, but
  should be told that the investigation of the complaint will be
  suspended until after the trial;

  b. if the complainant is legally represented, his solicitors
  should be told that it is proposed to suspend the
  investigation until the pending proceedings have been disposed
  of, since it would involve interviewing their client and
  questioning him on matters touching upon the charge preferred
  against him and might well necessitate interviewing any
  witness whom it might be possible he intended to call on his
  behalf.  The solicitors should also be informed that if the
  investigation were to proceed any statements made by the
  complainant or by the relevant witnesses would be made
  available to the prosecution;

  c. if notwithstanding this warning, the solicitors still
  stated that the complainant wished that enquiries be not
  delayed pending his trial, then the deputy chief constable may
  think it proper for the investigation to proceed.          The
  complainant might so wish if he thought it might bring to
  light evidence which would result in the prosecution being
  withdrawn.   The complainant should be cautioned before any
  questions were put to him or any statement taken from him;

  d.   the solicitors should in such circumstances be asked to

9/91                           F2
  state in writing that they agree to the complaint being
  investigated and realise that the result may be given in
  evidence;

  e. the prosecution lawyers should be informed at an early
  stage of any relevant complaint and of its nature.

Police Investigations in Complaints and Other Matters Affecting
Conviction After Trial But Before an Appeal
10.    If a person who has been convicted at a magistrates' court
appeals to the crown court, his appeal is heard by way of a re­
hearing of the case. The considerations set out in the previous
paragraphs regarding the investigation of a complaint before
trial apply equally where an appeal against conviction has been
made to the crown court.

11.    The   same  objections   do   not  apply,   however,   an
investigation preceding an appeal from conviction at the crown
court because the hearing of an appeal by the Court of Appeal
does not constitute a retrial, the appellant rarely appears and
fresh evidence is involved in only a very few cases.     For the
most part the question before the Court of Appeal is whether
there was anything wrong with the conduct of the trial at the
crown court.    It is considered desirable that any material
relevant to an appeal, including any such material which arises
in the context of a complaint, should be before the Court of
Appeal at the time of the hearing. Where this has not happened,
it has sometimes been necessary for the case to be referred back
to the court by the Secretary of State under section 17 of the
Criminal Appeal Act 1968 for reconsideration in the light of
fresh evidence arising from subsequent police investigations.
12.    The Secretary of State therefore wishes to commend to
chief officers the practice of rather greater flexibility as
regards investigations following conviction in the crown court
but before an appeal may have been heard.     It is an essential
element in any such greater flexibility of practice that the
defence should agree in writing to provide access to the
defendant and their witnesses        for the purpose of the
investigation under section 85 of the 1984 Act. Investigations
might for instance be appropriate in the following circumstances:
  a.   at the request of the trial judge or the Court of Appeal;

  b.   when information about documents in the possession of the
       police or the examination of exhibits has been requested
       by the appellant, either direct or through the Registrar
       of the Court of Appeal;

  c.   because matters come to the attention of the police which
       throw doubt on the validity of the conviction.
There may be other cases.

13.    It is not suggested that the investigation of a complaint

9/91                           F3
should proceed automatically at this stage but that the deputy
chief constable should consider seeking the advice, where
necessary, of the prosecuting solicitors and/or the Director
whether it would be appropriate to proceed with enquiries (see
paragraph 8 above). Where, after such consultation, there are
still doubts about whether it is proper to begin or to continue
with enquiries before the hearing of an appeal, it is suggested
that the deputy chief constable should inform the Registrar of
the Court of Appeal what is proposed and why, so that the Court
may, if they think it appropriate, indicate that they would see
objection to enquiries proceeding. It would also help the Court
of Appeal if the deputy chief constable informed the Registrar
of any case where enquiries were proceeding before appeal at the
beginning of those enquiries, if he considered that the outcome
of the investigation might substantially affect the appeal.

14.    When it is decided to proceed with an investigation
pending appeal, the deputy chief constable should keep his legal
advisers informed of progress, and notify them especially of any
developments that may bear upon the conviction under appeal. In
cases where it is not possible to assess the authenticity of
information coming to light until all enquiries have been
completed the deputy chief constable should apprise them of that
situation.   The prosecuting solicitor and, where appropriate,
counsel will be able to advise whether any new material is
relevant, and, if so, how it should be assembled so that it will
be admissible in evidence, if necessary. They will also arrange
for any such evidence to be made available to the Court of Appeal
and, in accordance with the usual procedure, for copies to be
supplied to the defence.

15.    There should be no alteration in the normal rule that the
report of the investigating officer is a confidential document
that should not itself be disclosed.




9/91                           F4
                             ANNEX 6
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE IN CASES WHERE CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS
ARE TO BE INSTITUTED AGAINST THE POLICE OFFICER

1.     Where a complaint has been referred to the Director of
Public Prosecutions under section 90(4) or section 92(2) and the
Director has notified his decision on the question of criminal
proceedings, the chief officer is required, by virtue of section
90(5) of the 1984    Act, to refer the case to the Complaints
Authority straight away.     There is no exemption     from this
procedure because criminal proceedings are being brought. It is
recognised, however, that where there are to be criminal
proceedings no decision on the disciplinary aspects of the case
can in most cases be reached until the outcome of the criminal
proceedings is known. An additional complicating factor is that
when the criminal proceedings result in a conviction the chief
officer may wish to bring a charge of criminal conduct under
paragraph 16 of the discipline code. (This is not a charge with
which the Complaints Authority have any concern since it is not
a charge arising directly out of the complaint). If, however,
such a charge is brought       and subsequently the    Complaints
Authority exercise their powers to recommend or       direct the
bringing of other disciplinary charges the officer may find
himself facing a second disciplinary hearing.       While it is
entirely within the chief officer's discretion at what point
after the conviction he brings a charge under paragraph 16 it is
suggested that, where criminal proceedings are pending in a
complaints case, chief officers may find it helpful to adopt the
procedure set out in the following paragraphs.

2.     If the chief officer is satisfied that the criminal charge
or charges cover the whole matter of the complaint, he will refer
the papers to the Complaints Authority at once under section
90(5) giving this as the reason why he has not brought charges
and does not propose to bring any disciplinary charges (other
than a possible charge under paragraph 16). If the Complaints
Authority agree, that is the end of the matter; but the chief
officer will not inform the officer and the Authority will not
inform the complainant of the decision until the criminal
proceedings are completed.   (Chief officers are asked to inform
the Complaints Authority of the eventual outcome of the criminal
proceedings) . If the Complaints Authority do not agree they will
so inform the chief officer and he will proceed as if paragraph
3 below had applied.

3.      If the chief officer is not satisfied that the criminal
charge (s) cover the whole matter of the complaint, he will refer
the papers to the Complaints Authority at once under section
90(5) giving as his reason for not preferring charges the fact
that criminal proceedings are pending and informing them that he
will let them have a further report when the outcome is known.
The Complaints Authority will take no action at this stage except
to note the report. Once the criminal proceedings are completed
the chief officer will consider the disciplinary aspects of the
case and follow one of the courses set out in paragraphs 4, 5 and

9/91                           61
6 below.


4.    If the chief officer proposes to bring a charge under
paragraph 16 and the officer concerned is in prison or has
received a suspended sentence, he will bring the paragraph 16
charge and arrange for it to be heard and then inform the
Complaints Authority of the result.

5.    Where the criminal charge leads to a penalty other than
imprisonment or a suspended sentence:

     i. If the chief officer decides not to bring disciplinary
     charges other than a paragraph 16 charge he should prefer the
     latter but should not arrange the hearing until he has
     reported to the Complaints Authority why he is not bringing
     other disciplinary charges and the Authority have given their
     decision.

     ii.   If the chief officer decides to prefer disciplinary
     charges, with or without a paragraph 16 charge, he should
     prefer the charges but should not arrange the hearing until he
     has reported to the Complaints Authority and the Authority
     have given their decision.     (If, however, the disciplinary
     charges, other than the paragraph 16 charge, cover all the
     matters complained of which were not covered by the criminal
     charge and all the charges are admitted, the hearing can take
     place and the Complaints Authority need only be informed of
     the outcome under section 90(2).)

6.    If the chief officer does not intend to bring a paragraph
16 charge or if the officer was acquitted of the criminal
offence, he will report to the Complaints Authority for their
decision whether to recommend or direct that disciplinary charges
(or charges additional to those which the chief officer himself
intends to bring) should be brought.

7.    It should be noted that reports to          the Complaints
Authority in the circumstances described in paragraphs 5 and 6
above are not formal references because that will already have
been done under paragraph 3 above. But the chief officer will
have to bring his memorandum up to date by giving the outcome of
the criminal proceedings and his reasons for not bringing any
disciplinary charges which he could in theory have brought.
Where the chief officer takes the view that charges are precluded
by virtue of the 'no double jeopardy' rule the Authority will
need more than a bare statement to that effect. It will normally
be helpful to them to have a brief report giving the substance
of the criminal case, and, in particular, any further information
which might be relevant to any possible disciplinary charges.

8.    The fact that the officer complained of ceases to serve
as a police officer does not put the complaint outside the
purview of the Complaints Authority.  (See paragraph 6.44).

9.      Where disciplinary charges    (other than   a paragraph 16
9/91                             G2
charge) are preferred and denied the case must be submitted to
the Complaints Authority for their decision whether a tribunal
ought to be held.




9/91                         G3
                             ANNEX H
          NOTES ON DISCIPLINARY HEARINGS BEFORE THE
              CHIEF OFFICER AND BEFORE A TRIBUNAL

The following notes are designed to ensure that disciplinary
proceedings are conducted fairly and with uniformity.   Some of
the notes reproduce provisions of the Regulations but are
included here for the sake of completeness.       Reference to
Regulations are to the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

TRIBUNAL CASES

2.     Where the Police Complaints Authority have directed that
a charge or charges shall be heard by a tribunal, the tribunal
as a whole exercises, by a majority if necessary, the same powers
in relation to the hearing (except on punishment) as are normally
exercised by the chief officer alone.         References in the
following paragraphs to the officer conducting the hearing or to
the presiding officer should accordingly be taken in appropriate
cases as references to the tribunal.

3.     Where it has been arranged for related charges to be heard
at the same time as charges in respect of which a tribunal is to
be held (see section 94 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act
1984) , all the charges will be heard by the tribunal and the
procedure for all of them will be the same as in any other
tribunal case.
LEGAL REPRESENTATION CASES

4.     The following paragraphs describe the procedure for
determining whether an accused officer should be offered the
right to elect for legal representation at a disciplinary hearing
and for notifying him of this.       The subsequent procedures,
including procedures at the hearing, should be identical whether
the case is presented and defended by a lawyer or by a serving
police officer.
5.     Section 102 of the 1984 Act provides that the punishments
of dismissal, requirement to resign or reduction in rank may not
be imposed at a disciplinary hearing unless the accused officer
has been given an opportunity to elect to be represented by a
lawyer at the hearing.    Accordingly, the first question to be
considered once the decision has been taken to charge an officer
is whether or not it should be a 'legal representation' case.
The decision should be taken by the officer bringing the charge
(who except in delegated cases and in the Metropolitan and city
of London Police Forces will be the deputy chief constable).
There are two opposing considerations which deputies will have
to bear fully in mind when making their decision.     On the one
hand, the chief officer's powers of punishment will be severely
limited unless legal representation has been offered in due form:
he will be unable to impose a penalty more severe than reduction
in rate of pay. On the other hand, for a variety of reasons the
deputy should attempt as far as possible to limit the number of

9/91                           HI
occasions on which the right to elect for legal representation
is offered. First, such an offer is in effect a warning to the
officer that on conviction he is liable to receive one of the
most serious punishments; if it is given unnecessarily it may
cause the accused officer considerable needless anxiety. Second,
in such a situation the accused officer may well feel that he
ought to retain a lawyer rather than a serving police officer
'friend' for his defence, which could be very expensive for him
or his staff association.     Third, where he does elect to be
represented by a lawyer, the Act provides that the case against
him may be presented by a lawyer, which also has considerable
cost implications.
6.     The deputy thus has a delicate path to tread, and in
reaching his decision he should take account of all relevant
considerations.    In the Secretary of State's view legal
representation should be offered if and only if the deputy
considers that were the charge to be found proved, there would
be a genuine prospect of the chief officer considering a
punishment of dismissal, requirement to resign or reduction in
rank appropriate to the case.
7.     The procedure for notifying an officer that he is to have
the right to elect for legal representation is set out in the
Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985. These provide that where
the officer formulating the charges is of the view that the case
is a "legal representation" case, the officer concerned will be
given an opportunity on the discipline form to indicate whether
or not he wishes to be legally represented.      The regulations
further provide that he should be required to indicate his
decision on the matter within 14 days of the date on which the
documents in the case (see paragraph 12 below) are served on him.
Normally these documents should be served with the discipline
form. Where any one of the documents is served later, the 14 day
period starts from the date on which that document was served.
Where, however, a document is adduced at a hearing by agreement
between the two sides, the introduction of that document shall
not of itself justify an adjournment of the hearing to allow the
unrepresented officer to consider electing to be represented at
later sessions of the same hearing.        In such a situation,
however, the officer presiding at the hearing should consider
granting an adjournment to allow the defendant to reconsider his
position if the statement so affects the strength of the case
against him (either as to his guilt or as to the likely severity
of the punishment to be awarded) that it would be in the
interests of justice to grant it.      The discipline form will
indicate to the officer that if he fails to make an election
within the 14 day period without reasonable cause, this will be
taken to indicate a decision on his part not to be legally
represented.

8.     The right given in the legislation is a right not to
receive the most severe punishments at a disciplinary hearing
unless the offer has been made of legal representation at the
officer's expense. Obviously, if the officer gives notice that
he does not wish to be so represented, or without reasonable

9/91                           H2
cause fails within the time limit to give notification that he
does so wish, the punishments of loss of job and rank will be
available to the chief officer if the charge is found proved.

9.     There may be cases in which two officers face the same
charges, but, because one of them has rank and the other not, the
most severe punishment thought reasonably likely in the latter
case is a financial penalty, while in the former case it may be
considered likely that a reduction in rank would be imposed. If
the deputy considers that the charges should nonetheless be heard
together, the right to elect for legal representation should be
offered to both officers.

10.    In the case of a Metropolitan Police officer who qualifies
and elects for legal representation at a hearing before a
Disciplinary Board, the right to such representation shall
continue if the charge is found proved, until an appeal by him
has been heard by the Commissioner.
PREPARATION
Rights of the accused officer

11.    Every effort should be made to assist an accused officer,
his 'friend' or his legal representative to interview witnesses
who might be called for the defence.    It is recognised that an
investigating officer should ideally be seen by both sides as
acting totally neutrally as between an accused officer and the
authority   presenting   the  case   against   him.     In many
circumstances, therefore, the defence will be content for the
Investigating Officer or some other officer of the force to be
present at such interviews.    Cases may arise where the public
interest in the protection of classified or otherwise sensitive
information might require the presence of a senior officer of the
force at interviews of this kind. Normally, however, where the
accused officer, his 'friend' or his legal representative raises
objections, chief officers should permit the interviews of
defence witnesses to take place in the absence of both the
investigating officer and any other officer.

12.    The accused officer must be presented with copies of the
evidence and ordered to appear at the disciplinary hearing as
soon as possible after the decision has been taken to proceed
with a disciplinary charge, and at least 21 days before the date
set for the hearing. Regulation 10(1) specifies the documents
that he is entitled to receive.

13.    When the above papers are served, then, if it is not a
legal representation case, the accused should be reminded that
he may consult, and be represented at the hearing by, a 'friend'
who may be any serving member of a police force irrespective of
rank; and that he may consult a lawyer about any aspect of the
case, though he may not actually be represented by a lawyer at
the hearing.

14.    Where two or more officers are accused of offences arising

9/91                            H3
from the same incident they may ask that their cases be heard
separately. The officer arranging the hearing should grant such
a request unless he is satisfied that a joint hearing can be held
without injustice to either or any of the accused.
Documents to be made available to disciplinary authority

15.    Statements taken from witnesses or other persons by an
investigating officer which are provided to an accused officer
under Regulation 10(1)     should not be placed before the
disciplinary authority before the hearing. At the hearing the
officer presiding should be provided only with the discipline
form, indicating the charges to be heard.         If during the
proceedings the presenting officer or the accused officer wishes
to put in evidence a written statement from a witness who is to
be called to give evidence he should be allowed to do so, subject
to the consent of either side at the hearing. Where the witness
is not to be called to give evidence, any statement from that
witness will be admissible only if the requirements of Regulation
17 have been fulfilled (amongst other matters, this gives both
the accused and the presenting officer the effective power to
require that written statements shall be admitted as evidence on
behalf of the other side only if the maker of the statement is
called as a witness and made available for cross-examination.
GENERAL AND PRELIMINARY
16.    Subject to the provisions of Regulations 18(2) and 22, the
hearing will be conducted in private (see, further, paragraphs
25, 41 and 42).

17.    The case against the accused officer will be presented by
a serving officer (who may be the investigating officer, except
in cases where he may be called as a witness unless there is
agreement with the defence for him to so act) or lawyer, as
appropriate (see above). His duties include making an opening
statement, giving a brief outline of the case, examining the
witnesses and helping to bring out the facts both for and against
the accused.

18.    At the hearing the accused officer may conduct his defence
in person, or be represented by any serving member of a police
force irrespective of rank (the 'friend'), or, in 'legal
representation' cases, by a solicitor or barrister. The accused
should be given every facility for communicating with his
'friend' or lawyer. If he is represented by a 'friend' both he
and his 'friend' may cross-examine the witnesses called to
support the case against him. The accused's 'friend' may appear
at the hearing either in uniform or in plain clothes.

19.   The regulations are so drawn that it is open to the
officer conducting the hearing to be assisted by a solicitor or
barrister.  It is suggested that consideration should be given
to obtaining assistance of this kind only in those cases where
both the defence and the case against the accused officer are to
be presented by lawyers. The decision should normally be taken

9/91                           H4
by the deputy chief constable in order to prevent the presiding
officer from gaining prior knowledge of the case. In reaching
his decision the deputy chief constable should attempt to assess
whether it is likely that points of law will arise such as will
require advice from a lawyer.   In reaching his decision, there
would appear to be no objection to his approaching the lawyers
involved in the case to inquire whether such points are likely
to be put forward at the hearing. Care should be taken if such
an approach is made not to discuss any merits of points which
might be put forward nor to apprise the officer who will conduct
the hearing of the nature of the issues which will be raised.
During the hearing, the lawyer assisting the presiding officer
should not be asked to advise on matters of fact. His advice on
points of law should be given orally and in the hearing of all
parties to the case.
20.    Before the case against him is presented the accused may
submit that the facts alleged in the charge are not such as to
constitute the offence with which he is charged.         If the
submission is upheld the disciplinary charge to which it relates
must be dismissed (Regulation 18(6)). He may also at this stage
submit that the correct procedure has not been followed - for
example that he has not received all the documents to which he
is entitled under Regulation 10(1). If this is upheld, the case
should be adjourned.   If, following the dismissal of a charge
under Regulation 18(6), an amended charge is preferred, the
proceedings may, and if the accused wishes it, shall, be
adjourned to enable him to consider his defence or to introduce
fresh evidence. In a complaint case, there is no requirement to
refer the matter back to the Police Complaints Authority when a
charge has been dismissed, whether or not it is amended at the
hearing.
PLEA OF GUILTY
21.    The officer should be asked at the beginning of the
hearing whether he pleads not guilty or guilty to each charge.
It is open to him to plead not guilty, even if on the discipline
form he has stated that he admits the charge. In addition, the
presiding officer should treat a statement in mitigation made by
or on behalf of the accused officer prior to punishment being
awarded, as a plea of not guilty (despite an earlier guilty plea)
where it appears from the statement that the accused officer did
not understand the nature of his plea or did not intend to plead
guilty, or that the facts adduced in the plea, if substantiated,
would mean that the requirements of the offence had not been made
out.   In either case (whether the charge of plea is at the
instance of the accused officer or the presiding officer) the
presiding officer is required to hear the case as if a plea of
not guilty had been entered from the outset, and he should grant
an adjournment unless satisfied that the case both for and
against the accused officer can be conducted fairly and
effectively without an adjournment.

22.    When an accused officer pleads guilty:


9/91                           H5
  i. the officer conducting the hearing may dispose of the case
  without hearing witnesses, the facts being outlined by the
  presiding officer.   He should, however, hear evidence if he
  considers it desirable to do so, and in particular he should
  agree to any request by the accused or his representative for
  witnesses to be heard;
  ii. whether or not witnesses are to be called, the accused
  officer should be given full opportunity to make or submit any
  statement in mitigation of punishment.

SEQUENCE OF CHARGES AT HEARING
23.    When an accused officer pleads guilty to one or more
charges and not guilty to other charges at the same hearing, the
officer conducting the hearing should first hear the case
concerning the charges to which he has pleaded not guilty, and
the presenting officer should as far as practicable confine his
remarks in his opening statement to matters relevant to these
charges.
24.    Where an officer pleads not guilty to all charges, the
order in which charges are heard is a matter within the
discretion of the officer conducting the hearing.     In deciding
on this he should take account of any request made by the accused
officer.
25.    Where a disciplinary charge stems from a complaint made
by a member of the public, the complainant may if he wishes be
present throughout the proceedings and until a finding is
reached; provided that if he is to be called as a witness, he
should not be allowed to attend before this point, and that the
presiding officer may require him to withdraw if evidence is to
be given which, in the presiding officer's view, might disclose
information which ought not to be disclosed to a member of the
public.   If the presiding officer considers it appropriate, he
may allow the complainant to be accompanied by a friend or
relative, to whose presence the same rules and restrictions will
apply. Apart from giving his evidence, the complainant should
be allowed to put questions to the accused officer either on his
own behalf or through the presenting officer; but he should take
no other part in the proceedings (see Regulation 22 and the notes
on it in Annex B).
ADJOURNMENTS
26.    The hearing may be adjourned from time to time as may be
necessary, either briefly or until a later date. Except insofar
as it might be necessary to discuss administrative arrangements
for the adjourned hearing or hearings, it is important that the
officer conducting the hearing should not discuss the case itself
with any persons whether connected with the case or not. It is
only in this way that the impartiality of the hearings can be
seen to be properly protected.
27.    If   during   the   hearing    of   a   case   facts   emerge   which

9/91                                 H6
establish a prima facie criminal case, the officer conducting the
hearing should if necessary adjourn the hearing to consider what
action is necessary as a result.
28.    At the conclusion of the hearing the presiding officer may
adjourn    to   consider   finding(s)    and   (if   appropriate)
punishment(s).

DECISIONS
29.    In a tribunal case, the decision as to finding will be
reached by the three members together, if necessary by a
majority; the decision as to punishment will be for the chief
officer alone but he must consult the other members of the
tribunal as to their views.
30.    Where a chief officer from another force is hearing the
case under Regulation 14(2) (ie where the accused's own chief
officer is an interested party or a material witness) he will be
responsible for the decisions as to both punishment and finding,
subject, in tribunal cases, to the tribunal's role.

31.    Where the chief officer of another force is hearing the
case at the request of the accused's own chief officer in any
other circumstances (Regulation 14(7)) it is for him alone
(except in tribunal cases) to determine the finding, but he may
only make a recommendation as to punishment.    The decision on
punishment in such cases is for the accused's own chief officer,
taking into account the recommendation(s) of the presiding
officer.

The decision on punishment

32.    Regulation 24(6) provides that in considering the question
of punishment the officer conducting the hearing must have regard
to the accused's record of police service as shown on his
personal record; and he must give the accused or his
representative the opportunity to make oral or written
representations on the question of punishment, to present
relevant evidence and to request that witnesses be called.     It
is open to the officer conducting the case to adjourn the hearing
to hear further evidence relevant to punishment.
33.    The Regulation also makes clear that it is open to the
officer conducting the hearing to consider any other evidence
which in his opinion would assist him in determining the question
of the punishment to be imposed or recommended.       The officer
conducting the hearing should as a matter of course hear evidence
by the appropriate senior officer concerning the accused's
character and his general performance as a police officer.     It
is vital that such evidence should be fair and accurate and
should cover all relevant matters including those which are to
the accused's credit. The officer who is to present it should
therefore exercise considerable care in its preparation; in
particular, to ensure that nothing is included in the evidence
which cannot be substantiated.     The senior officer concerned
should prepare typewritten copies of the evidence he proposes to

9/91                           H7
give (though, of course, it will be necessary for him actually
to present the evidence at the hearing only if the officer is
found guilty) and this should be handed to the accused officer
at least 21 days before the hearing.
34.    The material to be entered in an officer's personal record
following a disciplinary conviction is set out in the Police
Regulations, and, under the relevant Regulation, a punishment so
entered may be expunged at the end of the period specified in the
Regulation if the officer requests this. Punishments which have
been expunged in this way should not be referred to when evidence
is presented as to an officer's character and general record
following a subsequent disciplinary conviction; but evidence
should be given of any 'un-expunged' disciplinary convictions and
of any commendations.      Subject to this, however, the guiding
principle in the selection of evidence of character and record
should be the relevance of the evidence. Thus details of entries
in a divisional discipline book (which, by definition fall short
of formal disciplinary action) should not be given unless they
are relevant to the current charge.      But where an officer has
been found guilty of a serious offence, and his continuance in
the force or in his existing rank is in question, then all
aspects of his performance will be relevant to the question of
punishment.    Moreover, if,for example, he has been found guilty
of being late for duty, it will be relevant that his time keeping
had on other occasions been a cause for concern and that he had
been warned about this         - whether or not this had been
sufficiently serious      to merit an entry in the divisional
discipline book.       Relevance should also be the prime
consideration when deciding whether any reference should be
included to complaints made against an officer during his
service.

35.    The disciplinary authority when considering the question
of punishment should not have regard to any report or other
document which has not been disclosed to the accused officer.
36.    As soon as possible after the hearing the decision of the
disciplinary authority should be recorded on the discipline form
and notified to the accused in writing.    When a punishment is
awarded, a form setting out the conditions of appeal to the
Secretary of State should be handed to the accused officer.

ABSENCE OF ACCUSED

37.    If, without reasonable excuse, an accused officer does not
attend the hearing of the case, the hearing may proceed and be
concluded in his absence subject to the provisions of Regulation
21.   (In such a case, the accused officer's 'friend' or legal
representative may be heard as if the officer were present) . By
virtue of Regulation 21(1)(a), where the accused is in prison and
wishes to make representations in person, the hearing must not
be concluded until he has been enabled to do so. Alternatively
he might wish to have representations made on his behalf by his
'friend' or lawyer, as appropriate.       It should be clearly
established before the hearing whether the accused wishes to

9/91                           H8
attend himself, or to have representations made on his behalf
(see paragraph 9.34 of the Guidance for advice on cases where the
accused officer is medically unfit to attend).

MISCELLANEOUS

38.    A verbatim record of the proceedings at the hearing will
be taken. It is the Secretary of State's view that the record
should normally be made by tape recording unless this is
impractical, for example where the electricity supply fails or
where a hearing takes place away from a police building in a
place where tape facilities cannot be provided. If the accused
officer subsequently gives notice of appeal (whether by way of
an internal appeal or by way of appeal to the Secretary of State)
then, at his request, a transcript of the record will be made and
a copy supplied to him. The transcript is made available to him
for the purposes of his appeal only and must be returned to the
disciplinary authority with any copies when all disciplinary
proceedings are at an end. The record and any transcript should
be held in the secure conditions applied to any confidential
personnel papers. The record should, however, be made available
to the accused officer if he wishes to compare it with the
transcript.

39.   For the purpose of reckoning overtime,          rest day
entitlement and so on, the accused officer, his 'friend' and any
police witnesses who have been engaged in completing statements
and attending a disciplinary hearing should be regarded as on
duty unless in a particular case this would be inappropriate.
In addition, chief officers should allow as duty a reasonable
amount of time spent in preparation of an officer's defence.
40.   Reasonable expenses incurred by civilian witnesses
attending a hearing may, at the discretion of the chief officer
and subject to the concurrence of the police authority, be met
from the police fund.

41.    Apart from the chief officer and, in tribunal cases, the
two Board members, the only persons who should ordinarily be
present during a disciplinary hearing are the presenting officer;
and, in a legal representation case, a police officer adviser;
the shorthand writer; necessary administrative staff; the accused
officer; his representative and, in a legal representation case,
the 'friend' he consulted before the hearing; witnesses when they
are actually giving evidence; the complainant in a complainant
case, together with a friend or relative if appropriate; and any
other police officer or civilian admitted in accordance with
Regulation 18.

42.    It will sometimes be helpful, in the interests of gaining
experience,   for deputy chief constables,      assistant chief
constables and prospective presenting officers or 'friends' to
attend disciplinary hearings in their own force as observers.
There is no objection to this, nor to such officers attending a
hearing in a force other than their own, provided that in all

9/91                           H9
such cases the chief officer concerned gives his permission and
that the accused officer or his representative does not object.
It must be made clear that such an officer is present simply as
an observer and that he will take no part in the proceedings.
The Regulations also permit the attendance of a member (but not
an officer) of the Police Complaints Authority and any solicitor,
in each case at the discretion of the presiding officer and with
the agreement of the accused officer or his representative. In
the case of both Complaints Authority members and solicitors,
attendance should be in the interests of their gaining
experience.   It is recommended that a solicitor may be allowed
to attend where the Police Federation or Superintendent's
Association have indicated that he is likely to be used in the
future to represent their members in disciplinary hearings.




9/91                           H10
                            ANNEX J
                 FORM E - NOTES FOR GUIDANCE
       Please read carefully before completing the form

     GENERAL: Definition of a completed case or complaint

The following criteria should be followed to determine whether
a case or complaint is to be regarded as completed:
  i. any matter which results in disciplinary proceedings being
  brought (either arising out of a complaint or otherwise)
  should be regarded as completed when the disciplinary hearing
  (including any appeal to the chief officer) is over and any
  punishment has been communicated to the officer concerned (no
  account should be taken for this purpose of an appeal to the
  Secretary of State);
  ii. where a matter does not lead to disciplinary proceedings
  it should be regarded as completed when the final decision not
  to take proceedings has been made, ie normally, when the
  Complaints Authority notifies the chief officer of their
  agreement to his decision;

  iii.     a 'non-complaint' matter referred to the Director of
  Public Prosecutions which does not result in either criminal
  or disciplinary proceedings should be regarded as completed at
  the point when the final decision not to take either criminal
  or disciplinary action is made;

  iv. a   'non-complaint'  matter which leads to criminal
  proceedings but to no subsequent disciplinary proceedings
  should be regarded as completed at the point when the final
  decision not to take disciplinary proceedings is made.
PART A - This section applies to cases only.

  i. A 'case' for the purposes of this section is a single
  investigation carried out by an investigating officer into one
  incident or a group of incidents complained of by one or more
  persons. Thus, where a person complains that he was assaulted
  by an officer while being arrested and was later subjected to
  threats at the police station, this would be investigated and
  counted as one case comprising two complaints. Where a second
  person also complains about the alleged assault on the first
  complainant this would still be investigated and counted as
  one case even though it may consist of more than one complaint
  and involve two persons.
  ii. The starting date for a case (to decide in which year's
  figures it should be included) will be the date on which it
  was recorded. Question la, reading across concerns only cases
  received in the current year.    Question lb refers only to
  action taken in the current year on cases received in previous
  years.     The figures should include cases subsequently
  withdrawn or not proceeded with, and cases where the
  Complaints Authority agreed to dispense with requirements.
  iii.     Cases not falling within section 84(4) of the Police
  and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 should not be included anywhere
  in Question 1.
  iv. For definition of 'completed' see general note above.
  v. The total at lb should equal the total number of pending
  cases in the previous year's return.

  vi. Question 3 should include all formal representations of
  dissatisfaction with an investigation or its outcome, whether
  in writing or not, received during the year, regardless of the
  year in which the case was received or completed.
PART B: - This section applies to complaints completed in the
       year, irrespective of when they were received, ie both
       those completed having been received in the year and
       those completed in the year having been carried over
       from previous years should be included.    (Question 4f
       concerns complainants).

  i. A complaint for the purpose of this section is each of the
  individual matters of complaint in a completed case. Guidance
  on how many matters of complaint should be recorded where
  there is doubt is given in paragraph 3.14.
  ii. For definition of 'completed' see general note above.
  iii.     Complaints in respect of which the Complaints
  Authority have granted dispensation under the Police
  (Anonymous, Repetitious etc Complaints) Regulations 1985 (see
  Question 25) should be included in the total of complaints not
  proceeded with at Question 4a.
  iv. In Questions 5 and 6 the term 'substantiated' applies to
  any complaint which had led directly to a finding of guilt in
  criminal or disciplinary proceedings, or to the giving of
  words of advice.
  v. For the purpose of Question 4f where the completed
  complaints include those made by different people about the
  same matter each complainant should be counted.   Where they
  include those made by one person on separate occasions about
  the same or different matters the complainant should be
  counted only once.
  vi. In Question    5   'disciplinary proceedings'   excludes
  proceedings under paragraph 16 only of the Discipline Code.
  vii.    The sum of the answers to Question 5a-h should equal
  the total given at 4c.
  viii.    In Question 6 the sum of the answers in the first
  column should equal the total unsubstantiated complaints given
  at 4b; the sum of the second column should equal the total of
  substantiated complaints given at 4c; and the sum of the third
  column should equal the total of informally resolved
  complaints given at 4d.

  ix. In Question 6 categories a-n should be interpreted as
  follows:
  a.   Incivility                  Swearing, abusive or
                                   offensive language or
                                   behaviour (but not racial
                                   abuse: see j below);
                                   inconsiderate behaviour not
                                   amounting to neglect of
                                   duty.

  b.   Assault                     Any unjustified use of force
                                   or personal violence (but
                                   not technical assaults
                                   arising from unlawful
                                   arrests); indecent assault;
                                   attacks by police dogs.


  c.   Irregularity in             Unreasonable refusal to
       procedure                   provide access to a
                                   solicitor or to permit a
                                   detainee to make a telephone
                                   call; improper disclosure of
                                   information; other
                                   procedural irregularities
                                   not caused by neglect;
                                   breach of the Codes of
                                   Practice for the time being
                                   in force under S.60 or 66 of
                                   the 1984 Act.
  d.   Traffic                     Complaints about the driving
       irregularity                or use of vehicles on police
                                   business (but not about
                                   police conduct in dealing
                                   with civilian traffic).
  e.   Neglect of duty             Omissions, failures or
                                   neglect as specified in
                                   paragraph 4 of the Police
                                   Discipline Code other than
                                   the mishandling of property
                                   or money.
  f.   Corrupt practice            Any criminal allegation of
                                   corruption, or any improper
                                   practice ofthe kind defined

9/91                          J3
                        in paragraph 7 of the
                        Discipline Code.

Mishandling of          Theft or loss of property
property                (including money) ;
                        unreasonable retention of
                        property: damage to property
                        in police custody; failure
                        to account for money or
                        property; improper disposal
                        of property.

Irregularity in         Perjury; other to
relation to             evidence/perjury allegations
evidence/perj ury       of falsehood; any
                        allegation that evidence was
                        obtained by irregularity or
                        under duress; failure to
                        conform with the Judges
                        Rules or
                        associatedadministrative
                        directions; allegations of
                        conduct of the kind
                        described in paragraph 5 of
                        the discipline code;
                        concealment of evidence etc.

Oppressive conduct or   Unnecessary or unjustified
harassment              use of "stop and search" or
                        analogous powers,
                        harassment; improper
                        requests for driving
                        documents.

Racially                Any conduct which, if shown
discriminatory          to have taken place would be
behaviour               a breach of paragraph 9 of
                         the Discipline Code.

Unlawful/
unnecessary arrest or
detention
Impropriety in          Damage or theft in the
connection with the     course of entry or search
search of premises      premises. Unauthorised entry
                         or search. Premises left
                         untidy or insecure.
Other crime             Criminal damage (except in
                        connection with searches of
                        property).


Other
PART C - Refers to cases only.
  i.     For definition of 'completed' see general note above.

  ii. In Question 8 the first column should not include any
  cases where the complaints were withdrawn or not proceeded
  with.

PART D
  i.     For definition of 'completed' see general note above.
  ii. In Question 10, in giving the number of officers
  convicted, each officer should be counted only once, under the
  principal offence, if there is more than one offence.
  iii.    Where officers have committed offences outside their
  own force area, these should be recorded in the returns of the
  force to which the officers belong.
PART E
  i. For definition of      'completed'   see general note above,
  especially (i).

  ii. In Questions 12, 13, 16 disciplinary proceedings for
  offences under paragraph 16 only of the Discipline Code should
  be excluded.

  iii.    In Questions 12 and 13 'arising directly out of
  complaints' should include only those charges which are
  directly related to the subject of the complaint.   Charges
  relating to matters which, although not covered by the
  original complaint came to light in the course of its
  investigation,   should  be   included  under   'in   other
  circumstances'.

  iv. In Question 16, where an officer has been found guilty of
  more than one disciplinary offence, the entry should record
  only the most serious punishment.

  v. The total number of officers in Question 16 should equal
  the number given in the total at Question 12b.

  vi. Where an officer has been found guilty of a Code 16
  offence and other disciplinary offences he should be counted
  in Questions 12, 13, 16 as well as in Question 17. A footnote
  should be added at the bottom of the page where this arises.

PART G

Questions 21 and 22 should give the total number of instances
where a copy was requested or withheld in the year rather than
the number relating to cases completed in the year.


9/91                             J5
PART H
Questions 23, 24, 26 and 27 refer both to complaint and to non­
complaint cases.
  i.     For definition of 'completed' see general note above.
  ii. In this section 'disciplinary charges' excludes charges
  under paragraph 16 of the Disciplinary Code.
  iii.    Complaints itemised at Question 24 should not include
  those itemised in Question 25.

PART I
The figure required in this section is the actual number of
commendations and letters of appreciation received, rather than
the number of officers these matters relate to.




9/91                            J6
                              ANNEX K
                              NOTES

Complaint means a complaint by a member of the public recorded
under section 86 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.
The following notes may be helpful in considering the statistical
return.

PART B:

  A case is treated as 'completed' at the end of any criminal or
  disciplinary proceedings that may have resulted, or when the
  decision has been taken, following an necessary reference to
  the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints
  Authority, not to bring such proceedings. One complaint could
  result in more than one type of proceeding (criminal, traffic
  or disciplinary) against more than one officer.
Disciplinary proceedings:

  This heading does not include proceedings for the charge of
  having been found guilty of a criminal offence.
Reference to the Police Complaints Authority:

  i. Under section 87 of the 1984 Act the investigation of
  certain serious complaints must be referred to the Authority
  for supervision.      The Authority must supervise all cases
  involving death or serious injury (section 87(l)(a)(i)) and
  complaints of assault occasioning actual bodily harm,
  corruption or any serious arrestable offence, must be referred
  to the Authority for possible supervision (Regulations made
  under section 87 (1) (a) (ii)) . other complaints may be referred
  to the Authority on a discretionary basis (section 87(1)(b))
  or may be called in for supervision by the Authority (section
  87(2)) . Section 88 allows non-complaint matters of a grave or
  exceptional character to be referred to the Authority.

  ii. Under section 90 of the 1984 Act the chief officer must
  refer to the Authority the reports of the investigation into
  all complaints by members of the public against members of his
  force unless:

       a.   the complaint relates to an officer above the rank of
            chief superintendent; or
       b.   it is withdrawn; or

       c.   disciplinary charges have been brought covering all
            the matters complained of and these have been
            admitted by the accused officer.

       Where no disciplinary charges have been brought, the
       Authority have power to direct the bringing of charges.
       Where disciplinary charges are brought the Authority may

9/91                              K1
       direct that they be heard by a ^tribunal. A tribunal must
       be held where charges are brought on the direction of the
       Authority.

 iii.     Under  the  Police   (Anonymous,  Repetitious  etc
 Complaints) Regulations 1985 the chief officer may ask the
 Authority to dispense with further action because the
 complaint   is anonymous,   repetitious,  or  incapable of
 investigation.




9/91                           K2
