STATEMENT OF                     Andrew SANDERSON

DATE OF BIRTH

OCCUPATION OF WITNESS            Communications Assistant

ADDRESS & TELEPHONE NUMBER       South Yorkshire Police
                                  Snig Hill
                                  Sheffield



My day began in Headquarters at 0800 hours.     From there we trans­

ported some radio equipment to Hillsborough, this being spare equip­

ment to be left in the Police Control Room.     On completion of taking

this equipment into the control room, I attended the briefing.

On completion of the briefing I remained in the area of the gym­

nasium, where the issue of the radios was being conducted.     My

responsibility on the day was to make myself available in case of

communication problems.    I was in possession of a radio with an

ear receiver for the whole duration of the day.



At around 1400 hours I began to hear the radio breaking up.     At

first I assumed it to be interference but when it continued inter­

mittently I made my way over to the control room accompanied by

Chief Inspector Beal.     This being around 1420 hours to 1430 hours.



On arrival at the police control room I first changed the 'tulip'

microphone for a 'hand phone/first mic' taken from the spare W15U

Base Station.   The fault continued, so during a 'stop' in communi­

cations I plugged in the spare W15U 'Base Station' to the mains

supply and changed over the aerial connection.



The fitted 'Base Station' had been working on 'talk-through'.       This
is a ground to ground radio facility, so one radio can communicate

to another radio.   Therefore I switched the spare 'Base Station'

to 'talk-through', giving exactly the same communication as the

fitted 'Base Station'.



The spare 'Base Station' was situate on the floor underneath the

bench.   The box containing the spare 'Base Station' has a physical

size of 27 inches long by 11 inches high by 11 inches deep, the

mains lead and aerial lead are only of sufficient length to connect

to the spare 'Base Station' in situ and therefore I was unable to

place it on top of the Control Room bench.   This in turn meant that

the fist mic/hand phone, which is connected by a curly lead, only

just came about the level of the bench and the operator was obliged

to bend down to use it.   The loud speaker to the spare 'Base Station'

is incorporated into the set and therefore reception was at floor

level.



A hand held Motorola personal radio was therefore used by the

operator.   This enabled him to stand upright to transmit, the recep­

tion was via the loud speaker in the hand held radio itself and

it gave the Control Room equal opportunity for transmission.



The time was now about 1448 hours.   After checking the system was

working correctly I left the control room but remained at the

bottom of the steps by the gate, where I stayed for the rest of

the afternoon.



Many messages were coming over the radio, I remember the request
to open Leppings Lane gate.   That being around 1450 hours, I also

remember a request to delay the game, as there was still a large

crowd outside (Leppings Lane end).   Time unknown.   After 1500 hours

I remember someone asking for bolt cutters and a request for a

mortuary to be set up.   By this time I was helping in the direction

of ambulances at the south end of the stadium, by the control room

and the removal of casualty out of that gate.



Summary

At 1400 hours approximately communications began to break up.    At

around 1430 hours after the radio 'Base Station' was changed, to

the best of my knowlede the radio system was working and remained

working for the duration of the day and is still working today as

checked by Inspector Woodhead, 4.5-89 and Home Office Directorate

of Telecommunications Technicians.
