                                                                                         MIR.15


 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and time raised       2 9 / f jS ?
         &JLr. <r                   p                                                                   Number C.       s'

 Title        /c r> ^             J h J k 'U }       - /yiTH .
 (Include source and any document number if relevant)

 Receiver's instructions - urgent action - YpgfHo                 /w.   - h i k j° m J ( l      q   i    'o f c b f e t k ,!
                                                                                                                           Receiver



 Document registered/indexed as indicated. }                                                                                 Indexer
 No(s) of actions raised

Statement reader's instructions                                                                                      Statement Reader


Indexed as indicated                                                                                                      Indexer
No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No(s)
                                                                                                                          Indexer

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
10th May 1989


The Lord Mayor
The Mayor's Parlour
City of Sheffield
Town Hall
Sheffield    SI 1JL.




Dear Lord Mayor,
Civic Reception 10th May 1989
Thank you for your letter notifying me of the postponement of the
Civic Reception for those connected with the World Student Games.

I fully understand and appreciate the City of Sheffield's gesture
in making their facilities available to the inquiry into the
disaster at Hillsborough.
Being a life-long Liverpool FC supporter I was actually at the
match in seats acquired for me by friends in Sheffield,
fortunately out of harm's way.
With strong ties in both Cities I have felt the tragedy deeply and
would ask you to accept on behalf of myself and my company a
cheque towards the Hillsborough Disaster Fund.

Yours sincerely,




                                                        r



                                                        L
                                                       5 i,


Enc.
