                                                             <CL<s>S       /


STATEMENT OF:   John Lund
                Police Constable 1614
                Legal Services Department (Prosecutions)
                Police Headquarters.


I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police presently attached
to the Prosecutions Department at Police Headquarters.


On Saturday 15th April 1989 at 9.^5am I commenced duty at the Sheffield
Wednesday football ground for the semi final football match between
Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. At this time we were briefed by Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield in the North Stand. After this briefing I
took up patrol duty in a transit van together with other officers.
Police Sergeant 1075 Holbrook was in command of our serial (no. 50) and
we were assigned to patrol the north side of the ground in the area of
Halifax Road/Wordsworth Avenue/lower Foxhill etc., giving attention to
public order and licensed premises. We patrolled the area as directed
and prior to the arrival of the train carrying Liverpool fans to Wadsley
Bridge Railway Station, took up an observation position directly above
the Travellers Inn, Halifax Road.


Whilst at that location I noticed that the football fans were in good
humour and well behaved although a good number of them were carrying
cans of beer or lager. Most of the fans who were carrying cans of beer
were drinking from them. These fans were not displaying the usual signs
of drunkenness. As the time got nearer to 3pm the number of fans heading
towards the football ground gradually increased.


At about 3pm radio communications received from the ground control
indicated that a serious public order situation was arising at the
Leppings Lane end of the ground. Our seriel attended at that location
but due to the number of police officers already present and to avoid
congestion we returned to Halifax Road. Our transit became stationary
in heavy traffic in Halifax Road below the railway bridge. Emergency
vehicles heading towards the ground were having difficulty in
negotiating the build up of heavy traffic. In an effort to make a
clear passage for these vehicles officers from our serial directed
traffic and a short time later this congestion was eased to such an
extent that we were no longer required to direct it.


Our serial then went directly to the ground (the entrance near to the
gymnasium). At that location I assisted in placing the injured into
the ambulances and comforting a few friends/relatives who were very
distressed. A short time later I was instructed by an inspector to
report to Superintendent Bates inside the gymnasium. I was told to
stand by in the gymnasium in case I was required to act as an
identification officer. After about an hour I was directed to assist
members of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club (stewards) in
carrying the days 'takings' to another part of the ground. On my
return to the gymnasium myself and other members of my serial were
told to go and sit in the North stand and await further instructions.
At approximately 7pm we retired from duty.
