   .        f
.Incident        105      090589 0P5012          TYPING SERVICE DOCUMENT

                                                                 OFFICERS REPORT NUMBER    R363

                                                                                          Station
 Surname                   TRECK

 F orenames                LISA

 Age                                                                          AR

 Address


 Occupation                POL PC3183

 Telephone

 Number of Pages

 Dated                     090589                                                          Signed


                At S.30am Saturday 15 April             — i— paTStTed on duty at Main Street

                Police Station,       for transportation to Hillsborough Football Ground

                for duties at the semi final.           I was   in Serial 36 my Sergeant being

                PS -1829 France.
       *)
                We were transported to Hillsborough where we had a briefing and at abou


                11.15am we were deployed to Uiadsley Bridge S tation w here we were to

                meet the special       train, which was due to arrive at about 2.05pm.         The

                day was warm and sunny, and there was a constant stream of Liverpool

                supporters heading away from the football           ground in an effort to find

                public houses that were open, as the ones in the vicinity were

                closed.     As time went on supporters began to head back towards the

                ground, and most of them seemed to be in possession of cans of beer,

                lager,    etc.     At this time they seemed boisterous but in good humour.

                Just up the road from Wadsley Bridge Station was Halfords Store, which

                had a large grass banking in front of it.            This was occupied by a

                large number of Liverpool       fans,   the majority of whom seemed to be

                drinking alcoholic beverages from cans.            Again they were boisterous

                but in good humour,       but seemed to be making no attempt to head

                towards the football ground.
                                                                     PAGE      2 !
                                                                     R 363

At about 1.50pm the special train arrived at Wadsley Bridge Station,

where our duties were to carry out spot searches and then escort them

to the Leppings Lane end of the ground.      These supporters were decent

family people and were not the normal type of supporters you would

expect on a special    football train.   They were   orderly and very well

behaved and exchanged humourous banter with us       as we escorted them to      j
the ground.     With our Serial at this time were    a group of Mounted          j
                                                                                 l
officers who we assumed with their accent were in fact from        Merseyside.

We arrived at the Leppings Lane turnstiles and at this time        there         j
                                                                                 i
were quite a number of peole, who seemed to be mainly young        men           J

drinking alcoholic drinks from cans, who were milling about        and           j

making no effort to enter the ground.      We then took up duties outside
                                                                                 i
the Leppings Lane turnstiles.     As the time for kick off approached

the volume of people suddenly increased drajnatjljral ly and it seemed

that the whole of Leppings Lane was one mass of people atJLemj>ting to

enter the ground at the same time.       The mood of the younger men many

of whom seemed more than well the worse for drink,       then appeared to

change from being good humoured,     to being angry and agitated at the

fact that they were going to miss the start of the game, and everyone

seemed to be pushing towards the turnstiles.         I can remember seeing a

Range Rover with Inspector Ellis sat on the top using a loudhailer

trying to convince the crowd to stop pushing but this had no effect

whatsoever.     At this time I d o n ’t know if the match had kicked off or

not.   At this time the police horses tried to cordon off the

turnstiles and we were instructed to stand between them to stop the

crowd pushing forward.      I can remember standing at the side of PC

3044 Donnell,    but fans were climbing under the stomachs of the horses

and pushing them out of the way, and Jill and myself were totally

ineffectual, as we were being pushed and shoved, and on occasions

found it difficult to keep our feet.       I can remember turning to see
                                                                        PAGE
                                                                        R 363

fans climbing over the wall   into the ground, and I can remember

seeing a male officer doing likewise,     in retrospect to probably avoid

being crushed.   There seemed to be a large number of fans present who

did not have tickets and were asking around for spares.        At this time

I felt that we had lost control of the situation,      but now believe

that a large crowd attended in a short space of time, well the worse

for drink, and far too late to enter the ground for the kick off, and

that this initiated the crush at the gates.

Suddenly we were instructed to attend in the ground as the Liverpool

supporters had invaded the pitch.     I, can remember walking along a

walkway through the South Stand and down onto the pitch.        There were

supporters all over, and initially I thought they had been fighting,

but a/ I approached the West Stand it was obvious that something was

wrorw.   I could hear people screaming and could see them clawing at

thar fence.   Male officers then scaled the fence and tried to assist

fifns over the top, and it was obvious that there were people in there

w h o were badly hurt and possibly worse.    The fans on the pitch and in

the stand were being abusive,    some were obviously drunk,    but because

we were there and in uniform seemed to expect miracles from us.            I

was even struck by a screaming distraught fan.       I felt so useless.         I

can remember assist a young boy who had abdominal      injuries,   or

appeared to have and tried offer what comfort I could.         I then

assisted with many injured and can remember trying to assist in

reviving some who were obviously beyond help,      one being a young boy,

and having a son of my own.

I cannot express the feelings I had.      I couldn’t believe what was

happening or why it had happened.      At this time the pitch was strewn

with bodies and I can remember laying a coat over the face of a male

about 30 years who was obviously beyond a n y o n e ’s help.   Male officers

and fans alike then began to remove bodies on makeshift stretchers.
                                                                                                       PAGE
                                                                                                       R363
       .    It appeared to me at the time that there was a woefully inadequate

            amount   of   first   aid   equipment,    and    I can    remember     people     screaming

            for   oxygen.    I walked    over   to   the    fencing   to a s s i s t   as   best   I could

           and there seemed to be a pile of obviously dead people.                            The stench

           was unreal but the overriding smell seemed to be alcohol, a l o n g with
           everything else.

           After we had done all we could I found two of my female colleague, PC

           3291 Schofield and PC 3044 Donnell and we joined officers who had

           formed a cordon in the centre of the pitch.                   By this time I just felt

           numb, but can remember remarking to my friends that I would never

           allow my son near a football ground.                I can remember thinking and

           commenting on the drunken state of many of the young fans.                              The whole

           thing seemed to happen so quickly.                I don't feel we could have done

           any more than was done given the enormity of the situation.
END OF REPORT
Lisa Jayne Trcek   P.C 3133      3 Group     Main Street Police Station.

At 8.30am Saturday 15 April 1989* I paraded for duty at Main Street Police Station,
for transportation to Hillsborough Football Ground for duties at the semi final# I
was in serial 36 my Sergeant being P.S 1829 France.
We were transported to Hillsborough where we had a briefing,and at about 11.15am
we were deployed to Wadsley Bridge Station where we were to meet the special train,
which was due to arrive at about 2 ,05pm, %ie day was warm and sunny, and there was
a constant stream of Liverpool supporters heading away from the football ground
in an effort to find public houses that were open, as the ones in the vicinity
were closed,As time went on supporters began to head back towards the ground, and
most of them seemed to be in possesion of cans of beer,lager etc.At this time they
seemed boisterous but in good humour* Just up the road from Wadsley Bridge Station
was Halfords Store, which had a large grass banking in front of it.This was occupied
by a large number of Liverpool fans,the majority of whom seemed to be drinking
alcoholic beverages from cans,Again they were boisterous but in good humour, but seemed
to be making no att empt to head towards the football ground.
At about 1.50pm the special train arrived at Wadsley Bridge Station,where our duties
were to carry out spot searches,and then escort them tp the Leppings Lane end of the
ground, ^hese supporters were decent family people,and were not the normal type of
supporters you would expect o& a special football train.They were orderly and very
well behaved and exchanged humourous banter with us as we escorted them to the ground.
With our serial at this time were a group of mounted officers who we assumed with their
accent were in fact from Mersyside*
We arrived at the Leppings Lane turnstiles and at this time there were quite a number
of people,who seemed to be mainly young men drinking alcoholic drinks from cans,who
were milling about and making no effort to enter the ground.We then took up duties
outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.As the time for kick off aproached the volume
of people suddenly increased dramatically and it seemed that the whole of Leppings
Lane was one mass of people attempting to enter the ground at the same time.The mood
of the younger men many of whom seemed more than well the worse for drink,then
appeared to change from being good humoured,to being angry and agitated at the fact
that they were going to miss the start of the game«and everyone seemed to be pushing
towards the turnstiles, I can remeber seeing a range rover with Inspector Ellis
sat on the top using a loudhailer trying to convince the crowd to stop pushing,but
this had no effect whatsoever.At this time I dont know if the match had kicked off or
not. At this time the police horses tried to cordon off the turnstiles,and we were
instructed to stand between t h e m to stop the crowd pushing forward.I can remeber
standing at the side of P.C JOkk Donnell,but fans were climbing under the stomachs
of the horses,and pushing them out of the wayt and Jill and myself were totally
ineffectual,as we were being pushed and shoved, and on occasions found it difficult
to keep our feet,I can remeber turning to see fans climbing over the wall into
the ground, and I can remeber seeing a male officer doing likewise,in retrospect
to prbabley avoid being crushed.^here seemed to be a large number of fans present
who did not have tickets and were asking around for spares.At this time I felt that
we had lost control of the situation,but now beleive that a large crowd attended
in a short space of time ,well the worse for drink,and far too late to enter the
ground for the kic^ off,and that this intiated the crush at the gates*
Suddenly we were instructed to attend in the ground as the Liverpool supporters
had invaded the pitch. Ifican remember walking along a walk way through the South Stand
and down onto the pitch.^here were supporters all over,and initially I thought they
had been fighting,but as I approached the West stand it was obvious that something
was wrong.I could hear people screaming and could see them clawing at the fence. Hale
officers then scaled the fence and tried to assist fans over the top, and it was
obvious that there were people in there who were badly hurt and possibly worse*The
fans on the pitch and in the stand were being abusive,some were obvioulsy drunk,but
because we were there and in uniform seemed to expect miracles from us*I was even struck
by a screaming distraught fan*I felt so usless.I can remeber assist a young boy who
had abdominal injuries,or appeared to have, and tried offer what comfort I could*
1 then assisted with many injured and can remember trying to assist in xracingx reviving
some who were obviously                                         .
                         oey°ng help,one being a young boy, and having a son of my own
                                                                              A
                                   2

I cannot express the feelings I had.I couldn't beleive what was happening or why it had
happened.At this time the pitch was strewn with bodies and I can remember laying a coat
over the race of a male about 30 years who was obviously beyond anyones help.Male
officers and fans alike then began to remove bodies on makeshift stretchers,
appeared to me at the time that there was a woefully inadequate amount of first aid
equipment,and I can remember people screaming for oxygen* I walked over to the fencing
to assist as best I could and there seemed to be a pile of obviousljr dead people.
^he stench was unreal but the over riding smell seemed to be alcohol,along with
everyting else.
After we had done all we could I found two of my female collegues P.C 329^ Schofield
and P.C 30kk Donnell,and we joined officers who had formed a cordon in the centre
of the pitch.By this time I just felt numb,but can remember remarking to my friends
that I would never allow my son near a football ground.I can remember thinking and
commenting on the drunken state of many of the ^oung fans.^he whole thing seemed to happei
so quickly.I dont feel we could have done any more than was done given the enormity
of the tanntjsraniyxx situation.
