Module Three

As soon as possible after arriv
a tutorial with the probationer
in Module Two can be discussed
light of organisational requi:
required for extended comment bj

In the penultimate week of th.
probationer and tutor should com]
be examined by the supervisor/Dr
can discuss how'the probationer'
Plan, were met. The DTO should a

Module Four

As soon after arrival as poss:
different one from Module Two, s
probationer where any outstanding
At this time the probationer wil
Plan in respect of the remaining

In week 3 of the module (week
Development Exercise will take
Trainer will review the Action P
it according to the probationer'!
CHRISTOPHER THOMPSON


police Sergeant 2019
Sheffield Road Traffic Department, Claywheels Lane, Sheffield.



I am a Police Sergeant in the South Yorkshire Police, presently
stationed in the Road traffic Department Sheffield.
At 08.30 hours, Saturday 15th April 1989, I paraded at Woodseats
Police Station where I was to be transported to Hiilsborogh Football
ground to take up duties in connection with the F.A. cup semi­
final which was between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
On arrival at the ground I met other members of my serial, which
was serial number 60, and went to the North Stand for a briefing.
My serial was to patrol an area outside the ground on Penistone
Road, between Burton Road and Borough Road. This was the side of
the ground from which the Nottingham Forest supporters would arrive.
At about     10.30 am I walked with my serial ( which consisted of
5 men ) to the area that had been allocated to me.
On   arrival I examined the area and identified that there were
several public houses within this area and that in fact they
were open.
One of these was the Royal Hotel, which is situate on Bradway
Road, at the junction with Penistone Road. At this time there
were a number of youths, numbering around 60, stood on the
footpath outside these premises drinking beer.
As a result of this I deployed two of my officers to stand at
this junction opposite the premises with a view to having a
visible police presence. I instructed the remaining officers to
patrol the remainder of the allocated area and to keep an eye
on the situation at the Royal Hotel.
I remained at this location for most of the time as I had the
only radio for the serial.
It was obvious that there was going to be a problem with supporters
at this location and I informed ground control of the numbers
on the footpath and that there may be problems later.

As the morning progressed, the numbers both inside and outside
the Royal Hotel increased and I kept ground control aware of
this.
At approximately 12.30 pm there were some 100 people stood
outside the Royal Hotel and inside there were a large number
of people. By this time they were becoming more and more
Christopher Thompson Police Sergeant 2019


boisterous and there was a great deal of singing and chanting
caning from inside the pub.
At about his time I noticed that many of the people were drinking
the extra strength larger from bottles and were in fact buying
it by the crate full and carrying this outside to drink it.
I then saw an estate car pull up at the side of these premises
near to the rear gate. The driver got out of the vehicle and
started to unload something from the rear. Several of the people
who were drinking outside the premises went up to the car and
came away carrying cans of larger.
I went over to the car and saw that the man had a large number
of trays of "Carling Black Label" Larger in it. These appeared
to have been purchased from a warehouse or supermarket. He
was in fact selling this from the rear of the vehicle.
I told him that he could not do this and he stated that he was
doing it because the pub was full and people could not get to
the bar. He then carried the Larger into the premises to sell
from behind the bar.
As the day progressed then the crowd drinking outside the pub
swelled and at this stage I   brought the remainder of my serial
to my location anticipating that there was going to be some
trouble at these premises. The number of people outside I
would estimate to be about 200 at this stage. I again informed
ground control of the numbers for their information.
At about 2.20pm a bottle was thrown from amongst the crowd
across the road towards my group of officers, breaking just
in front of us. I inmeadiately in formed ground control and
asked for the assistance of a dog man.
There were no more missiles thrown at that time and within
a few minutes a dog man arrived.
As the dog man was walking towards me a member of staff from
the pub came across to me and informed me that they were causing
problems iaide. I informed ground control of this and asked
for assistance, informing them that I was not going in until
back-up had arrived.
I stood outside the pub with my 5 men and as soon as other units
arrived, which was a very short time, I entered the pub.
Page Three
Christopher Thompson Police Sergeant 2019


There were people leaving the premises at this time and I ascertained
that there had been a small amount of damage caused. The people
who were apparently responsible for this^ had left the premises.
I then asked the licensee to close the premises down as there
was every likelyhood that further troble would follow. This was
agreed and I assisted in clearing the premises.
Once this had been done I remained outside the premises whilst
the broken glasses and bottles which were strewn     about were
cleared by the staff.
At 3.00pm my brief was to make my way to the ground to stand­
by on a coach and then to attend Claywheels Lane Traffic Office
where a meal was going to be provided.
As we were walking back along Peistone Road towards the Football
Ground I hearJl a message over the radio that it appeared there
was a pitch invasion taking place arid that all units should
attend at the ground as quickly as possible.
I then flagged down    a passing police transit van and this
transported my serial and I to the ground.
On arrival I met up with other units and we were told to stand
by at the rear of the entrance to the pitch.
After several minutes I was then instructed to take my serial
onto the pitch and to line up on the touch line facing the North
Stand. At this time I was still not     aware of what was taking
place and thought that it was a pitch invasion.
Once on the pitch we lined up along the touch line facing the
crowd. I then saw a spectator who was being carried on a stretcher
and it appeared to me that he was dead. I realised that there
was more to it than at first thought.
I then assisted in carrying injured and dead persons to the
rear of the gym where medical teams were working.
Once this task had been con^leted the ground was cleared and I
went to the outside of the ground to assist with vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
A de-brief was   carried out at the ground and once this had
been completed I was released and eventualy returned to Woodseats
Police Station where           ff duty at 7.15pm that date.
