                   Sheffield Archives Ref.       °1 i b W                              M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and time raised   n fgfea      ~i-    is?>             Number


Title
        KibUsv |vcw \                                                     gvtTX&e<*so<- Icu -f& l
(Include source and any document number if relevant)

                                            ^ 0
Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Ye(/No                 j      O oepm A        €   >     | ju   2   6   v   5
                                                                                                                              Receiver
 0 Lpo/lr5             ____________

                                                                                                                                 Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised   1Y W
                                                                                                                         Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions/             C


                                                                                                                                 Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                     O /M         SIO

                                                                                                                         qp
                                                                                                                          1651

                                                                                                                                 Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                         METROPOLITAN POLICE

                                         W O O LW IC H POLICE STATION
                                         2 9 M ARKET STREET
A.C.C. M. Jones MSc                      W O O LW IC H , LONDON, S E 18 6Q S
The Hillsborough Enquiry Team
                                         Telephone 0 1 - 8 5 3 8 2 1 2
Fowler Street
Neachells Green                           Your ref.:                     Our ref.:

Birmingham




                                                       10th May 1989




            Dear Sir

            I have been asked to pass the following report, and
            a minute I have added, to your enquiry.

            The author is a Sergeant under my command who has
            an immense knowledge of football crowd behaviour
            and it might be of benefit if one of your officers
            were to interview him.




                                Michael Shadrack
                                Chief Superintendent




            JLA
                                                                                                                                                                                 BB

                                                                                                                                                           No. 7 2 8 (Unruled)


                                                                          METROPOLITAN POLICE
                           (C. O.                                                                                                   D IV N ./B R A N C H          ..’M   '   ........
         Reference
         to papers
            K
                           ,_D. ivn ............................................
                           (
                           V
                                                                                                                                            S T A T IO N      ca t f o r d .......


         Registry Folio N o                  .....................................            .........................                 25th April,.....19. 8.9-...

         G .O ./Police O rd e r................................                      refers


                                          R e .... CONGESTION...AT TURNSTILES.



                                                                                        1.



             Chief Superintendent,

             I have been employed on duty at football matches since 1976. I have
             been employed at Cup Finals staged at Wembley Stadium on several
             occasions some of which have involved policing supporters at turnstile
             entrances.

             For several years I have been aware of a method used by some football
             supporters to gain entry to the stadiums without tickets. This method
             is used mainly by supporters of more successful football teams and its
             use results in the build up of supporters outside turnstiles as was
             seen at HILLSBOROUGH. I regret not bringing this matter to notice pre­
             viously and feel that it may still help if the content of this report
             be brought to the attention of T020.

             A large mass of supporters would approach a turnstile, single supporters
             would then approach a turnstile and would either offer the torn off stub
             of an already used ticket or would offer no ticket at all. The turnstile
             operator would correctly refuse the supporter admission, normally the
             supporter would argue with the turnstile operator. The result of this
             action would stop other supporters entering the turnstile and frustrated
             supporters would pack the entrance to the turnstile. The supporter who
             had originally tried, unlawfully, to enter would then claim quite correctly
             that he could not retreat because of the force of the crowd behind him.
             Several supporters would gain entry by this method.

             When policing such a situation it is very difficult to remove such a
             supporter from the entrance to a turnstile because of the congestion of
             the crowd. At times it becomes almost impossible. This method is used
             successfully by supporters of particular teams and explains why so many
             fans travel to such matches without tickets. Its success is based on the
             inability to remove such a supporter from the turnstile entrance.

             There is a great need to keep a sterile area between the bulk of the support­
             ers and the turnstile entrance, or for the turnstiles to be re-designed
             providing an exit route for a person at the entrance to a turnstile who
             has not got a ticket, or who is not allowed into the ground for any other
             reason.
             I respectfully ask that this report be forwarded to TO 20 and especially to
             those officers responsible for operation orders connected with Cup Finals
             staged at WEMBLEY STADIUM.



                                                                                                                                                PS


M.P.87                   All minutes to be numbered in consecutive order.                                                 Continue on other side if necessary.
   r                                                                                                   No. 729 (Unruled)




           Chief Superintendent T020

           The report at minute 1 has provoked a good deal of discussion on this
           division concerning football crowds and duty at football matches.

           Sergeant        could be described as a reformed football hooligan.
           For many years he has attended football matches both as a fan and as
           a police officer on duty. He does not support any particular team
           but when possible attends the most attractive fixture and is willing
           to travel great distances to watch an important match.

           He is certainly the most football wise officer it has ever been my
           pleasure to talk with and I am very impressed indeed by his under­
           standing of crowd psychology, football hooliganism and terrace
           trible warfare.

           The problem he highlights fits exactly with two of my own observations
           at Millwall, West Ham and Leyton Orient for which I was not able to
           hitherto think of a logical explanation.

           At Millwall F.C all ticket matches police operate a filter system a long
           distance from the ground and only allow through those with tickets. Possibly
           this filter does not always check that the paper they are shown by a
           fan passing through is a proper valid ticket.

           Inside the ground I have watched Liverpool fans asking ticket holders
           who have already entered the ground for the retained part of their
           tickets for 1souvenirs1. Cynically I could see no advantage in
           possessing these tickets.

           Sergeant        may have provided the answer. They are passed out of
           the ground and are presented at turnstiles by ticketless fans who,
           because of the pressure of fans behind them, are allowed in.

           I have also observed fans seeking permission from police and stewards
           to move through the fencing separating the seated areas from -the
           terraces. I wondered why they should wish to give up a seat to stand
           on the terraces. Perhaps the reason is simply that the legitimate
           ticket holder is already occupying the seat.

           The main reason for the submission of this report is, however, the
           explanation provided by Sergeant        of the crush of turnstiles
           and the excessive number of 'extra' fans on the terraces and after
           the Hillsborough tragedy I commend it to you.




                                                           Michael SHADRACK
                                                           Chief Superintedent




M.P.8KE)            All minutes to be numbered in consecutive order. Continue on other side if necessary.
