O T rifR DOCUMENT FORM                          Date and time raised                            Number


Title                              I                                                bDwy.
(Include source and any document number if relevant)

Receiver's instructions - urgent action -YeS/No
                                                                                                             Receiver
                                    fC( 3

                                                                                                             Indexer        ■i’
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No($) of actions raised                                                                                         nr I
                                                                                                               ________ ^
                                                                                                         Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions    S .   xLQ-
                                                                                                                            -.n
                                                                                                               Indexer
Indexed as indicated f \ 7

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                  ^ )0 6
Examined - further action to be taken                                                                    O/M         SIO


                                                                                                         1531
                                                                                                             Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                      . #                    n   .
The Hillsborough Disaster       /%\b^>   ^

THE STATEMENT OF WILLIAM DEREK MCNIVEN AND- ANTHONY CURRAN


14.30
Said goodbye to Eddie and Adam at the end of Halifax Road.
14.40
Tony and myself approached the Leppings Lane end turnstiles and entered through.
The crush was about the same as at any other big match ie Liverpool/Man Utd or
Liverpool/Everton. In our opinion, the crush was certainly no more than at
any Wembley Final.
14.45
After entering through the turnstile, I went to the toilet and Tony went to
buy a programme, liie met outside the toilet, and at this point it appeared
a lot more people.had been allowed into the enclosure behind the West stand
and Leppings Lane-Terrace than is normal. We had to avoid the oncoming crowd
although I must stress that the crowd was calm and orderly.
14.55
Once we were inside the ground, we could see that sections of the Leppings Lane
end were overcapacitated and people were climbing over barriers to escape the
crush. At this point I said to Tony that they would have to stop the match
before it had even started due to the obvious crushing.
15.10
Tony and I witnessed a man, who was helped by 4 others, trying to remove the
mesh off the barriers.
15.11
The man was stopped from doing this by a policeman, who, we assumed, was more
than a seigeant by the marks on his shoulders. The policeman manhandled those
people onto the pitch, stopping them from removing the mesh and letting people
out.
15.50
More police arrive and bolt-cut the mesh to let the injured and dying out.
16.00
There was an announcement for people still in the Stadium to stay calm and
not to leave.
16.20
Tony and I leave the Stadium and head for the car.   On arriving at the car,
there is no sign of Eddie or Adam.
16.30
We went back to the Stadium to search for Eddie and Adam.
17.00
Our searching had proved fruitless.
17.20
We went back to the car and there was still no sign of Eddie or Adam. I left
Tony at the car and went to a nearby house to use the telephone. I contacted
my wife and Tony’s wife and left a message instructing that if anyone from the
Spearritt family phones to say nobody had been in touch from Sheffield. We
thought this would avert what might turn out to be unnecessary upset.
17.40
We decided to look around the hospitals for Eddie and Adam. On asking a
Police constable, we were advised to first go to Hamiton Road Police Station.
1>

     STATEMENT OF WILLIAM DEREK ICNIVEN AND ANTHONY CURRAN (cont)

     18.00
     Arrived at the Police Station.     Reported Eddie and Adam missing.
     18.20
     We were asked to wait in the adjacent Boy’s Club.
     19.20
     A policeman in uniform stood on a chair in the Boy's Club. He was about 34,
     and had ’pips’ on his uniform. He announced that the only list they had was
     one of people who had been reported missing at Hamiton Road Police Station
     AND WERE KNOWN TO BE SAFE AND W ELL. jhere were about 8-10 names on the list
     and Adam Spearritt was included. All the people who had reported those on
     the list missing were summoned to the Police Station.
     19.30
     A very senior policeman (tall, dark blue      suit, grey hair) then went to find
     out were Adam was.
     19.40
     After a lot of confusion, this senior policeman asked Tony and I to return to
     the Boy's Club. We still did not know were Adam was. I rang the Spearritt
     home and told Mrs J Spearritt of the situation ie that Adam was on the safe and
     well list.
     20.00
     We asked again for news and were told that the list read out earlier could not
     be traced to source.
     21.00
     We asked again for n e w s / i n f ormation and nobody knew where the list of names
     had come from.

     21.20 and 21.45
     More phone calls reassuring Mrs Spearritt that Adam was OK - he was on the
     safe and well list - but that there was no sign of Eddie.
     22.00
     A senior police officer stood on a chair in the Boy’s Club and announced that
     the people in the Boy's Club would be put on a bus and taken to Hillsborough
     Stadium.
     22.10    We are assigned                  Social Workers.
     22.40
     The situation at Hillborough Stadium:-
     1. Dark and cold          ♦/*
     2. Damp
     3. Lighting run off a Generator
     4. We found it had been turned into a temporary morgue and had not been warned
         to expect this
     We have to say that these two hours were disgraceful and that people - some old,
     some young - were left to fend for themselves and shuffle about in damp, noisy,
     cold and dark conditions.
     00.10 (Sunday)
     I complained to the Assistant Chief Constable (who fetched the Chi&f Constable,
     the Chief                 about the disgraceful conditions people were left
     in. The Assistant Chief Constable could not apologise enough. We were ushered
     into the Gymnasium area. We were then shownwhat we are told are photographs of
     ALL the people who had died in this disaster!

                                                                                           ..cont
STATEMENT OF WILLIAM DEREK MCNIVEN AND ANTHONY CURRAN (cont)       3

00.30
As Eddie or Adam were not amongst these people on the photographs, we were told
to try the Northern General Hospital to look for them. We were then left to
ourselves.
00.50
We arrived at the Northern General Hospital and asked for any people fitting
Eddie and Adam’s descriptions. We were then taken to the Intensive Care
Unit and looked at four young lads on life support machines and ventilators.'
As you can imagine, recognising somebody under these conditions is very
difficult, but it turned out none of these boys was Adam. On leaving the
1.C.U. we asked for any unidentified males aged about A0. We were then shown
Edward Spearritt in a very poor state of health.

01.00
I phoned Mrs Spearritt and assured her that her husband was alive but that
we could not find Adam, but, as he was on the safe and well list, not to worry.
I told her to make her way to Sheffield and that meanwhile Tony and myself
would go to the Royal Halisham Hospital and find Adam, as he was not in the
temporary morgue at Hillsborough and he was not in the Northern General.
02.15
We have to look at many more unidentified children and young   men in intensive
care, but to no avail.
02.30
We decide to return to Hillborough Stadium and look at the photographs again
just in case we have overlooked Adam, as the photographs were very distressing
and the people on them barely recognisable.
 02.45
 At Hillborough, we asked to see any unidentified males under 20 yrs and were
 shown the body of what was the last remaining unidentified male in the
 temporary morgue. At this time,                             were present, we
 looked at this child and it was not Hdam.
 02.50
 We asked to see the photographs again. We were told it was not worth looking
 at them, as there was now only one unidentified dead male on the premises,
 which was the child we had just looked at.
 03.10
 We returned to the Northern General and met Robert Spearritt (Eddie’s brother,
 who had travelled from Liverpool) in the I.C.U. Ule reassured him that Adam was
 not at Hillsborough, because we had just seen the last unidentified male
 there.
 03.25
 Robert, myself and Tony - on the advise of Hospital Management - went back to
 Hillborough, just in case this child was Adam: it was felt that# as the body
 was very battered and bruised, perhaps Tony and myself had not been able to see
 that it was Adam, and Robert should look also, to put his mind at rest - "this
 being the only person not identified. Tony and myself feel it should be said
 that the tasks that had been asked of us were very hard to bear.
  03.30
  On arrival at Hillsborough I asked the senior Policeman to show Robert the last
  remaining unidentified male, to which he replied ”He’d better look at the
  photographs first”. I said ’’Hang on, what do you mean, photographs? I have
  just told this man there is only one”. He replied "I’m sorry, there are some
 -fiiore”. He opened the door to the room containing the photographs. I
„.j;mmpHiately.^aw^groxiroately J.O new photos that were not there previously.
STATEMENT OF WILLIAM DEREK MCNIVEN AND ANTHONY CURRAN      (cont)    4


One of these photographs was of my friend Adam Spearritt. This was identified
by Robert as being Adam. Adam’s body was brought from the Gymnasium area
and this was confirmed.
03.40                                                             , . ..          .-
After formal identification by Robert, a police officer apologised           myseif
and Tony, to which I replied " I, Derek M c N i v e n , having been told at 19.20
that Adam Spearritt was alive and well, phoned his mum and told her so. And,
o r ^ b e i n g shown photos of what we were told where £Lk  of the people who had .
died, I again phoned and told her not to worry, ^Fiat I had seen all the
deseased and Adam was not amongst them. Half1an.houy / 9. % . ^ 1^ 1ga®nH ^ ’
I reassured and stressed that I had seen the last unidentified male and he,
a poor boy of about 11 years old, was not Adam. In these
I cannot accept your apology and we are very very angry . He replied               ^
’’It was a lack of communication between that side of the gymnasium and this .




 This is a very brief statement, not detailed.
 The times are approximate.




 WILLIAM DEREK MCNIVEN

 ANTHONY CURRAN




 April 1989
