                                                                       fa-llo/ i f t / u l

                                                                             "   7   *



 * THOMAS JOHN WHITELEY                                                                  R 414



   Police Constable 70



   At 9-00 a.m. (0900) Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I commenced duty at

   Hammerton Road Police Station.

   At 9-30 a.m. (0930) the same day I arrived at Hillsborough Football Stadium with

   other officers from Hammerton Road. The serial I was on had duties supervising

   the upper level of the South Stand and turnstile supervision. The Inspector on

   the serial was Inspector Darling from Hammerton Road and two Sergeants were 577

   Gardener and Turner.   After briefing and a cursory search of the South Stand, I

   was allocated duties supervising turnstiles Nos 23 to 26, with other officers.

   The Nottingham Forest supporters who had been allocated tickets for this stand

   began to arrive early and there was a steady flow through the turnstiles from

   about 11.00 a.m.   This increased steadily up until 3.00 p.m. with the majority of

   Notts Forest fans coming through these particular turnstiles being orderly and

   well behaved. I saw nothing of the inside of the ground until after 3-00 p.m. as

   I was behind these turnstiles all of this time.

   At just after 3-00 p.m. I went through the rear of the South Stand with Sergeant

   Turner. We were to go to the gymnasium to meal at this time. We walked down the

^j^players tunnel and turned right along the South Stand. At this time I saw the

   game was in progress and the ground appeared to be full to capacity. As I looked

   towards the West Stand I saw the people on the terraces below were surging

   forward to the fences in the middle section 'CN' and ’CS' in particularly behind

   the goal mouth people were pressed to the fences and climbing over the top. I

   could also see supporters climbing from the terraces into the stand above.            I

   could see officers trying to contain supporters who were on the perimeter track
THOMAS JOHN WHITELEY                      - 2 -                               R 414



and side lines and more officers moving into this area to try and contain

supporters from over-spilling onto the pitch.     I carried on walking around the

perimeter track and across the front of the Spion Kop which appeared full to

capacity with Notts Forest supporters.

Upon arrival at the gymnasium we were immediately directed back to the pitch. As

I went back onto the perimeter track I saw that the game had been stopped and

that Liverpool supporters had converged around the goal mouth at the West Stand

side.    I was directed to form part of a cordon in front of the Spion Kop as Notts

Forest supporters were beginning to get aggravated about the game being suspended

and were surging towards the fences. At this time I saw a Liverpool supporter run

from the Liverpool crowd on the pitch across the half way line and into the Notts

Forest end.   He was shouting and goading the Notts Forest fans and gesturing two

fingered signs at them.    I was instructed by a senior officer to get him off the

pitch.   I approached him as Police Constable 60 Godley came up behind him and

detained him. The man was about 30 years of age and wearing a red and white

shirt.   He carried on shouting and swearing and was obviously drunk as he smelled

very strongly of drink.   Police Constable Godley took him from the pitch and I

was joined by Sergeant Turner.     As I looked across the pitch I saw that more

Liverpool supporters were on the pitch and that a number of them were lying on

the ground, several of them looked in obvious pain, it was only at this point I

realised some of them had been injured and immediately went to assist.     I went to

a young man of about 15 years old, who was lying on his back clutching his lower

abdomen and complaining of pain.     I loosened his clothes and saw a young girl in

a St John's ambulance uniform.     I asked her to get a stretcher to move the boy.

She never returned but a man also in St John's uniform approached with a
THOMAS JOHN WHITELEY                     - 3 -                                  R 414



stretcher. Sergeant Turner and myself with two other officers who I don't know,

carried the boy across the pitch to the side of the gymnasium where other injured

people were being treated by medics. We went directly back with the stretcher and

saw that there were more injured in the same area. We found another man who was

semi conscious.   He was laid on the stretcher and carried by us to the gymnasium

where there were at least twenty people laid on the gymnasium floor. As a medic

attended to him we left the gym   with the stretcher to go back to the pitch.      I

overheard conversations at this   time claiming people had died in the crowd.

It was only at this time I realised the severity of the incident. As I returned

to the pitch for a third time, I saw that it was covered with supporters and

Police, hoardings around the pitch were being ripped up by supporters who were

carrying them to stretcher the injured from the pitch.    I returned to the same

area with the stretcher where I saw a man on the floor being given heart massage

and mouth to mouth.    He was about 35 years of age wearing a red and white shirt

and of heavy build.    His face was blue and his eyes open.

                                   He appeared dead and did not respond to

reviving. We   placed him on the stretcher and covered his face.   As we crossed       the

pitch I saw bodies at the other   end and near to the Spion Kop.    Some were

covered, others were being resuscitated but several looked dead.      We carried the

dead man to the gymnasium. There were at least a dozen dead outside the gym and

as we entered with the deceased on the stretcher there were at least another

dozen bodiesinside.    ACID officer called Detective   Constable Locking from

Hammerton Road told one of   us to stay with the body. This was done by an officer

who had assisted us, myself and Sergeant Turner then went back to the pitch.

This time at the West Stand side there were no more injured or dead on the pitch.
THOMAS JOHN WHITELEY                      - 4 -                                 R 414




I heard a Liverpool fan shouting "You bastards, you fucking killed them."       He was

ignored and ran across the pitch towards the South Stand.     I saw an officer I

know from West Bar Police Station.    He stated how he had been pulling supporters

from the terraces.     He said that one man he had pulled out was dead and that as

he tried to revive him,    Liverpool fans shouted "Murderer, you killed him."    He

was extremely upset and I stayed with him for a time until he was assisted by

members of his serial.

I was directed to form part of a cordon across the centre line, which I did with

other officers, two of whom were on my original serial, and we thought it best to

stay together at this time. While in this cordon and facing the Liverpool fans,

several came up to us obviously in shock and very upset, looking for family and

friends who they had lost in the confusion. Then there were other fans who seemed

completely unconcerned for the dead and injured.    Some asking why the game

couldn't continue, others asking when the replay would be.

I was told all the gates had been opened and people asked to leave the stadium

but for about fifteen minutes the crowds didn't seem to dissipate. After about

thirty minutes when the ground had almost cleared, myself and two colleagues went

to Leppings Lane where we    joined with members of our original serial.

On reflection there was    a distinct contrast between Liverpool and Notts Forest

supporters. The Notts Forest fans seemed to be more orderly and better behaved,

causing no problems at all. From the stand I was originally in on turnstile duty

there were no problems at all and all the fans seemed well behaved and arrived

early.   I did not have a radio but from what I was told by the Sergeants, a lot

of Liverpool fans were arriving late and were not in the ground for the start of
THOMAS JOHN WHITELEY                   - 5 -                                R 414



the game. As I walked from the players tunnel at the start of the game, I saw

that the majority of Liverpool fans on the terraces had converged on the centre

terraces behind the goal mouth with spaces apparent on the wings of these

terraces. This was noticeable as the rest of the ground was full to capacity.
