12   NOU   ’ 91   9:10   FROM   SOUTH   YORK S   POLICE                                 PAGE.001




                                                                   South Y oj^hipe^olip^
                                                                       PolkT© H^qya f t e r s
      Sheffield (0742)
                                                                            s'   /S n \g Hill
      Telex: 547996
                                                                   X    ^heM d       S3 SLY
      Fax: (0742)523411

                                                                                                jiv L U




                            Facsimile Transmission




                  COMPLAINTS & DISCIPLINE DEPARTMENT
                                           Ext 8420

                                   Head of Department
                                Chief Superintendent Mole




       The following document consisting of      ..   .■-   page(s) is for the attention of.*



           Ioc. Km, . oUtfeA&Qcy .c£v, .. .sT. j7*. ^ £ ^ ? ^ o ! o o £ .

           .                        ...............................................

                                   ................................................
12   NOU   ’ 91    9:10    FROM    SOUT H   YORK S   POLICE                          PAGE.0 0 2
X




                                  THE POLICE (DISCIPLINE) REGULATIONS 1985


                                        PROCEEDINGS DIRECTED AGAINST


                                      CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT DUCKENFIELD


                                                       AND


                                            SUPERINTENDENT MURRAY




                                                      ADVICE




           1.     The Archbishop of York preaching at the Hillsborough Memorial Service
                  on 23 April 1989 said, "Events of the magnitude of Hillsborough don't
                  usually happen just for one single reason, nor is it usually possible
                  to pin the blame on one single scapegoat--.       Disasters happen because
                  a whole series of mistakes, misjudgments and mischances happen to come
                  together in a deadly combination."


           2.     In this whole tragic affair with the benefit of coisimonsense and hindsight
                  there are many who could have done better or performed differently be
                  they police officers, officials of Sheffield Wednesday FC, structural
                  engineers, officials of the local council and others t nevertheless it
                  seems to the writer on consideration of thousands of documents available
                  both in his preparation and in his actions on the day Chief
                  Superintendent Duckenfield was not for whatever reason up to the role
                  of overall match commander at this major sporting event.       Sadly for
                  Chief Supt Duckenfield, the South Yorkshire Police and those of the




                                                      - 1 -
12   NOU   ’ 91    9:11       F ROM   SOUTH   YORKS    POLICE                           PAGE.0 0 3




                  bereaved who seek disciplinary action, Chief Supt DuckenfieldTs health
                  appears to have failed and we will never know whether a tribunal would
                  have found that such various acts or omissions as were found proved
                  would have amounted to neglect of duty.


           3.     There remains, however, the position of Superintendent Murray.          I
                  start by adopting observations made in the report of the West Midlands
                  Police to the Director of Public Prosecutions.         Chief Superintendent
                  Duckenfield, the overall match day commander elected to police the event
                  from the control room in the ground, but according to Supt Murray there
                  was no confusion in roles.          However, the adoption of this style of
                  command must to an extent reduce the overall responsibility held by
                  Supt Murray because decisions are always likely to be made with the
                  consent of the present Chief Superintendent.         However, by the very nature
                  of bis rank Supt Murray would accept responsibility.         Furthermore there
                  is a duty on every police officer to act promptly if the situation
                  requires it and the presence of a more senior officer should not hinder
                  or excuse that requirement.


           4.     At 1447 Supt Marshall asked the police control box for permission to
                  open the exit gates, an extraordinary action, but one well justified
                  given the circumstances prevailing at the time.         Two further requests
                  were made whilst Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was considering the
                  position.    At this point Supt Murray addressed Chief Supt Duckenfield
                  saying words to the effect, "Are we going to open those gates."          Perhaps
                  this is a good example of Supt Murray, although the junior officer,
                  making his mark in a situation and at a time he felt it necessary.


                  Nevertheless the fact remains that the decision to open the gates was
                  not followed by any direct or indirect orders to deal with the 2000
                  or so fans who for a period of 5 minutes entered the ground.         There
                  were no stewards or police officers checking or directing them so the
                  majority of them made for the tunnel leading to pens 3 and 4.




                                                         -2 -
✓
    •   12   NOU    ’ 91    9:11       F ROM   SOUTH   YORKS   POLICE                          PfiGE.0 0 4




                   5.      The earlier opening of Gate 'C' when 180 or so supporters got in did
                           not alert him to consider how to cope with a deliberate authorised
                           opening of that gate.


                           The order given "to open the gates" was directed not to specific police
                           officers, "but in general-     Bearing in mind the inevitable background
                           noise close to kick off he could not know who may or may not have heard
                           the order and who for that matter might be alerted to be prepared to
                           take action consequent upon th£t order.


                   6.      Supt Murray was part of the decision making team employed at the semi
                           final.    In overall terms he had some responsibility for the control
                           of matters outside the ground as well as inside-      The use and
                           availability of the video and communications by radio placed him in
                           a position of overall authority with Chief Supt Duckenfield.        It can
                           be argued that he should have recognised the dangers inherent in the
                           requests being made, especially as he had previous experience of the
                           1988 semi final and of the ground.       Furthermore if the conclusion drawn
                           by Lord Justice Taylor that Chief Supt Duckenfield "froze" is fair and
                           correct then the question can be asked why Supt Murray did not recognise
                           this and step into the breach-


                   7.      Whilst the writer accepts that the charge against Supt Murray has some
                           prospects of success I am concerned as to whether having regard to all
                           the circumstances that now obtain that it is just and fair that Supt
                           Murray should as it were be seen to face the music alone.       The following
                           may be worthy of consideration


                           a.   The proceedings might be considered oppressive because of delay.
                                There has, of course, been the Taylor Inquiry, the Inquests, and
                                   the consideration of some of the papers by the Director of Public
                                   Prosecutions all of which have naturally taken up time-     It is
                                   now a little over 2 \ years since this tragic event, those preparing
                                   the case for the disciplinary hearing have taken time to get the




                                                                - 3 -
12   NOU   ’ 91   9:12      F ROM    SOUTH   YORKS   POLICE                             PAGE.0 0 5




                         matter in order.     There are administrative and evidential
                         difficulties to overcome. Time has been expended in thorough
                         preparation in the hope that this would facilitate in due course
                         an efficient and thorough presentation of the complaints and keep
                         the case within reasonable boundaries in the hope that it could
                         fairly and properly be dealt with both by the presentation and
                         the defence in a matter of weeks rather than months.     In Chief
                         Supt Duckenfield's case 5 charges were to be presented ranging
                         widely over events from when it was first announced that the semi
                         final would be held at Hillsborough to the time when the match
                         was stopped as well as later discussions with Mr Kelly and
                         representatives of the 3 football clubs involved.     It was known
                         that having regard to the medical information available charges
                         would not be served upon Chief Supt Duckenfield until his health
                         improved.    In contrast Mr Murray faces only 1 charge; much of the
                         preparation time has been consumed by Chief Supt Duckenfield's
                         alleged shortcomings rather than those of Supt Murray.


                  b.     A distinction should perhaps be made between making decisions to
                         move particular resources and having the ability to move them and
                         making decisions that cause the need to move resources to arise.
                         It is open to argument that the role of Supt Murray overseeing
                         the control room staff was to implement the decisions of others.


                         The force order entitled, "Standing instructions for the policing
                         of football matches" does not identify the responsibilities of
                         "match control” much less the officer in charge.     Para 10.1 states,
                         "The officer in charge of match control should not be of less rank
                         than Sergeant and be aided by at least 1 police constable.”        This
                         might suggest that the officer in charge of match control is not
                         contemplated as a decision maker next in descent from the overall
                         commander, but rather as an implementor able to carry out the
                         routine tasks to be associated with a first level supervisor.




                                                       _   4   -
IE   NOU   ’ 91    9:13        F ROM   SOUTH   YORKS   POLICE                          PAGE.0 0 6




                       The above has even greater.force when put in the context of what
                       was on any view a major departure from the operational plan, an
                       exceptional course of action taken in exceptional circumstances.


                  c.   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, unlike Supt Murray, has never
                       co-operated with the disciplinary enquiry as of course was his
                       right. Chief Supt Duckenfield will not be at the Tribunal hearing.
                       The Tribunal will not have the opportunity of contrasting the
                       testimony of the defendants.        Furthermore, Supt Murray will be
                       deprived of the opportunity of asking questions of Chief Supt
                       Duckenfield.


                  d.   Regard might be had to matters of detail or stances that could
                       be taken by Supt Murray.


                          i.    Having been in the control box in question the writer is
                                well aware that Supt Murray had a reasonably good view through
                                the windows of the Leppings Lane terracing albeit at an angle,
                                but would not have been in a good position to view the screen
                                monitors, he would have to crane his neck backwards.


                       ii.      The time Chief Supt Duckenfield took to make the decision
                                to open the gate was probably of the order of 3 to 3£ minutes.
                                Supt Murray would be entitled to the opinion that Chief Supt
                                Duckenfield during this time was thinking about the
                                consequences of such a decision and of any follow up
                                information or directions to be given consequent upon such
                                decision.


                                Supt Murray was there to assist, be sounded out or whatever
                                if asked, but Chief Supt Duckenfield didn’t ask.     Supt Murray
                                reminded him of the need for a decision and it was then taken
                                and given out over the radio by PS Goddard.




                                                        -5 -
*   IE   NOU   ’ 91    9:13       F ROM   SOUTH   YORKS   POLICE                          PAGE.007




                                   Supt Murray had other matters to consider, he was in command
                                   of the centre of communications for police activity both
                                   inside and outside the ground, in particular we know at times
                                   that there was some concern about, the behaviour of Liverpool
                                   fans at the edge of the spion kop which was allocated to
                                   Notts Forest fans.      He could fairly advance the claim that
                                   Chief Supt Duckenfield had taken full responsibility for
                                   this major departure from the plan and would follow it
                                   through, by for example observing the monitor screen and
                                   seeing where fans entering the concourse through Gate ’C
                                   went, and taking such further action as may have appeared
                                   necessary to him.


                      e.      In terms of moral culpability there is a significant difference
                              between the respective roles, acts and omissions on the part of
                           Chief Supt Duckenfield and Supt Murray.        If Chief Supt Duckenfleid
                              is not to be proceeded against then those directing the charge
                              against Supt Murray may wish to reflect on the situation ana seek
                              to balance justice being seen to be done to Supt Murray, the likely
                              distress occasioned tc some by the inevitable publicity this matter
                              will attract and the likely outcome.


                      f.      If Supt Murray is to be seen as a "scapegoat” by the media and
                              many of the public, this would not I suspect assist the bereaves
                              with their grief nor be seen as just action by the police against
                              one of their number.


                              If the charge against Murray is found proved, I anticipate that
                              any penalty imposed would be seen by many as totally out cf
                              proportion to 96 deaths, 1 person lingering on a life support
                              machine and many others having endured an horrific experience-
                              Sentencing would be difficult, the prime miscreant is Ch Supt
                              Duckenfield who has throughout been suspended frctn duty, on the
                              other hand Supt Murray has remained on what mig.it be termed maini-ne




                                                            -6 -
N0 U ’ 91   9:14   FROM   S0 UTH   Y 0 RKS   F10 L I C E                                                     PAGE . 0 0 8




                                                           .\   f ' c:;/' r:i      ly<   A r ? a :ct:icn             in
                                                                                     -Z~ -r. «       1r iJVCfi
                                                                r ; ,~,y y   ,-4                 ^   ,;j i        C ' >1 1   t.   V
