Minutes of Mid Season Football Conference 17. 6. 87 - PHQ

Minutes of Meeting with Local Football Leage Clubs & Police
24. 7. 87 - PHQ
                 v'



Minutes of Mid Season Football Conference - 12.1.88 - PHQ   v

Minutes of End of Season Football Conference - 27.6.88 - PHQ

Minutes of Meeting with Local Football League Clubs and Police
20.7.88 - PHQ

Minutes of Mid Season Football Conference - 19.1.89 - PHQ
                                         fcmrkaLu                 f ,.

              u p ™ ! ' f ES 0F MID SEASON FOOTBALL CONFERENCE HELD AT 2 1 5 pm on
              WEDNESDAY 17 JUNE 1987 IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM, POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                              SHEFFIELD


   PRESENT:




  Superintendent5 Stuart, Vallance, Duckenfield
  Chief Inspectors King and Beal
  Detective Inspector Eggleston
                              Secretary



                              r?s\::?nr tr Fby. welcomin8 aii the
  congratulate C h L T s u p e S n t e ' d f ^ S“ S°” ' t00k the °PP°rtunity to
                                                                                               «*
                        Superintendent Meadows on receiving the Queens Police Medal

                 Aspects on Policing Football Grounds in South Yorkshire


  th a t^ fo o tb a l^ o v ertim ^ a llo ca ti^6 ‘ J                                    s u b j e c t and s a id
  f o r c e m aintained e ^ d u t T a " "                   t t       ZZZ.1™'"       " * £ 5 4 7 ' 6° °        «“

 He continued by saying that for the coming season, £640,500 had been allocated.


 matches a n d ^ a ^ c o n c l ^ d e d h ! G ' ° ! o'16 a U o c a c l o n o f overtim e a t f o o t b a l l
 monitor the s i t u a t i o n a lth o u g h th 'e a    E         ^      S                                “


 by clubsPfor”tha?efacilityn ^ f t e ^ f ' h°”tP°liCing.t m b i U Sounds end payment
 that s fnrH,rn •        ty- After a short discussion he concluded by saving

 :Lii:                                                 ; r rs                clarify the sit“                 ”
Public Order Guide on Football HoSliganism and Dse o£ CCXV/Photography (Video)

Superintendent Stuart circulareH a ri-r-n-Pt-                      -j        c

Hooliganism S e c t i o n ) - A C P O ^ i ^ l a ^ f r ^ r ^ i b l i r o ^ S e ^ ” 8” ^      12 (F°°t b 3 U

matches.PreSSnted         *   Sh°rt Vldeo on outbreaks.of crowd disorder at football



video^rJco^ingl S                                   d l S C U S S i °n t 0 °k  -  the v a l i d i t y of
ga thering and the                       Photography, in r e l ati on to d eter r e n t s e vidence
ga thering and the p r e s e n t a t i o n of s u c h m a t eria l befo re court.


intP'ha^rman, Cr ClUded by thankinS everyone for their input into a very
further d e v e J o p ^ n t s ! " ^      ^     ^              UPdat£ Divisional Conunanders on

Command Structures at Grounds                                     ' -


rank^hould^e^ff^                       i ntro d u c e d this subject and said that C hief Inspector
of 5 000 or less 11                   t0 comiliand P e r s o nne l at foo tb a l l m a t ch es w i t h crowds
A short discussion took place resulting in all commanders agreeing with the
principle. The Chairman concluded by saying that he would consider the matter.
(This was discussed at chief officer level and the decision was status quo).

 Public Transport

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson introduced this item and said that the
provisions of Public Transport at football matches was one of the elements to
providing a successful police operation, however, it was not the responsibility
of the police to provide that service.

A short discussion took place resulting in the Chairman saying that hopefully
Transport Corporation would provide transport for the coming season or arrange
for another company to do so. Mr Jackson asked that divisional comanaers
monitor the situation.

Overt/Covert Police Operations (Use of Spotters)

Superintendent Stuart introduced this item and said the use of overt and covert
spotters had been discussed at the first and second division conferences.

He said that other forces had used overt and covert spotters within police
operations resulting in a high degree of success, however, both systems were
labour-intensive and costly.

The use of overt and covert spotters was discussed at length and Chief
Superintendent Mole said that spotters from the British Transport Police gave F
Division an excellent service at the Leeds semi final.

He continued by saying that such a system should be on an exchange basis and
would help to reduce football hooliganism.

The Chairman agreed and said arrangements should be made by Divisional
Commanders to exchange spotters where it was clear useful intelligence would be
gained and that he should be consulted if it was felt that a covert operation
was necessary.

Membership Schemes

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson said that a meeting had taken place to discuss
Membership Schemes and conditions. A list of conditions were defined and
accepted in a scheme within South Yorkshire but the clubs had not'agreed at this
stage to introduce photographs on membership cards.

Superintendent Stuart continued by saying that all clubs in South Yorkshire had
entered into the scheme. The members discussed the COGGANS system.

Mr Stuart outlined at length the Membership Scheme including the Membership Card
and its format.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson said that the scheme did not directly affect
the hooligan element but was designed to embrace all the converted and family
members and allowed the police to concentrate on other areas of crowd control
and hooliganism.
                                     -   5   -




He continued by saying that hopefully Membership Card Scheme "would promote
family areas within the ground, thus requiring less policing. The system was a
government initiative in conjunction with the Football Association and it will
be monitored, assessed and developed accordingly. Any comments regarding the
scheme should be forwarded to Superintendent Stuart, Operations for collation
during the season.

Exclusion Orders

The Chairman introduced this item and explained fully the system involving
Exclusion Orders and the taking of photographs,

A lengthy discussion took place regarding photographs, equipment and
installation of the same resulting in the Chairman saying that officers should
be instructed in the use of camera equipment provided. This would reduce failure
rate in film exposures.   Inspector Eggleston said that he would provide the best
equipment available within the budget, being mindful of certain failure rates
involving prisoner photography.

The Chairman asked the members views on where the Exclusion Order Index should
be kept for easy access by our officers and other forces.

Acting Detective Chief Superintendent Addis explained the full system of
Exclusion Orders and a lengthy discussion took place on the recording and
retention of the Orders.

The discussion was concluded by the Chairman saying that advice would be sought
from Superintendent Hale (Communications and Computers Department) regarding the
possibility of entering Exclusion Orders on the BODS FILE for easy accessability
and an order outlining procedures would be produced.

South Yorkshire Police Standing Instructions on Football

The Chairman introduced this item and said that the Orders would require some
amendments in relation to Exclusion Orders and Membership Schemes, and a new
Force Standing Order in relation to Exclusion Orders.

The order was discussed and it was accepted there was no need for further
change.

Report of Meeting of 2nd Division Conference 28/29 May 1987

The minutes of this meeting had not been received, however, Superintendent
Stuart briefly outlined the agenda and said there was nothing to add in relation
to matters not already discussed at the present meeting.

Report of Meeting of 1st Division Conference 9/10 June 1987

The minutes of this meeting had not been received, however, Superintendent
Stuart briefly outlined the agenda and said there was nothing to add in relation
to matters not already discussed at the present meeting.

There being no further business the meeting closed at 5.00 pm.
                MINUTES UF MEETING BETWEEN LOCAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS
          OFFICIALS AND SENIOR POLICE OFFICERS OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
      HELD AT 11.30 AM ON FRIDAY 24 JULY 1987 AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS, SHEFFIELD



PRESENT

W W Jackson Esq, Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) - Chairman
Chief Superintendents Meadows, Lodge, Broomhead
Superintendents Doyle, Vallance, Duckenfield
Chief Inspectors Waring and Murray
M Spinks Esq - Secretary Barnsley Football Club
R Buckle Esq - Chairman Barnsley Football Club
K G Hulley Esq, Director - Sheffield Wednesday FC
G McKreel Esq, Secretary SWFC
Mrs S L Lane. A/Secretary - SWFC
K Booth Esq, Chairman Rotherham United FC
N Darnall Esq Secretary Rotherham United FC
K Agar - Commercial Manager - Doncaster Rovers FC
Mr K J Oldale - Doncaster Rovers FC
G E Smith Esq - Secretary Sheffield United FC

APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

 Apologies for absence were received from Derek Dooley Esq, Sheffield United
'Football Club.

MINUTES OF THE PREVIOUS MEETING

The minutes of the meeting held on 6 August 1986 which had been previously
circulated were accepted as a true and accurate record.

MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

a;-    Close Circuit Television

       The Chairman invited comment from the members as to the success or
       otherwise of Close.Circuit Television overthe last season.

       Chief Superintendent Lodge said that the equipment at Barnsley had proved a
       success and a number of excellent arrests had resulted from it.

       He continued by saying the equipment had also proved invaluable for
       intelligence gathering.

       A short discussion took place and it was generally agreed that the
       installation of Close Circuit Televisions at football grounds within South
       Yorkshire had been a success.

       Item discharged.

b     Conduct of Players and Officials

      Mr Jackson referred to item 3 on the previous minutes and said that in
      general the conduct of players and officials was good and every
      encouragement should be given for this to continue.
     Members of the meeting agreed with the comments made by the Chairman.

     Item discharged.

c    Supply of Alcohol

     Club representatives queried the need for control of sale of alcohol in the
     grounds and said that it created a tendency to drink outside the ground and
     supporters arrived not too long before the match started.

     Mr Jackson said there was plenty of evidence by way of practical experience
     and research that alcohol was a motivating factor in the commission of
     offences and a causation of hooliganism. He said that prior to the
     legislation he had policed a first division ground and the fans arrived not
     long before the game started having been drinking elsewhere. He said it
     was the topping up of alcohol inside the ground that could cause problems.

     He had noticed a tendency, however, for problems to develop away from the
     grounds and that he was a member of the National Working Party who would be
     considering all such matters to try in co-operation with clubs and everyone
     else with a vested interested, to resolve the issues. In the meantime,
     clubs and the police should continue their efforts to fight hooliganism and
     make their views known as certainly had been done so in the past.

EMERGENCY EVACUATION AND STEWARDING

The Chairman referred to documentation previously circulated outlining notes of
guidance for Stewaraing and Emergency Evacuation Procedures. He stressed the
need to ensure that there was appropriate briefing by the clubs and the
appointment of fit and responsible persons. For our part, we would assist and
give advice.

It was agreed by everyone that we should continue to ensure that public safety
was.paramount and that the high standard of awareness would continue.

Item discharged


EXCLUSION ORDERS

The Chairman circulated guidance and said that from 1 August 1987 persons
arrested at football grounds having committed certain types of offences would be
subject to Exclusion Orders.

Mr Jackson briefly outlined the procedure to obtain Exclusion Orders and its
effect on police and football clubs.
                                     - 3 -




ALL TICKET MATCHES - FANS ARRIVING AT MATCHES WITHOUT TICKETS

Chief Superintendent Lodge said that their first match of the season was Leeds
United v Barnsley and although it was an all ticket match a substantial amount
of supporters would attend without tickets.

He continued by saying that this could create policing problems and there had
been suggestions that supporters could be allowed entry to the ground but this
would defeat the object of all ticket matches.

Chief Superintendent Broomhead said that this created two police operations one
inside the ground and another outside and by allowing persons into the ground
without tickets, would lose the credibility of all ticket matches and cause
general problems for others.

Mr Broomhead continued by saying that it was general policy to publish in the
local press and the programmes that persons attending without tickets would be
turned away.

Mr Jackson agreed with the general view of the members that persons without
tickets should not be alldwed entry or otherwise we-would never stop non-ticket
holders coming thus aggravating future policing operations.


MEMBERSHIP SCHEMES

The Chairman said that this was a government initiative aimed at lessening
hooliganism at grounds.

He noted that clubs in South Yorkshire had not gone for a scheme which included
photographs and said it was generally felt that photographs should have been
included on the cards.

Mr Spinks, Secretary of Barnsley Football Club said that to date, they had not
agreed on a Membership Scheme as the Football League Working Party had rejected
their Scheme on a technicality and proposed an amended Scheme.

He continued by saying that the amended scheme was unacceptable in relation to
the segregation of members and non members and therefore was rejected by the
club.

Mr Spinks said that they intended resubmitting proposals back to the Football
League Working Party and welcomed any comment the police wished to make and
indeed invited officers to attend the ground to facilitate those actions.

The Chairman said that Barnsley Football Club should try and resolve the
situation with the Football League Working Party and as it was their
responsibility to consider them and monitor them, but there was no doubt the
police would be asked to comment to assist the future evaluations.
                                     - 4 -




Representatives from Barnsley Football Club said they would rather have no
scheme than accept proposals that were not constructive and workable. The
Chairman said that future developments and evaluations would hopefully determine
the use of such schemes.

Item deferred.

POLICE ROOM AT OAKWELL GROUND - UP DATE

Chief Superintendent Lodge said that the new police control room at Oakwell
Football Ground would be an asset to all concerned.

He thanked the representatives of Barnsley Football Club for their help and said
that the new control room would assist in better policing especially inside the
ground, ie. camera sightings, personnel address system and possible evacuation
procedures.

The Chairman agreed and thanked everyone concerned.

Item discharged.

POLICING ARRANGEMENTS 1987/88

The Chairman said that in addition to comments made earlier under Policing
Arrangements 1986/87, we should continue to work together and any problems
encountered by football clubs within the area should be discussed with the
appropriate commander.

Mr Jackson said that football is a national sport to be enjoyed   byfamilies and
we should strive to stamp out hooliganism in whatever form.

Item, discharged.

There being no further business the meeting closed at 12.25 pm.
                    MINUTES OF THE MID SEASON FOOTBALL CONFERENCE
                  HELD AT 10.30 AM ON TUESDAY 12 JANUARY 1988
                       AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS, SHEFFIELD




PRESENT

W W Jackson Esq, Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) - Chairman
Chief Superintendents Herold, Addis, Herbert, Mole, Broomhead
Superintendents Stuart, Swann, Marsh, Brookfield and Hale
Chief Inspectors Murray and Sewell
Inspectors Wood and Finch
PC Rosevear (Football Liaison Officer)
PS _____________ AMISM MISM - Secretary

Apologies for Absence

Apologies for absence were received from Chief Superintendents Owen, Wain and
Nesbit.

Minutes of the last meeting (17 June 1987)

The minutes of the meeting held on   17 June1987,which had been previously
circulated were accepted as a true and accurate record of that meeting.

Matters arising from the Minutes

There were no matters arising from the previous minutes - 17 June 1987.

Coach Operators/Traffic Commissioners Guidelines

Superintendent Stuart introduced this item and said that as a result of a
meeting with the Transport Manager of a local coach company (Ridings Travel) it
was apparent that some of the Traffic Commissioners Guidelines were not being
adhered to by Coach Operators throughout-the country. In particular, rule 4
'coaches attending designated events must not stop at any premises where '
intoxicating liquor is available 1.

Mr Stuart continued by saying thatthis guideline wasdifficult to implement as
most motorway service areas sold intoxicating liquor and bona fide supporters
who wanted to stop at such premises for ordinary refreshments were being
penalised.

He continued by saying that Ridings Travel were to lose approximately £50,000
per annum in revenue if they adhered to the guidelines as regular customers were
hiring coaches from other companies that stopped at motorway service areas
irrespective of the rule outlined.

The Chairman outlined in full the Traffic Commissioners Guidelines and the
procedure to be adopted through Mr Phillips, ACC at ^Greater Manchester,
Secretary to the ACP0 Sub Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events of
breaches to those Guidelines.
                                     - 2 -




Superintendent Stuart said that to date only 16 breaches had been reported to Hr
Phillips this season and in percentage terms this figure appeared low taking
into account the number of supporters coaches that travel nationally each
weekend.

Chief Superintendent Hole said that it was slightly unfair on normal supporters
when executive coaches were offering to travellers, champagne breakfasts and
other similar packages in order to attract custom. He continued by saying that
uniformity should be sought in implementing the Guidelines nationally.

Chief Superintendent Hole said that one solution may be to 'stockpile' coaches
at such locations like Tankersley and question drivers as to their schedule
stops and then escort them in a convoy of ten to the appropriate ground.

The Chairman said that the use of intelligence across forces, good planning and
appropriate deployments were important features in preventing disorderand each
match should be treated on its merits.

A short discussion took place on the Guidelines resulting in theChairman saying
that he had written to Hr Phillips about Rule 4 with a view to
it being discussed at a national level - the important thing was that we should
use all methods available that contribute to a reduction in public order.

Chief Superintendent Broomhead said that coach parking facilities were now
becoming a problem at Bramall Lane and asked if other members had similar
problems and should we as a Force be asking certain clubs to provide parking
facilities.

A short discussion took place resulting in the Chairman saying that wherever
possible encouragement should be given for clubs to provide appropriate parking
places.

Item discharged.

Football Intelligence

Superintendent Stuart introduced this item and said that a number of Divisional
Intelligence Officers and Football Liaison Officers were contacting other Forces
directly. This was outside the system presently being operated and frequently
created duplicity of information by the force Football Intelligence Officer, PC
Rosevear.

Chief Superintendent Hole said that he accepted information received from PC
Rosevear was correct, however, it was not always up to date and his Divisional
Intelligence Officer was in touch with the visiting teams and even the
appropriate sub division up to the kick off and beyond, thus gaining direct and
immediate information.

Chief Superintendent Hole continued by saying that it was frequently the case
for more relevant intelligence to be gathered within the last few hours to kick
off than any other period.
                                     - 3 -




Chief Superintendent Herold said that PC Rosevear was the Force Football
Intelligence Officer and he should be the person to liaise with other forces
throughout the week to avoid duplicity and after Friday evening for the other
appropriate personnel to continue in respect of fixtures in their divisions.

A short discussion took place resulting in the Chairman saying that it was
equally important for relevant intelligence to be gathered and disseminated up
to and including the football fixture, than days prior to it and a balance
should be struck between those concerned.

Item discharged.

Use of CCTV at Football Stadia - Force Standing Order

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson said that this item had been raised at Chief
Superintendents Conference and certain valid points had been raised which
differed from the draft guidelines issued by the National Working Party.

In particular, viewing of CCTV, the preparation of pocket books by officers
involved in incidents recorded on tape and collusion by those officers when
preparing their pocket books.

It was generally thought that when officers had made an arrest or been involved
in an incident,   they should be allowed to view a    tape recording of that arrest
or incident and   converse prior to preparing their pocket books, these being
contrary to the Guidelines.

A short discussion took place resulting in the Chairman saying that these facts
were to be raised -at the National Working party.

He continued by   saying that it had been approved      at Policy Review Committeefor
tape retention to be 12 months from recording or        corresponding fixture.

Superintendent Stuart said that a number of other forces had also expressed
their concern over the viewing of closed circuit television and the question of
collusion prior to the preparation of pocket books.

He continued by referring to problems encountered by police and comments made by
a High Court Judge when they allowed numerous viewings of a video tape to take
place after an incident at Luton Football Ground and did not keep proper
records.

Mr Stuart said that the reasoning behind using closed circuit television is to
establish the truth and create another way of presenting evidence of fact before
a court.

He continued by saying that it was thought nationally that collusion between
officers should take place during viewing the tape and advice would be
circulated to all forces in due course from MrGhandi, Deputy Director Public
Prosecutions.
                                      - 4 -




 The C M m i i said it was essential to keep an accurate record of all viewings,
  ncluding place viewed, time, day, date, persons present and other relevant
 information coming to light during the viewing, in particular, identification of
 persons in the video.

 A sh°rt discussion took place on this item resulting in the Chairman saying that
 we should await the directive from Mr Ghandi and write the recommendations into
 a draft order in due course for discussion at Policy Review Committee.

 Superintendent Swann asked for advice on the purchasing of tapes and who should
 provide the funding for the equipment.

 The Chairman said that the purchase should be made centrally and in bulk. Chief
  uperintendent Herold agreed to make arrangements for the purchase on behalf
 divsions.

 Item discharged.

 Exclusion Orders

The Chairman introduced this item and asked members if any problems had occurred
with exclusion orders and the system adopted.

Mr Jackson continued by referring to the apparent delay in circulation of
exclusion orders by Magistrates Courts and that ACC Watson was to raise the
issue during his liaison with Magistrates Clerks with a view to speeding up the
process.

Detective Chief Superintendent Addis said that in some instances, exclusion
or ers aa been received as late as one week after issue, however, the telex was
being received on the day of issue.

Mr Addis said that to date, 13 exclusion orders had been made and details
forwarded to the relevant forces.

Mr Addis continued by saying that only 2 minor problems had occurred, namely
that an exclusion order had been received with a black and white photograph
instead of colour and that on 3 occasions orders had been received without
p otographs, however, in general the system was working well and all members
agreed.

Mr Addis concluded by informing members that in the near future all photography
would be in colour.

Item discharged.

Spotters

The Chairman introduced this item and asked members if any problems had occurred
with the use of 'spotters'.
                                     - 5 -




Superintendent Swann said that B Division had 2 full time spotters who travelled
in uniform to away fixtures. He continued by saying that the officers provided
a deterrent, as away fans recognised them and knew that the possibility of being
identified existed. The spotters also provided intelligence for local and home
forces on persons of interest attending away fixtures.

A short discussion took place and all members agreed that the system was working
well. The Chairman concluded by saying that the British Transport Police were
also very helpful by providing travelling spotters and intelligence.

Chief Superintendent Mole made reference to an.incident whereby one particular
force refused to provide spotters due to financial constraints and concluded by
saying that if it was to be a national scheme, all forces should participate.

The Chairman said that he would liaise with Mr Phillips on this matter.

Item discharged.

Membership Schemes

The Chairman introduced this item and asked for members views on the present
schemes.

A short discussion took place on Membership Schemes and all members {with the
exception of B Division) agreed that they were working.

Superintendent Swann said that Barnsley Football Club had not agreed with   the
Football Association on a suitable scheme.

He continued by saying that Barnsley Football Ground had not initially been
designed with total segregation in mind and a membership scheme would at present
create problems in policing fixtures, however, the police and Barnsley Football
Club did agree in principle to some form of scheme being adopted.

The Chairman concluded by saying that the situation should be monitored closely
with a view to being in a position to give a police view on the subject.

Levels of Policing

The Chairman introduced this item and asked members views on current policing
levels and if the balance was right.

Superintendent Stuart made reference to the Dog Section and their attendance at
football matches. He said that some divisions only wanted the provision of dogs
in duty time and not overtime or leave, due to financial constraints.

Mr Stuart continued by saying that it was not always possible to supply dogs in
duty time and a balance had to be struck. In future, when dogs were being
supplied the commander will be given the option of having the full quota of dogs
offered or only those working in duty time.
                                     - 6 -




The Chairman said that it was important for commanders to identify their needs
according to the fixture, and deploy resources accordingly as members of the dog
section may be required elsewhere.

He continued by saying that the balance of handlers/dogs on overtime or leave
should be spread evenly across the force.

Community Policing at Football Matches

Mr Jackson referred to Community Policing at football matches and said that
Chief Superintendent Mole had introduced a system of using the same officer at
the same point within the ground at each fixture.

Chief Superintendent Mole said that it was similar to community policing in the
fact that the same officers was positioned in the same area of the crowd each
time. This enabled the officer and certain supporters to become known to each
other and become a community type constable.

Mr Mole continued by saying that the system was working well and fewer resources
were now needed on the perimeter. The officers had become known to the rowdy
element and were quick to identify contentious areas. They also provided an
ideal intelligence gathering resource.

Chief Superintendent Mole then referred to resources and parking facilities at
Niagara Sports Ground. He said that a problem had evolved with officers/people
visiting Hillsborough. These people were using the parking facilities at
Niagara and therefore caused congestion resulting in emergency vehicles being
unable to move freely within the complex.

Mr Mole asked members to convey the message to officers with a view to finding
other parking facilities or to be.more sensible in their mode of parking.

A short discussion took place resulting in all members agreeing that it was a
problem especially when match days at>. Hillsborough coincided with other
functions at Niagara.

Item discharged.

There being no further business, the meeting closed at 11.50 am.
  •           '




                             MINUTES^ OF THE END OF SEASON FOOTBALL CONFERENCE
                                  HELD AT 2.15 PM ON MONDAY 27 JUNE 1988
                                     AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS, SHEFFIELD


  PRESENT:


  c J p f af S°n -ESq f sistant Chief Constable (Operations) - Chairman
  Chief Superintendents Addis, Mole, Owen and Thompson
  Superintendents Brookfield, Duckenfield, Mole, Murray, Simpson, Sleath and

  PC Rosevear (Football Liaison Officer)
           (Secretary)

 APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE


           f£r ^bsence were received from Chief Superintendents Herold
 Broomhead, Nesbit and Wain.                                       °iQ’

 MINUTES OF THE PREVIOUS MEETING

             °£ the "eetln2 held on 12 Jsnuarv 1968 which had been previously
 circulated were accepted as a true and accurate record of that meeting

 MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

 There were no matters arising from the previous minutes of 12 January 1988.

 PARADING FOR DUTY AT FOOTBALL MATCHES


                                 thlS it6m referrinS to Standing Order H E and Force
 expensls                54/1982 item 6 relating to travelling time and travelling



coffln ? i L r e P r ^       atlT       h3S b6en mad e ln J a n u a r y this year c o n c e r n i n g n o n ­
canvassed         M           ?     °f General 0rder 54/1982 and as a result he had
this m a t t e r               -C O m m a n d e r = a sking if t here was a need for r e - n e g o t i a t i o n on



S e ^ r ^ s e n t ' s i t n ^ r 0 ' 6? “ d^      U s sio n on the 'views exp ressed in the replies and
re-negotiation nf t-^    6          *
                              division. On conclusion the members agreed that
   negotiation of this aspect was unnecessary at this stage.

Item discharged.

ARRESTS BY MOUNTED OFFICERS


armoun^edno f ^ d              ^    ^      ^      brouSht to his attention that on some occasions
o f f i c e r at t h e ^ h                 ^             ^    there has be en 3 t e n de ncy to retain the
of a hnr<?p f    ar§e    ^Ce t0 comPlete process papers, resulting in the loss
of a horse for some considerable time.


I riinnf    f S T dlscussl01' Mr      «aid that custody officers at football
formalities reau^ 1"S" ucted/ °       “° ™ t e d officers following the Initial
oroce    “   T lr6d f°r !VldenCial purposes' leaving the administrative
procedures to be completed later.

Item discharged.
                                    - 2 -




PLAYER BEHAVIOUR ON THE FIELD OF PLAY

This item was introduced by Mr Jackson the papers having previously been
circulated.

He said that following the well publicised case in Scotland,the aspect of police
intervention into incidents occurring on the field of play has been subject of
discussion at National level and the paper shows the recommended guidelines.

Following a discussion on the content of the paper the Chairman stressed that
the guidelines were still awaiting approval and are not for implementation at
this stage.

Item discharged.

CCTV/PHOTOGRAPHY - STRATEGY TO COMBAT HOOLIGANISM

Superintendent Stuart introduced this item outlining a proposed strategy to
combat hooliganism.

He said the suggested strategy based on the use of closed circuit television
should comprise of the following

Intelligence officer
Designated arrest teams
Post match analysis
Follow up enquiry teams

He said the Divisional Intelligence Officer and Underwater Search Unit Officers
could act as the evidence gathering teams which has the added advantage of not
making further demands on divisional personnel. Also the Underwater Search Unit
are normally committed to football in duty time on match days.

Concerning the designated arrest team, Mr Stuart suggested that the Crime and
.Vandal Units could fill this role supported by detective officers.
He said the post match analysis could be achieved by the Divisional Intelligence
Officers and the Underwater Search Unit viewing the video tapes after the match
to identify and target offenders.

 Finally the follow up enquiry team where necessary could comprise of the Crime
 and Vandal Unit, Underwater Search personnel and divisional CID where
 appropriate.

 Mr Stuart informed the meeting that negotiations were still taking place
 regarding additional closed circuit television equipment, also for the
 allocation of a portable video camera.

 He said the quality of the recordings produced by the .portable recorders were
 excellent and in contrast to the static camera inside the grounds its use allows
 greater flexibility when covering sections of the crowd both in and outside the
 ground.
A short video film taken by a portable unit was shown to the members to show its
value when considering the matter of identification/evidence.

 After a lengthy discussion on the various aspects of the strategy plan and the
 use of a portable video camera, members agreed that the use of a video camera
 should be implemented.

 Superintendent Simpson said that officers were available as part of the usual
 match day staff who had attended the Greater Manchester Police course of CCTV
 operators when part of their training related to still photography. He
 requested a camera for use by those officers therefore negating any further need
 for a Scenes of Crime Officer.

 Concerning this strategy plan Mr Jackson asked the members to sumit their views
 through Superintendent Stuart within 14 days.

 LOCKS ON PERIMETER FENCES

 Chief Superintendent Mole introduced this item for the information of members
 because other clubs were contemplating using the same locks in their perimeter
 fencing as those used at Hillsborough.

 He said problems have    been experienced withthe retaining spring working loose
 on the lock, allowing    the spectators access to the field of play.
 Superintendent Murray    explained the defect and warned against using this type of
 lock until the design    has been modified.

 Item discharged.

 REPORTS OF 1ST, 2ND, 3RD AND 4TH DIVISION FOOTBALL SEMINARS

 Superintendent Stuart introduced this item and summarised the various matters
-raised at the mid season conference.

 a    Covert Operations

      Superintendent Stuart said that the recent well publicised court cases
      involving this type of policing indicate the problems that can arise when
      the officers are not sufficiently trained. As an alternative solution he
      suggested that an officer should be used as a 'passive observer'. He would
      accompany the problem groups, observe and listen to what is being said and
      report back, thereafter, having no further involvement.

      Mr Jackson said that community policing on match days should be strongly
      considered whereby a number of officers are allocated the same area of the
      ground on each match day in order to identify the trouble makers, it is
      important that these officers target and establish the identity of any
      hooligan element in their areas. He said so far we did not see the need in
      our Force to run a covert operation and if there was a need his authority
      should be sought. Any advice regarding recent operations would be
      disseminated to Divisional Commanders.
  Personal Radios

  Mr Stuart said that it has been established that organised grouns
  the police personal radio as a source of information for their
  simply by standing near to an officer and listening. To c o m b a t t M < fh
  use of earphones should be encouraged.                            this the

  Cameras


  intpn? information of the members Mr Stuart informed them that recent
 camera tureen                        S°“6 °f the organised groups are making use of a
 them afterwards
          -u  , to thei^ friend^
                         m e n d s . ^On
                                       o one
                                         n 11occasion
                                              matCheS to
                                                      ±n date
                                                         °rder this
                                                                t0 boast about
                                                                    tvDP nf
 evidence has been found and provided the basis of a successful prosecution.

 Offensive Weapons


 stanieyrL ^ ° h r H                 mef ing that *“ PPorters are known to be taping
 trousers etc     1   n         10          b° dy 0r            them in turn ups of
 grounds.                   "          eSCaPe ‘‘'“ “ ion "hen searched upon entering the


 Football Supporters Association



 f W   tit
 theSr“ e M i o n rt i m r ^ tatl0nS ^                    by the ^ o c i a t i o n s concerning
                          ay suPPorters at the end of the game. They accent
 bona fide6<;1S
    1
                   *   f°r thiS policy but are showing some concern for the
           supporters who travel by private transport and are left in a
vJXtT        P°Sltl0n when “aking their way back to the car, which is often
 from thp°me                    aWay'    Th6y argUe that by the time they are released
dis pe rs ed          ’    6 maJ'°rity ° f P ° U C e r 6S 0UrceS ha ve al- I d y been


Prevention of Alcohol Act


Mr Stuart informed the meeting that Barnsley had recently submitted papers

c a r r n n r a U o h o l “ nC“ n1"8 th'        °f “ tra"Slt V!,n by a” ay *“P P ° « e r s and


bee^decided^thsf10113 “              ° PS and th" °ther               conferences it has
is not ^        f f       3 prosec"t10"            fail on the grounds that the vehicle
IS not adapted for the c a r ri ag e of passengers.

Membership Schemes


research°w^ahd -that thlS matter was bein8 examined at National level and
research was being carried out and he would report on any developments.


it'was'agreed'thflt°n ^   ^     °n the SyStemS s t a i n i n g in our Force and
        greed that we would consider any recommendations in due course.
h   Exclusion Orders

    Superintendent Stuart informed the meeting that complaints had been
    received concerning the duration of the orders which are generally about
    three months which on occasions has been imposed at the end of the season
    and therefore expired before the start of   the new season.

     It was suggested that 12 months should be   the standard period.

    Chief Superintendent Owen said that there   had been a recent casewhere CPS
    had failed to proceed with a case because   the offender had alreadybeen
    sentenced to 9 months imprisonment relating to a separate incident and
    therefore the opportunity to impose an exclusion on him had been lost.

    Mr Jackson asked that details concerning this matter be passed to Mr Addis
    and they could be raised at the CPS/Police Working Party in the first
    instance and if we felt there was a need to take it further it could be
    discussed at the Magistrates Courts Working Party meeting. He expressed
    that we MUST have factual information that required addressing.

I   Play Offs

    Mr Stuart said that representations had been made to the football league
    concerning the lack of consultation with the police and the requirement of
    policing football matches at very short notice. As yet the Football League
    have not responded.

J   Closed Circuit Television

     Superintendent.Stuart outlined the findings of the survey by Sandridge on
     the equipment already used in the grounds. Mr Jackson expressed the
     importance of informing him of any alterations suggested so that he could
     give the best advice available to support divisional commanders in their
     operational needs.

     Item discharged.

ANY OTHER BUSINESS

Fixtures 1988/89

Following the recent release of the fixtures for the forthcoming season Mr
Jackson asked the members if they presented any problems.

Chief Superintendent Mole said the Boxing Day fixture at Hillsbrough when
Newcastle are the visitors could present a problem therefore, he had asked for a
12 o'clock kick off. This was agreed.
Mr Jackson requested that members examine the fixtures closely so that any
alterations of times could be discussed at an early stage with clubs.  He
expressed the importance of feeding intelligence to Force Intelligence Unit and
measurements against that to determine resources required. It was important for
us to ensure that we did not over or under police. This could only be achieved
by gathering all the information and intelligence together so that our
deployment was as accurate as possible.

Mr Jackson said the pre-season meeting with the Clubs was scheduled for 20 July
1988 and any items to be raised should be forwarded to Superintendent Stuart by
10 July 1988.

Item discharged.

Evacuation Procedure/Contingency Plans

Mr Jackson emphasised the need to test our contingency plans and requested that
Stewards and police officers be briefed concerning them and particularly
evacuation procedures at each pre-match briefing.

Item discharged.

There being no further business the meeting closed at 4.30 pm.
                      DRAFT MINUTES OF THE MEETING BETWEEN
                   LOCAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS OFFICIALS AND
             SENIOR POLICE OFFICERS OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                  HELD AT 11 00 AM ON WEDNESDAY 20 JULY 1988
                       AT POLICE HEADQUARTERS, SHEFFIELD




PRESENT :



T Watson Esq BA                  ACC (Management Services) - Chairman
W W Jackson Esq                  ACC (Operations)
Chief Superintendents            Thompson and Owen
Superintendents                  Duckenfield, Marshall, Seller and Stuart
G E Smith Esq                    Secretary - Sheffield United FC
D Dooley Esq                     Managing Director - Sheffield United FC
G H Mackrell Esq FCCA            Secretary   Sheffield Wednesday FC
E Barron Esq                     Director    Sheffield Wednesday FC
M J Spinks Esq                   Secretary   Barnsley Football Club
G Buckle Esq LLB                 Chairman    Barnsley Football Club
Mrs K J Oldale                   Secretary   Doncaster Rovers Football Club
N Darnill Esq                    Secretary   Rotherham United Football Club
B Peacock Esq                    Director    Rotherham United Football Club




1    APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

Apologies for absence were received from Chief Superintendents Broomhead,
Mole and Wain, also K Booth Esq - Rotherham United Football Club.
 2     MINUTES OF THE PREVIOUS MEETING

 The minutes of the meeting held on 24 July 1987, which had been previously
 circulated were accepted as a true and accurate record of that meeting.




 3     MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES


 3-1   All Ticket Matches

The Chairman promoted a discussion between members concerning the experiences
over the previous season by the Clubs and Police, when matches had been
designated "all ticket". During the discussion it was agreed that on such
occasions no severe crowd problems had taken place, however, the Clubs did
stress that they had proven to be financially detrimental to them because
many casual supporters who had decided to attend on match day were not able
to purchase tickets, therefore reducing the number of persons passing through
the turnstiles. At the conclusion of the discussion it was agreed to
continue with the existing arrangements for the forthcoming season.


3-2    Membership Schemes

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson said the whole aspect of membership schemes
was presently subject of re-examination by the Government and no doubt we
would be made aware of proposals- in the near future.

 A long discussion then took place concerning the individual schemes presently
"in operation in this area. It was 'the opinion-of the Clubs representatives
 that they had done little to assist in reducing the problem with the
 hooligan element attending matches.

A discussion then- took place regarding the well publicised trouble
caused by English supporters at the recent European Championships in Germany,
and it was agreed that the popular press exacerbate the situation by
'hyping up' the situation at every given opportunity.
#




    4    POLICE -CHARGES   1988/89   SEASON

    A paper giving details of charges was circulated. Assistant Chief Constable
    Mr Watson stated the terms and conditions in the contract would continue
    as in previous years. He explained the increases were in line with the
    annual increase in pay. The difference in rates was between matches held on
    Bank Holidays as opposed to normal Saturday and mid-week fixtures.   The
    charges were accepted by all the Clubs and Mr Watson said he would forward
    new contracts for signature as soon as possible.


    5    ANY OTHER BUSINESS

    There being no further business the meeting was closed at 12 15 pm.
                MINUTES OF THE MID-SEASON FOOTBALL CONFERENCE
                   HELD AT 2 15 PM THURSDAY 19 JANUARY 1989
                  IN THE CONFERENCE ROOM, POLICE HEADQUARTERS




PERSONS PRESENT :

W W Jackson Esq              Assistant Chief Constable - Chairman
Chief Superintendents        Addis, Broomhead, Mole, Nesbit, Owen
                             and Wain
Superintendents              Murray, Simpson, Sleath, Stuart and
                             Acting Superintendent Chambers
Chief Inspectors             Purdy, Price
Inspector                    Finch
Pc Rosevear                  Football Liaison Officer
Ps                           Secretary



APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

Apologies for absence were received from Chief Superintendents Herold

and Thompson.




MINUTES OF THE PREVIOUS MEETING

The minutes of the meeting held on 27 June 1988, which had been

previously circulated were accepted as a true and accurate record of

that meeting.



MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

There were no matters arising from the previous minutes on 27 June 1988.



CLOSED CIRCUIT TELEVISION -
Visits to Stadium by Football Trust Technical Committee

Superintendent Stuart introduced this item stating the ACPO Working

Party on the use of closed circuit television at football grounds has

completed its final report and will be published in the near future.
He said that a final draft Standing Order has been completed on the use

of closed circuit TV but because it makes reference to the Working Party

Report it will not be introduced until the report has been published.



He then referred to the survey of the existing closed circuit television

equipment in the South Yorkshire Football League grounds which was

carried out in November last year, by Mr      of the Police Research

Scientific and Development Branch at Sandridge, a member of the

Technical Committee assisting the Football Trust regarding the survey

and installation of closed circuit television equipment at Football

Stadia.



Mr Stuart said that the systems were examined in detail by Mr|_____ pnd

faults were identified on all of them particularly the Sheffield Clubs

and Rotherham, Barnsley in the main was quite good.   He added that

Divisional representatives were present during the individual surveys

who notified the Clubs of the faults requesting that they in turn notify

the installer with instructions to remedy them.   Also as a point of

interest it was established on the visit to the Barnsley ground that

they did not have a 'maintenance contract' and as they are required to

meet maintenance costs the division has adopted a policy whereby the

Club is notified of any faults and the Club are responsible for calling

out the engineers and paying the account.   If the Club fails to maintain

a satisfactory closed circuit television system they do not fulfil their

obligation in accordance with Football League instructions and

objections could be made against matches taking place.
                                  - 3 -



He concluded by saying that generally the systems are no better or worse

than most other grounds in the country.


Mr Stuart informed the meeting that the Football Trust has now

undertaken to purchase two full sets of tripod mounted/portable video

equipment at a cost of £30,000.00 and this will be operated by the

underwater search unit as previously arranged.    He said the equipment

will be delivered in the very near future.




Mr Stuart then referred to the use of closed circuit TV night matches.

He said that he had recently visited Ibrox, Scotland, where the whole

of the stadium, including stands etc. was fully lit before, during and

after the match and therefore the equipment could operate at its

maximum efficiency.   He said that he had asked the Club Secretaries to

raise this matter with their respective Boards.


Item Discharged



END OF SEASON PLAY-OFFS

The Chairman introduced this item stating that because of the problems

encountered with the end of season play offs in previous years the

Secretary of the ACPO General Purposes Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at

Sporting Events has again written to the Football League regarding the

scheduling of matches at very short notice , which in turn causes

problems in raising the necessary Police resources.
He said that the Football Joint Management Committee had not given

a full undertaking to consult with the respective Police Forces before

finalising arrangements for matches.    However, they have been advised

that if matches are arranged without sufficient notice and with little

regard for Police resources it is open for Chief Constables to consider

whether the requirements of the Safety at Sports Grounds Act have been

satisfied.   If the provision of the required police resources cannot be

attained then the League would have to make alternative arrangements.



Item Discharged



USE OF CLOSED CIRCUIT T.V

Superintendent Stuart introduced this item and referred to the paper

previously circulated relating to the arrests following the

Barnsley v Bolton Wanderers match held on the 9 January 1988, which

highlights the benefits gained from the use of video equipment.


He said that during the game eleven Bolton supporters were arrested and

after viewing the video tape additional evidence was gathered against

them, also, as a result of viewing the tape a further six were arrested

in Bolton.   Of those seventeen only one individual pleaded 'not guilty'

but the case was subsequently proved.   At the conclusion of the cases

advice was sought from the Crown Prosecution Service about the system

adopted for presenting the video evidence and an assurance was given

that none of the evidence presented was challenged by any of the

defence solicitors.
Mr Stuart said that one area of concern was the length of time that it

took for all the defendants to be dealt with, because the last case was

not dealt with until the 22 December 1988, nearly 12 months after the

incident.   He said that it had been suggested by the officer in charge

of the case that a joint charge of affray could have possibly ensured a

speedier conclusion to the case.



After discussion it was agreed that a joint charge of affray would often

prove to be a retrograde step when aiming for a faster conclusion to

cases , although each case must always be judged on its own merits and

the evidence available and the individuals charged accordingly.



Mr Stuart continued by saying that the lessons learnt as a result of the

Barnsley incident were

1.          The use of the camera and recording facilities at the

             ground must be to the highest calibre possible in order

             that the evidence produced to the Court is of the best

             quality possible.

2.          Equipment of the highest quality must be available to

             view the tapes if it is to be considered as useful in

             evidence.

3.          The reviewing and use of the video tape (or its working

             copy) to provide sufficient evidence against those already

             arrested and those to be retospectively arrested is both

             time consuming and difficult.
             Officers must be deployed solely to this duty in the

             initial stages if it's thought that the video tape will be

             produced later in evidence.



 With regard to the third point it is intended that the Underwater Search

 Unit have been suitably trained and will be responsible for reviewing

 tapes.



 Superintendent Simpson said that it was worthy of note that after the

 game people had criticized the police action, but when the video was

 viewed it showed that they had acted in a very professional manner.

 With regards to the video tape he said that if sound was included it

 would greatly enhance its evidential value.   Mr Stuart informed the

 meeting that the new portable equipment also records sound.



 Chief Superintendent Owen stated that the portable equipment had

- already proved that it is a good d.eterent as on the occasion of the

 Chelsea match when there was a great deal of jostling and pushing in

 the crowd but when the equipment was brought into place all the

 disorderliness ceased.



 Item Discharged
                                                  - 7 -


    RAISING OF MANPOWER AT FOOTBALL MATCHES

    C h i e f Su pe rintendent Nesbit s ta te d that he had r e c e iv ed c r i t i c i s m from

    a Sergeant who reg u la rl y works         'football duty'      re ga rd in g the

    i n c o ns is t en cy of m e n on n o rm a l dut y time and those on overtime.             He

    said that a m at ch at Ba rnsley had be en ci te d w h e n officers h a d a tt en d e d

    from E Di vision in duty time           to fi nd m a n y Barnsley offi cers on overtime

    and w h e n he has at tended S h e f f i e l d matc he s   ag ai n Barn sley o fficers were

    on overtime.         M r Nesbit s a i d that he rais ed this as a point             for

    discussion.

    The C h a i r m a n said that this issue has a l re a dy bee n rais ed by the

    F e d e r a t i o n and as a result a W o r k i n g Party has b e e n form e d to ex amine

    the whole issue of ra ising m a n p o w e r at fo otball matches a nd invi te d

    S up er in te nd en t Simpson,   as a m e m b e r of the W o rk in g Party to update

    members.

    S u p e r in t en de nt Simps on sai d the p r o b l e m has arose purely because' some

    officers    feel that w h e n c o m p a r e d to others work in g a fo otball dut y they

    are losi ng out in m o n e t o r y terms.          He sa id general order 22/19 87          sets

    out clearly the m e t h o d of r a i s i n g m an power,    after a s s e s s i n g the numb er
U
    of off icers    required,     the   Divis i on al C o m m a n d e r will ca lculate   the numb er

    of off icers which can'be r a i s e d w i t h i n his division,         h a vi n g r e g a r d to

    m i n i m u m m a n n i n g levels and the c r i te ri a is laid do w n in the fo ll ow in g

    order:

                    1.      Assess   the n u m b e r of officers to be p a i d for

                            by the Clu b on overtime.

                    2.      From dut y personnel

                    3.      By shift de vi a t i o n
                        ~e’
                          S4v-
 Mr Simpson said that        Division follow this criteria and then the

 balance of manpower needed is requested from other Divisions.     He said

 that compared to lastyyear, they had been successful in raising more

 manpower within DiviaionF^therefore requests to other Divisions for
                                  ';V
 manpower has been r educed.-~
                                        ■■




Regarding manpower receiyed from other Divisions, he said that if the

criteria laid down is|follbwed it should produce some men in duty time,

ana some in overtime ,^but...,in practice all are attending in overtime and
^
that is when inconsistencies in the system occur




    e Chairman said that; after minimum manning levels and other

commitments have beenr-iaken into consideration then Divisional

Commanders must supplyrihe resources required.

                        -

                        V.';.’;


Chief Superintendent Mole .'said that invariably, following the criteria

the only pool of manpower readily available are the Community

Constables, which means .effectively that nearly every Saturday they are

working football duty'^Vbut.'they do have other commitments connected with
                           y      „


their respective areas,and."often those commitments means that they will
                    ■sum-
incur overtime if they.work a football match.
The Chairman asked the views of Divisional Commanders on the use of

Community Constables for football duty and it was agreed that they are

convenient pool of manpower aailable on a regular basis.                     However,

Mr Mole added that Community Constables do have many commitments in

their respective areas and these should always be considered prior-to

deputing that officer to 'football duty'.



The Chairman thanked members for their comments and said the important

point that has arisen as a result of the discussion is that Divisional

Commanders should examine closely the status of the manpower they

supply to other Divisions for football matches, in accordance with the

Standing Order and hopefully this will create some consistency

throughout the force.



The aspect of charges to the football clubs for the manpower used was

discussed and it was felt that clubs were not being charged sufficient

for the amount of resources they incur.               The Chairman stated that he

would pass on their views to Assistant Chief Constable Management

Services, Mr Watson, for his attention.



Item Discharged



ARREST AND EJECTION FIGURES COMPARISON - 1987/88


S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Stuart introdu ce d this it em an d r e f e rr ed to the paper

p r e v i o u s l y circulated.
 He outlined the arrest and ejection figures for the five football league

 grounds for the 1988/89 season to date with a comparison to the figures

 for the corresponding period in the 1987/88 season.      These show that the

 number of arrests have reduced considerably and with regards to
                    Si >
                      :            ‘
 ejections, with the exception of Hillsborough, the figures for both
                  -   ~ hS aX;''T V
                                  .


 seasons are similar.      At Hillsborough the ejection figures for the

 present season stand a t . 105 compared to 43 for the previous season.

Mr Mole added that .this was due to a concerted effort to stop the use

of abusive language on the Spion Kop.



Item Discharged



ANY OTHER BUSINESS

Football Watch


The Chairman informed members that details concerning 'Football Watch'

had been recently received from the West Midlands Police and invited

Chief Inspector Price to outline the detils of the Scheme to the

meeting.




Chief Inspector Price stated that early in December the details of

Football Watch were circulated to all Divisional Commanders.      He said

the scheme is a pro-active relatively low cost initiative to reduce

public disorder, to set positive and consistent standards of policing

and positive and consistent standards of crowd behaviour.      He said that

the West Midlands Police have told all their fans through leaflets,
posters , tannoy messages and through the programmes which they buy at

the ground, what will not and what will be acccepted.



They are told that obscene chanting, obscene gestures, racist remarks,

racist chants, missile throwing, threatening behaviour and criminal

activity will not be allowed.


It is a combination of persuasion, education and control and through the

persuasion education to get information from genuine supporters, from

the Supporters Club as to who are involved in the gangs, as to who are

involved in organising racist chanting etc.




Mr Price said that at Bramall Lane just before Christmas, a tannoy

message was put out at half time, stating that they would not accept

this kind of behaviour and it was warmly applauded by the great majority

in the ground.   This then raised interest from Radio Hallam, Radio

Sheffield and the local press.   He said that concern had been shown

about racist chanting and requests had been made to the Chief Constable

to do something about it.   This may be one initiative to try and satisfy

them.   From a Community Liaison point of view they would be very

interested in line with a new policy of offering whatever support they

can give to the here and now problems of the community policing.

Community Constables can go into schools and youth clubs with players

and put the message across, what will and what will not be accepted.

He said it would obviously lead to more arrests and ejections, at least

in the short term, but perhaps this is necessary as part of the overall

re-education and control to show them that they cannot get away with it.
     said that at the moment West Midlands have only asked Club


 Secretaries in South Yorkshire to put appeals in the programmes so that

 when they go to Walsall, West Brom, Wolverhampton, Birmingham, Aston

 Villa or Coventry, our supporters know they will be arrested if they

 carry out any of this action.



  fter discussion the Chairman said that it is a new initiative which

 should be developed by each of the Commanders with football grounds

 within their Divisions and in order to ensure some uniformity and

 consistency with the schemes operated, Headquarters Community Liaison

 should provide administrative support, including posters etc. subject to

 finance availability.



Superintendent Stuart suggested that the publicity to launch Football

Watch could be linked to the introduction of the tripod video equipment.



Item Discharged




End of Season Football Conferences.,.

Superintendent Stuart said the three conferences for the 1st Division,

2nd Division and 3rd/4th Division will be held in June   1989   , and are

aimed at Divisional and Ground Commanders therefore any support from

this force would be welcomed.



Item Discharged
                   IfSa Sill®




                                           - 13 -
              /

             Videos

    Superintendent Stuart said that the following training videos were now

    available should any members wish to make use of them.

                  1.   Briefing for disaster

                  2.   S t ew a rd in g

                  3-   Brief for Success



    Item Discharged


    There being no further business the meeting closed at 4 00 pm,




i
