                                ‘nartoA                                       QOR.
 DAVID JAMES BARRON

 POLICE CONSTABLE 1511

MALTBY POLICE STATION

NOTES FOR INCIDENT AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM ON 15.4.89.



Having been detailed to work at the above stadium on Saturday 15 April 1989* at the semi­

 final match between Nottingham Forrest    and Liverpool, I arrived at   the stadium at 9 am the

 same date where with other officers we    were briefed in relation to our duties.

At 10 am the same morning I commenced foot patrol on Herries Road, Sheffield, close to

 its junction with Wardsend Road, where    it was my duty to assist with the parking of

^ehicles and coaches for supporters attending the match.      I carried out these duties upto

2.45 pm the same date when at that time the unit I was working with was stood down for

 refreshments and we proceeded to make our way towards Claywheels Lane.      As the serial, made

 its way to Claywheels Lane we joined another 3 or 4 serials together with Insp. Charles frcm

Rotherham Police Station, who was the senior officer present.      We continued making our way

 towards Claywheels Lane and it was apparent from radio activity that some form of incident

was taking place at the ground.     As a result of this all the serials made their way to the

Leppings Lane End of the ground as quickly as possible.      All the groups stopped some 50

yards from the entrance to the Leppings Lane End of the ground where we divided into

 serials, my serial Sergeant at the time was PS Carter from Maltby Police Station.

    7 minutes passed 3 the order was given by Insp. Charles and our serial Sergeqnt PS

Carter for us to enter the ground in relation to the incident which had taken place. At

 this time it was not known what had happened inside the ground and no other information

was available at that time.

All the officers entering     the ground were quickly separated and I made my way to the

 tunnel that leads from the     concrete hard standing at the rear of the Leppings Lane Stand

 through onto the middle 2 portions of the Leppings Lane lower terraces.      Whilst making my

 way towards the tunnel leading to the terraces I saw numerous Liverpool fans coming out of

 the ground using the same tunnel and quite a number were carrying people who appeared

 injured or in some distress.    The people with casualties began depositing people on the
v ’' .                                                                                       C
                                               2

concrete hard standing at the back of the stand and these were being trodden on by the

large number of crowds still leaving the stand.

As a result I positioned myself in the centre of the tunnel at the rear at the point where

it becomes concrete hard standing and began dividing people to the left and right hand

side walls of the tunnel thus keeping them away from the concrete hard standing where

casualties were beginning to increase.    Whilst positioning myself and making my way to the

tunnel entrance I was greeted by numerous fans who were shouting at all the Police officers,

shouting, "You murdering bastards." "It’s your fault, you’ve killed them, it’s all your

fault." and various similar comments.

^ i e fans coming out of the ground were also punching and kicking at me and I noticed that

some other officers were also struck as they tried to make their way through the large

crowd.

As soon as it was possible I made my way through the fans into the front terraces still

being punched and kicked as I made my way through, and, having gained access to the front

terrace I was met with large numbers of inert bodies lying on the concrete hard standing

with numerous other people milling around in varying degrees of distress.

The blue metal perimeter fencing was still intact at this time and together with other

officers who I could not identify I went to the nearest person to me and carried that

person to the concrete hard standing at the rear of the stand.     That person was a male,

^lite, about 30 yrs of age, who wasn't breathing and his complexion was blue tinged, and

waxen.   I commenced artificial respiration on the youth that I had carried to the back of

the stand while another officer commenced heart massage.     The youth was vomitting and it

appeared that his airways were blocked with vomit.     There was no pulse and as the body was

warm, I continued resuscitation efforts until I was relieved by a woman who identified her­

self as a nurse.   I left the casualty with this off-duty nurse and returned to the terrace.

In all I brought 4 people back from the terrace, on each occasion attempting to revive them

with mouth to mouth resuscitation and heart massage.    All the casualties at this time had

the same complexions as the first, their bodies were still arm but they were not breathing,

and there was no evidence of any pulse.   Any efforts made to revive them were made without
 gain at that time, and repeated enquiries were made with people in the crowd in an effort

 to find anyone with medical training.     I finally returned to the front of the terrace

 where the remainder of the casualties were taken out through the front fencing which had

 now been cut away and once the terrace had been cleared of casualties I made my way onto

 the pitch where I assisted with other fans who required minor attention and assisted in

 the movement of ambulance personnel onto and off the pitch.

 I remember at that time assisting with PC 1805 Latham who had collapsed onto the ground at

 the Leppings Lane End of the pitch.     He appeared to have been assaulted by persons at the

 ground and I could see that his coat had numerous different footprints on it.     He was

^^lrther assisted by PC 3056 Sloan and was taken from the field for medical attention.

 That was the extent of my involvement in relation to the incident at the Leppings Lane

 Stand.    After the casualties had been cleared to the rear of the concrete hard standing and

 moved onto the gymnasium my next duty was traffic control on Penistone Road North at its

 junction with Herries Road.

 The only description I can give of crowd behaviour on my entrance into the rear of the

 Leppings Lane Stand is that as already stated, numerous fans were coming out of the ground

 with people in distress and people who had been injured in some way.    Officers going into

 the ground were met with a tirade of abuse    withpeople shouting as I have previously

 stated.    Up to going upto and on entering the ground none of the officers from the 4 serials

^feo I met outside Leppings Lane for the first time at approx. 5 past 3 had any idea of what

 had actually happened in the ground and I was totally unprepared for the scene that met me

 on my entry into the ground.
