                                                                                        MIR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised         /C t/lo               Number


Title   (                 3             i-o LOc+ljtA. s f
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y&s/Nc
                                             'No        ^ ^                                                      Receiver




                                                                                                                 Indexer
Document registered/indexec^as indicated

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                           tV
                                                                                                          Statement Reaaer
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                 Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                     0 /M          S IO




Further action No(s)

jWljen satisfi^d^aH actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                            TO                              P. 0 3
14-09-1939   14:04




                                        of                   Liverpool


                     On 15th April, 1989 I went to Hillsborough to watch the f a cup serfti-final
                     between Liverpool and Nottingham Forrest, When I arrived at the ground
                     I was with my friend                   We were in the ground by 1,30 p.m.
                     and we took up positions in the centre of the terracing of the Lepping
                     Lane end of the ground.    The ground began to fill up and by 2.30
                     it was getting so full we decided to move forward.     We ended up
                     standing in front of a barrier which was eventually shown in the
                     media as badly buckled.     More and more people started to arrive
                     at the ground and they came under the barrier as well.        As the
                     crush got worse I remember one lad was so close to me that his head
                     was stuck up against and under my chin. Another lad was in front of
                     me smothering me because my face was pushed into him.       Whenever I
                     could I had shouted at the Police to ask them to open the gates. They
                     just instructed us to move back and to calm down,     I asked the lad
                     to move his hand but he couldn't.    Eventually I blacked out.    I woke
                     up to find myself on the floor and there were people trampling all
                     over me.   I bit a lad's leg to let him know that I was there and
                     eventually I was pulled free. I was then thrown up against the front
                     fence. A Police woman asked me to climb over but I couldn't as I
                     had no strength.   Eventually I was thrown over the fence into the
                     hands of the Policeand then laid     on the pitch.   An ambulanceman
                     asked me if I needed anything.     I said that I had lost rrty inhaler
                     that I needed for my asthma.    He went off but I did not see him
                     again. I lay ' down       for   ten minutes and then went       back tolook for
                                couldn't see her. I just wandered around and I did spend
                     some time with other victims.    There were bodies lying everywhere and
                     other people nursing their injuries.    Some considerable time later
                     I finally met up with           and we went home.

                     My injuries included the following
                     1. Both legs were bruised all round from the knees downwards.
                     I could hardly walk.
                     2. I had bruising on my right arm where a lad had grabbed me
                     to drag me up,
                     3. Pains in my back.
                                                                                       P . 04
    14-09-1989   14:05



*




                     I was off work for a week but did not lose any earnings. However,
                     I did lose a pair of gold earrings which had cost about £19 two
                     weeks before the match and a pair of sunglasses which had cost £3.
                     I also paid £6 for my ticket and spent a further £2.60 on a
                     prescription from fly doctor


                     Dated the       day of                 1989




                                                                                   TOTAL   P . 04
