MICHAEL GEORGE LONG

Police Sergeant 838

Hammerton Road Police Station




I am 40 years of age and joined Sheffield City Police in 1965 as a
Cadet.   In 1967 I became a Police Constable and was promoted Sergeant
in 1979.   On promotion I was posted to Hammerton Road and have
remained there since that time, apart from a brief attachment to
Special Branch.

I have experience of policing football matches at Hillsborough as
both a Police Constable and Sergeant.

Over the past 10 years I have fulfilled all supervisory duties of
that rank at Hillsborough.  However, I have operated from within the
Police room for the greatest part.

My recollection of the 15th April 1989 are as follows:

1       My duty for match day was in the police room for the
        processing of any persons arrested.

2      Also shown as working in the police room for that day were
        Police Sergeants 1164 Colley   and 1127 Hardy, Police
        Constables 341 Hall, 1403 Jones, 1910 Hulley and 766
        Marshall.  In overall command was Inspector Barker.

3      I arrived for duty at 8.00 am that day.    On arrival at the
        ground I saw Police Constables Hall and Jones, Inspector
        Sewell, Police Sergeants 616   Goddard and 102 Fidler. The
        last three are my colleagues  within the Area office at
        Hammerton Road.  I prepared the police room for business and
        assisted Inspector Sewell with various administrative
        tasks.

4      At 9.10 am I was joined by Police Sergeant Colley and Police
        Constables 1910 Hulley and 766 Marshall.  Duties continued
        as outlined above.

5      At 10.00 am Inspector Barker paraded for duty along with
        Police Sergeant Hardy. Duties continued as outlined.

6      At 11.55 am, the first prisoners arrived.   They were!______
       and          k who were arrested for touting.   I assisted
        in their process and accepted custody of

7      At 1.20 pm, along with Police Sergeant Hardy and Police
       Constables Hall and Marshall, I went to the mobile kitchen
        and obtained a meal.  I consumed it in the gym.

8       At 1.40 pm, I was informed that more prisoners had arrived
        and I went back to the police room, where I assisted with the
        prisoners        and
From that time a steady in-put of prisoners started arriving
and I can say that I accepted the detention of the following
prisoners:

2.05 pm -

2.20 pm -

2. 30 pm -            (Nottingham Forest)

2.45 pm -                   (Liv e r p o o l )

2.50 pm -                  (Live r p o o l )

2. 55 pm -                     (Nottingham Forest)

3.00 pm -             (Nottingham F o r e s t )

3.10 pm -                     (Liv e r p o o l )

The procedure carried out was that I would fill in a
detention form and seize the property of the prisoner.   He
would then be photographed with the arresting officer.   The
prisoners were then segregated and detained on different cell
buses, pending completion of files.  The prisoners were
then taken to either Hammerton Road Police Station if they
were Nottingham Forest supporters and Ecclesfield if they
were Liverpool supporters.  I recall there being no let-up in
prisoners arriving.  They were all the worse for drink and
the later ones were nearly all dead drunk.  There were
several skirmishes in the police room and I remember becoming
covered in blood from one prisoner who had been fighting
outside the ground.  He was spitting blood all over from a
mouth injury.  I remember thinking that I thought it was
against the law to come to a football match the worse for
drink.  This mob hadn't given it a thought.  The semi was
obviously an excuse for a big 'piss up'.

News began trickling in that there was crowd trouble.   This
was about 3.15 pm.  The prisoners stopped arriving and more
information was filtering through.  We tried to get the last
of the prisoners from the police room on to the cell buses,
but there was pandemonium outside and no way through.   I saw
bodies and injured persons lying on the ground, interspersed
between the cell buses and the gymnasium.  I went to the
gym and the first obviously dead started to arrive.   I think
I saw several bodies at this time.  I returned to the police
room.  All the staff except Police Constable Hall and Police
Sergeant Colley had left to give first aid and resuscitation
to the injured outside.  The enormity of the situation was
unfolding.  Detective Superintendent McKay came into the
police room.  The police room has two phones, a police phone
with a local outside line and an internal club phone.        The
only other phones on that side of the ground are a pay phone
in the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, sports hall and a
private phone behind the desk of the sports hall reception.
I told Superintendent McKay what the situation was.       He
contacted Hammerton Road for the Major Incident boxes to be
brought down to the ground.      I moved the big desk in the
police room to accommodate more space as Police Officers,
St.Johns came in, obviously very shocked.       At about 4.00 pm
I talked with Chief Inspector Beal and Inspector Barker.
It was decided to release all the persons we had detained
on the cell buses, whatever their condition.      With Police
Sergeant Colley, I released twenty four prisoners and
verbally cautioned them.      Even though they were going
virtually 'scott f r e e 1, a number, even amongst all the
carnage, wanted to argue and cause further trouble.       I just
couldn't believe their mentality.      One I remember walked
past several dead bodies and numerous injured and his first
words were 'What's the score?'      Another who had been very
troublesome was released, and shown the door.       I went outside
several minutes later and saw him sat on a chair with a
St.Johns ambulanceman comforting him.      I asked what was a
matter and the St.Johns man said he was upset      by what he had
seen. I found this hard to believe.

I returned to the police room.      There was even more injured
people in there.   I was doing what I could.     Near to the
telephones there was a young man seated on a chair.      I was
talking to him trying to establish his injuries.      I had been
talking to him for several minutes, before I realised he was
a Special in uniform, such was his distressed state, his
trousers were in s h r e d s . I wondered what had happened to
him to get in that condition.

Time was passing and the whole thing unfolding.    Everybody
bar Police Constable Hall had disappeared from the police
room.  More and more calls were coming in from both radio
and telephone.   I remember thinking, I better establish
myself as  the link between the temporary mortuary and the
outside.  It was about 10.00 pm when communications people
started to arrive to sort out the phones etc.   British
Telecom started working, and all that happened was that
they managed to put out the phone links we had.    I became
a runner between the outside and the Major Incident room.     I
made hundreds of trips into the gym, walking amongst the dead.
I talked to Police Sergeant Fidler and saw loads of
colleagues I knew, performing most professionally.    I think
we got some kind of phone link set up at about 2.00 am in
the gym.   Identifications started and buses with relatives
started arriving.   Social workers were there to greet the
b u s e s . I had been asked to get the club to open the lounge
in the sports hall for relatives.      I contacted them, but it
took over an hour for the key to arrive.

We started to remove the bodies to the mortuary.  I stayed
between the police room and gym, with Inspector Sewell and
Police Constable Hall until this was completed.  We left at
5.40 am, leaving only ground security present.

/_________
