                                    Sheffield Archives Ref; 1b dpi | f 11> IOGJ           M IR .1 E




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and time raised                                  Number           \O   c P   t




T itle
                                  1^ V Q y / )
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)
                                                          Vi'
Receiver's instructions — urgent action 4 Yes/^lo    ^                 £/y - Q^BT f/Q
 ^ r iSt                          i^                                                                                  Receiver


                                                                                                                3 7 3 ^
                                                                                                                      Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                    A 4- l b ’*5 •                                                                 IC44
                                                                                                               statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions
                                            Re­

                                                                                                                      Indexer
Indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                   (£ llr )
No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                        O /M          SIO




Further action No(s)
                                                                                            FILE               W
                                                                                                               i53t
                                                                                                                      Indexer



When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
    '




Registered Office:



19th April 1989                         '
                                            \'
Secretary to the Inquiry
Room 662, 50 Queen Anne's Gate
LO N D O N
SW1H 9AT




Dear Sir

I have just listened to a statement by 'I believe' a Mr Miller
the Chairman or Spokesman of the Sheffield Police Confederation
on BBC Breakfast Time, at approximately 8:15, 19th April in
which he stated that in their opinion most of the trouble was
caused by drunken fans arriving late.

I was at Hillsborough and would like to put my version of what
happened outside the ground on record.

I drove to Sheffield with my 17 year old Son and one Friend.
We arrived in Sheffield at approximately 2:00 pm and parked
in the Gateway Supermarket Car Park, about h a mile away, and
proceeded to walk to the ground. Whilst walking to the ground
I was quite impressed with the strong Police presence and the
good humoured banter between the Police and Fans. I also
noticed that ALL the Side Streets had barriers across with
between 3 to 5 Policemen behind each barrier. There was the
usual FEW groups of drunken people, but on the whole a orderly
procession heading to the ground. On arrival at the Lemming
Street entrance at 2:20 pm we were confronted by a mass of
people trying to get into the ground. I was amazed to find
that both seating and standing tickets were being directed
towards the same turnstyles. There was absolute bedlam with
people already being crushed, and amazingly hardly any Police
in this area. I counted 5 mounted Police, 4 foot Patrol and
1 Officer in a Land Rover, trying to direct the crowd which
was several 1000's strong. Plus one more Officer by the
turnstyle who did not even have a Radio.

There was no way we would join the mayhem, so we stood back,
along side a row of houses with quite a few other people, who
were also too frightened to join this mass of bodies being
pressed tighter and tighter together.

I noticed, with some surprise that my two Brothers and Nephew
were also standing back and looking on. We joined them and
they told me that they had arrived at 2:10 pm, and they would
not join the chaos for fear of their lives.




                         Directors:
    ■>




Registered Office




We stood back and watched what was happening. It was
terrifying. How could 7 or 8 Police Officers control 1000's.
The Police had no control or direction whatsoever. I/ve watcned
until approximately 2:50 pm when my older Brother
           could stand it no longer. He pushed his way through
the crowd to the Police Officer in the Land Rover, which was
trying to direct operations. My Brother told the Officer to
direct his Mounted Police to turn their Horses Nose to Tail
to   op the flow of people and so relieve the pressure.

The Officers immediately responded to this advice and ordered
the Mounted Police to turn their Horses side on, Nose to Tail
thereby filtering the crowd through a lot slower. Just as
the crowd was getting into some type of order, the gates were
opened. As we all know now with disasterous consequences.
Ninety five people dead and hundreds injured, and all because
Police had their manpower deployed in the wrong areas. Not
knowing what was going on in the ground, our party joined the
now orderly queue, the time 3:08 pm. There was no pushing,
no shoving, just people waiting in a patient manner, although
they knew they had missed the kick off.

On arriving at the turnstyle the two people in front of me
each put an amount of money down to the Ticket Collector, who
told them 'keep your money just go in' I then passed my ticket
and went through the turnstyle, where to my amazement there
was two or three Police Officers at every turnstyle. We finally
got to our seats at 3:15 pm.

I most firmly refute the scandalous allegations that Mr Miller
has made.

I, and many other fans of all ages watched for almost one hour
as people joined the crowd in this 'funnel type entrance' and
could not get out.

Mr Miller should get his facts right before he speaks out in
this manner, clearly trying to direct the blame from the Police.

This terrible tradgedy was caused, in my opinion, 'and I have
been going over and over the event for the last 4 days, through
sheer uncompetance by the Police. There was total lack of
communication, control and manpower where it all mattered,
at the turnstyle, and no matter what the Police say this is
fact.

Yours faithfully_________________




                         Directors:
Registered Office:




To whom it may concern:




Dear Sir

I have wrote this letter in the hope that it may determine
who was at fault, and possibly help in any enquiry.

May I add that I was at Heyshel. I never thought I would see
horrors like that again, but it has happened, and happened
in our Country, in one of our safest grounds.

I personally will never go to an away match again, and I have
followed Liverpool F.C for 35 years.
Yours faithfully




                          Directors:
