BRIAN LEONARD MOLE OF POLICE HEADQUARTERS, BARNSLEY, SOUTH
YORKSHIRE WILL SAY:-

I make this statement further to the statement of 5th May 1989 and also
further to the oral evidence which I gave to the inquiry into the Hillsborough
Disaster conducted by Lord Justice Taylor.
I have been asked to make additional comments on a number of issues which
are listed below.

1.    Control of spectators passing down Lepplngg Lane towards the
      ground.
      I have already made clear in evidence that in relation to the semi-finals
      in 1987 and 1988 which I commanded no barriers or cordons were
      placed across Leppings Lane either for the purpose of checking tickets or
      for the purpose of holding back spectators to keep pressure off Leppings
      Lane turnstiles.
      I disagree with the suggestion that the placement of such barriers or
      cordons would have been beneficial and would have helped to prevent
      the crush which developed at the turnstiles at Leppings Lane after 2.30
      pm on the day of the disaster. I say this for two reasons.
      Firstly, such barriers would have required a very large amount of
      manpower to be effective against the enormous volume of spectators who
      were then moving down Leppings Lane as can be seen from photographs
      and films. Generally speaking if a barrier is to be effective against
      persons who are determined to go forward then I would plan to have one
      police officer for each person advancing. It can readily be appreciated
      that this was wholly impracticable at the time. With pre-planning,
      horses or dogs could perhaps be used to sustain such barriers but the
      use of dogs as part of a normal crowd control exercise where there has
      been no indication of aggression or deliberate wrong- doing by spectators
      would be unusual. So far as horses are concerned later events show that
      these can be by-passed and overwhelmed and the same could easily be
      true of dogs if people behind were pushing those at the front. It must
      also be remembered that many supporters appeared to be approaching
      the Leppings Lane end from the south crossing the bridge over the river
      Don. To be effective therefore, barriers would have to be placed at this
      point also thereby increasing the strain on manpower.
      Secondly, if effective barriers could be provided this would, in my
      opinion, merely push the problem further away giving rise to the
      likelihood of public order difficulties and breach of segregation. A crowd
      held up by barriers on Leppings Lane could burst through the side roads
      to Penistone Road and either confront spectators from the opposing club
      or by-pass the barrier by re-approaching Leppings Lane down a lower
      side road. Even if fans were successfully held up for a period all this
      could really achieve would be to concentrate the num bers waiting still
      more and delay their arrival at the ground still longer.
2.   Police Assumption! to relation to the West Terrace
     Police planning was always based on the assumption th at if the gates at
     the rear of the radial fences were locked open the terrace could be
     treated as one entity. Indeed the police view appears to have been
     shared by everyone else involved including the club and specifically
     Doctor Eastwood as witness the memorandum referred to in paragraph
      148 of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report although this conflicts with
     Eastwood's earlier allocation of Informal capacities to the pens. In any
     event so far as I am aware the police were not told of these.
     I can say categorically that if the Safety Certificate had been amended to
     include specific capacities for the individual pens then I would have
     insisted on sitting down with the responsible official at the club to
     determine how those limits ought to have been enforced. I have to say
     that I would have expected the club to co-operate in such discussions
     and I am sure that a workable and effective system could have been
     produced. That it was not may well reflect on all the parties involved but
     in my opinion it ought to reflect most on those whose duty it was to
     promote such an alteration in the Certificate.
3.   Police Monito r in g of Pens at Lea g u e M atchca
     There has been a great deal of misunderstanding of the reasons for this
     monitoring. Briefly the purpose of having separate pens is to ensure
     crowd seg reg a tio n and improve police access for public order. When
     both home and away fans use the Leppings Lane terracing but no
     capacity crowd was expected, home fans could be directed to e.g. the
     north end of the terracing and away fans to the south end with a central
     pen being left empty. This would have the dual benefit of discouraging
     the opposing fans from throwing things at each other or climbing over
     fencing and fighting but allowing police officers to go onto the unused
     section of terracing thereby being visible to deter disorder and available
     to take action against it. Even when the entire Leppings Lane terracing
     became available for away fans some pens would still be closed for
     spectator access for the second reason i.e. allowing a viable and
     functional police presence. This policy required th at the gates at the rear
     of the radial fences should be locked shut because otherwise spectators
     would have direct access from one pen to another. It was of course
     recognised that if those gates were locked shut then there had to be an
     assessment of the numbers being allowed into a pen because the fans
     were not in a position to "find their own level". It was for that reason and
     that reason alone that the police made such assessm ents in relation to
     league games where no capacity crowd was expected. In my experience
     no such assessments were ever made in relation to cup semi-final games
     nor indeed in relation to league matches where a capacity crowd was
     expected or more precisely where the full area of the Leppings Lane
     terraces was likely to be taken up by away spectators. In such
     circumstances the same position would apply as applies at a semi-final
     i.e. all the gates between the pens would be locked open and no visual
      assessment of num bers would take place.
     It is therefore quite incorrect to say that the police had accepted a duty of
     monitoring numbers on the individual pens on the Leppings Lane
     terracing and in fairness I have to say th at I would not expect the club to
     have been doing such monitoring either. The belief common to club and
     police was that the terracing was safe up to its certified capacity as a
     whole on the basis that fans could move between individual pens. In
     hindsight this can be clearly seen to be a m istake b u t I reiterate that it
     was a mistake made by all those concerned. I specifically do not accept
     that the club would have been expecting the police to be monitoring
     numbers in individual pens on the day of the semi-final.
4.   Failure to Recognise Qvfrrrnwrilng
     I was not at Hillsborough when the disaster occurred and cannot
     comment on what ought to have been done. If it is accepted that
     overcrowding ought to have been noticed then I would say again that this
     cannot be seen solely as a police responsibility. Although it is suggested
     that the club had no stewards in a position to recognise overcrowding I
     see on the BBC video at 1456 the club's ball boy supervisor Mr
     walking along the Leppings Lane pitch perim eter fence. If overcrowding
     should have been obvious to police officers at th at time then the same
     m ust be true of Mr         Finally on this point I was not in the control
     box in 1989 but there were certainly binoculars available in 1987 and
     1988. I would expect these to be used more to focus on a problem which
     had already come to light rather than as a means of random checking
     around the stadium.
     Reasons for Police Presence
     Responsibility for safety of spectators at Hillsborough in 1989 cannot be
     considered in isolation from the reasons for the large police presence.
     Police officers are present in num bers at football matches, not for
     reasons of public safety, but because of the threat of public disorder.
     Much larger events take place not only in South Yorkshire but elsewhere
     in the country with the same num ber of spectators as were at
     Hillsborough but with only a tiny fraction of the number of police
     officers. Pop concerts, religious gatherings, race meetings and, perhaps
     most significantly, rugby league games provide perfect examples. I
     therefore think it misguided of people to criticise the police for having
     prevention of hooliganism and prevention of public disorder as by far in a
     way their main priority in attending a football match. Of course police
     officers have to be concerned with safety b u t that is not the reason for
     their attendance.




BL
Dated
