0 TW ER D O C U M E N T FO R M                 Date and time raised A *       i< n                    Number


Title
(Include source and any dacum&hthiumber if r&kvant)                   **/
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No                   (3
                                                                                                                   Receiver


                                                                                                               78*7
                                                                                                                   Indexer
Document registg/ed/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Statement reader's instructions
                                                                                                                 M 2:
                                                                                                               Statement Reader


                                                                                                                  <n^r°\
                                                                                                                   Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken


           &J0 L W L                uJQup          jajQ>i 5~>             t    T jgrr g>
                                                                                                  F CL^xX/
 23. ^£4 5lO jagd/irvu                                                                     '    teh & I   oM
Further action No(s)                                                                                               Indexer
                                           fi ~ y u y
When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                      4. Sols

                                  STATEMENT               15.4.89




Of                           of                        Merseyside


On Saturday the 15th April 1989 I attended the Liverpool Nottingham
Forest game at Hillsborough Sheffield.        I had a ground ticket
for Entrance B at the Leppings Lane End.        We arrived at
approximately 2.25pm and because of the amount of traffic parked
our car some distance from the ground and I walked.


I arrived at the Leppings Lane End at approximately 2.50/2.55pm.
Unlike at. Liverpool Football Club where fans are marshalled
into orderly queues,    the Police presence at the ground appeared
sporadic.     There were a large number of fans arriving late although
as I approached a pair of outer perimeter gates painted blue
two mounted policemen told us to stop and physically closed
the gates holding them in the closed position to allow a small
number of supporters who were at the turnstyles to enter the....
ground.     There were very few fans within the outer courtyard
between the blue gates and the turnstyles for Entrance B.            As
a result of this a large number of fans started to congregate
on the outside of the gates behind me.        I was within touching
distance of one of the mounted policemen and there was a heated
exchange between other fans and him claiming that they had tickets.
The police officer in question,      who was shown prominently in
the Television News coverage,      indicated we would have to wait.


As it was approaching kick-off1 time the crowd were becoming
agitated and urging him to let them through although he refused.
After what appeared to be an eternity although it was probably
no more than five minutes he finally allowed the fans to pour
through the gates and there was an immediate rush for the turnstyles
Being atthe front I     was able to reach the turnstyle and     go
through.     There then appeared to be an inner courtyard between
thexturnstyles and the main stands at that end of the ground.
 As I had    never been to the ground before I did not know     where
to go and    there were no stewards who I could see or even     police
advising fans where they should go.       There was a large tunnel
which appeared to lead up into the ground which seemed the only
and obvious entrance.     I along wit h many others hurried through
 this although as we reached the end of the tunnel which lead
onto the terraces     it became clear that that section of the ground
was already completely full.      By this time it was impossible
 to go back down the tunnel because of the number of fans coming
 in behind you and the only alternative was to move forward into
an already overcrowded section of the ground.       It also became
apparent that unlike the kop where once you had entered you can
 go into any part of the kop that there were steel barricades
dividing the whole standing area into three separate sections.
As the crush became greater I realised there was likely to be
a disaster and did notice in the stand above me a Policeman
screaming into a walkie-talkie.       Other fans were being pulled
into the stands.      I decided to try and move sideways as best
I could.   I tried desparately to keep my feet because I realised
that if one fell down you were likely to be killed.       Eventually
I made m y way with difficulty to a crash barrier near the side
of the middle section.     There was a small space about six foot
wide between the three main sections of standing area some fans
had already entered this and were encouraging others to climb
over to escape the crush.      I managed to clamber onto a crash
barrier and- then cnto the top of the metal fence and jumped
down being helped by another Liverpool Fan already there.         By
this time large numbers of fans were doing this and even this
small central section was becoming overcrowded and the police
opened a metal gate leading onto the pitch to allow us to escape.
I seem to recall that there were two or three steps and people
were clambering up these and being pulled onto the pitch.


Once I got unto the pitch I realised the utter carnage and there
were large numbers of policeman hanging around who did not appear
to know what to do.     In fairness   I suspect they did not know
whether this was part of a pi t ch invasion or a genuine tragedy
although I made my feelings abundantly clear to one policewoman
by saying that if you didn't get the fans out of the center
section there would be a tragedy she appeared to ignore my remark.
Although I tried to provide some assitance to other fans the
police started to usher you off the pitch and into the two side
sections of the standing area w h ic h appeared far less crowded
and in fact the area in which I eventually went being a standing
area next to the main north stand had plenty of space.      The
situation was not helped by the lack of any information provided
by the public address system.     In particular the fans inside
the ground at the Liverpool end were incensed by the shouts
and taunts of the Nottingham Forest fans who clearly failed
to appreciate that a major tragedy was unfolding.      Had it been
explained to them clearly and immediately,     it is unlikely that
they would have adopted such an attitude and indeed once they
realised there was a major tragedy the behaviour was exemplary
in that they applauded those Liverpool fans who attempted to
tear up hoardings to provide make-shift stretchers.      While I
can well appreciate the reason not to make an announcement that
the match would be abandoned thereby causing thousands of fans
to leave the ground and hampering the efforts of rescue services
nevertheless a great deal more could have been done to keep
people informed.    It was extremely difficult to hear the public
address system.


Even though I had seen people lying on the ground I didn't
immediately realise that there had been fatalities although
obviously there had been injuries.      At about 3.30 pm a rumour
went round the Liverpool End that about 14 people had died.
 People,   including myself, were sitting on the terraces crying.
I eventually left the ground slowly following the annoucement
that the o[iatchKwa1s; abandoned ai)d made my way back to the car.


I consider the major cause of the tragedy was lack of effective
policing firstly in ensuring that only those supporters who
had tickets actually reached the ground itself.      This could
have been easily done by a police cordon on the outskirts of
the ground ensuring that only those fans with tickets were allowed
through.   Secondly,   by attempting to close the outer perimeter
gates thereby depriving the fans of the opportunity of going
directly to the turnstyles which clearly caused a back-log at
a most sensitive time a few minutes before the kick-off when
tempers began to rise.    Thirdly,   by not ensuring that all fans
with tickets were put into queues, policed by horse-men leading
to the turnstyles stretching back if necessary      nto the road,
which frequently happens at Liverpool home matches.      Fourthly,
by ensuring that those fans once through the turnstyles went
into the two side sections of the standing area and not into
the area immediately behind the goal.     While I do not know whether
it was possible to go directly into these areas once through
the turnstyles there were no stewards or police to advise fans
to go into other areas or to block off the tunnel leading to
the main standing area behind the goal.     As this appeared to
be the only obvious entrance into the whole of the standing
area everyone went through it.          Quite why this area is segregated
into three separate standing areas I do not know given that
Liverpool were to occupy the complete end of that ground which
merely meant that once inside the centre section it was impossible
to move sideways    into other less crowded standing areas.                     Finally,
there appeared to be a lack of appreciation by the Police of
what precisely was happening and what to do about it.                       One final
point is that having the turnstyles leading to an inner compound
and not directly into that section of the ground was clearly
a mistake.     If the fans were to be divided into three separate
standing areas then the turnstyles should have lead directly
into those areas to ensure that the capacity for each area was
not exceeded.     I went through the turnstyles marked                 'B' because
that was the entrance for the ticket I had.                     Even if it had
been possible to go directly from the turnstyles to other standing
areas of the ground this could obviously lead                    to the fact that
the majority of the fans wished to congregate                    behind the goal,
that th      section was clearly going to become                 overcrowded.
I caRf pnlye be           sfcfoat ;■b e c a u s e .I arrived'    shortly1               L
the kick-off that I am probably alive whereas                    had I been standing
near the front of that enclosure I would either be dead or seriously
injured.
PS:


At no time either outside the ground or while inside did I see
any fighting actually on the terraces.   The only trouble was
after the tragedy had occurred when the Nottingham Forest Fans
failing the realise that had happened began taunting the Liverpool
Fans who appeared to be invading the pitch.
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                        FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                 Furnival Gate
 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM
                                                          Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                          Telephone: 0742 727599

WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                   SM ITHDOW N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                    Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                                  Telephone: 051-709 7 17 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 021-236 5000, extn. 2025                       Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street                                             Our Ref:
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 021-359 3332                                   Date:       31 J u l y 1 9 8 9




   Merseyside

   Dear

   I have received your letter dated 15 April 1989 concerning the tragic events at
   Hillsborough on Saturday 15 April 1989.

   The contents of your letter have been of great interest to my investigation
   team.

   The hearing of oral evidence in relation to the enquiry concluded on the 14
   July 1989. However if you have any further information please do not hesitate
   to contact my investigation team at Nechells Green Police Station.
   Alternatively you may write to the Secretary of the Inquiry below:

   Mr R M Whalley
   Secretary to the Inquiry
   50 Queen Anne’s Gate
   London SW1H 9AT

   Yours sincerely




   J^M JONES
   ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE




   PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T     NECHELLS .GREEN .P.0.LI.CE. STATION
