                 Sheffield Archives Ref: (heft f s )£>%£                                    M IR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                               Date and time raised                                       Number


Title _______        (VP* C? tfo&Z       *j
(Include source and' any
                     a/ny document number ihf relevant)

Receiver s instructions — urqent action — Yes/N o                                   ^                   .—
                                                                                                                              Receiver
                                              Act*?             fcU/SL—


                                                                                                                                Indexer
Document registered/fadeXSJT^rlmiteetetP""
                                                                                                                           [s'A <%
No(s) of actions raised                                                                                                    iiy 1 j ,/       (
                                                                                                                          Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions                       3 % I f u J l w k l   •                         C l/
                                                                                                                          s 's d n
           (H   q a m j/Q I <   ^                                                       "
          \                                                                                                                     Indexer
Indexed as indicated
                                         Jt
No(s) of actions raised                   ’ I t ( {

Examined - further action to be taften                                                                                    O/M         SIO




                                                                                '
                                                                                                                      i
Further action No(s)                                                                                                       i S3       Q
                                                                                                                           fp!
When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form                              1 i
Name:

Address:
           Upton
           Wirral

Date of
Birth:     15 October 1966




Saturday 15th April 1989

I travelled to Sheffield by car w i th three frien ds ,


We parked the car by the Ritz Bingo Club in Sheffield at about 2.15pm.    From
there we walked to the ground and our first sight of it was the Kop end where
the Nottingham Forest fans were.    We walked around to the Leppings Lane end and
entered one of the queues inside   the blue exterior gates.It became apparent
that we were waiting in the wrong queue so we got out and went over to the
standing area queue which wasn't as orderly as the seated area queue.

Everyone was pushing to get into   the turnstiles and there didn't appear to be
anyone trying to get people to queue in single file.    The blue exterior gates
were closed behind us because there was too much pushing but we decided that as
we were getting knocked about too much, we would stand back and wait until the
queue had gone down.  Whilst we were standing at the back, we could see one
policeman on the exterior gate and as we were watching, the gate was pushed
open.  It wasn't charged or forced, it just came open because of the weight of
so many people on the other side.  The atmosphere outside was quite hectic.

Soon, we saw the police open the concertina gates and we were directed in.    It
wasn't a mad rush, just a steady stream of people going through the gates.
Inside there, we met up with |      [who we'd lost in the crush to the
turnstiles.  We waited for a few minutes whilst I went to the ladies' and then,
at approximately three o'clock, we entered the tunnel.    I didn't see any
stewards or police directing    people to the two side entrances into the terrace
so, naturally, we went where    everyone else was going, which was into the
tunnel.  There was no one there checking tickets.

We lost |______ |straight away and as we reached the end of the tunnel, we were
swept into the terracing.       Almost immediately, the atmosphere changed and we
felt uncomfortable. There was a lot of pushing and swaying as people entered at
the back and people were trying to find somewhere more comfortab         to stand. We
lost        somewhere    over to the right     as    you   look at the pitch,was
behind me trying to      hold me upright. It was very cramped and very noc and no
one was really watching the match.        I    had toconcentrate hard, just tokeep rav
footing.    There was   no*, room to manoeuvre your body at all, you just had to go
with the sway of the crowd.

After about two to t&ree minutes, I felt that I had to get out but I didn't
know how.  I wanted to faint to get out but I was too frightened that if I did
faint, I would go under the crowd and never get up again.  It was a struggle tc
keep my feet as we were on the steps, and people kept slipping and going down
under the crowd.  Then I    and I separated; we could still see each other but
we weren't close enough to touch.  People started shouting "stop the match,
stop the match" and everyone was shouting "move back" but there were still
people coming in at this time and there was no possible way that anyone could
move back.
                                                                             Page 2




I could feel my legs going, whether through the panic rising in me or because I
was having difficulty breathing, I don't know.  The atmosphere, by this time,
was one of fear; we all knew that the situation was out of hand.  I was crushed
and it was unbearably hot and I was shouting ”1 can't breathe, I can't breathe"
but the men around me couldn't do anything.  A large man by me had his arms
under my arms to try and hold me up but I slipped on the steps and went under
the crowd for about ten seconds and everyone closed in above me. I couldn't
breathe.  The man who had hold of me struggled and pulled me out.  At this
point, I can remember thinking 'if I lose my feet and go under, I'll never get
up, I'll die; I'll just be trampled to death'.

Then we saw, about four feet away from us, a man had passed out, his face was
dark red but he was being held upright because the crowd was so cramped.  He
started to sink and we lifted him up and the crowd passed him overhead towards
the perimeter fence.  I don't know if he got out.

After we saw him carried off, the crushing was worse; no one could move their
arms.  I was near panic and shouting "lift me up, lift me up" but no one could
because they couldn't even move their arms to push me above the crowd.    After
about five minutes, more of the people around heard me shouting.   They all
tried together and pushed me up and as they were passing me overhead, everyone
was calming me and saying "you'll be alright, you'll be alright".   I was passed
overhead to the front, I could see the   gate but I knew I couldn't make it
there, so I knew I would have to climb over the barrier.

Towards the front, I could see people lying and I thought they'd fainted, it
didn't occur to me that they were dead.   I could see the top of someone's head,
he or she had their back to the pitch and   was slumped forward. They had long,
frizzy, black hair and there was vomit on    the top of it. I didn't look down
again.

I reached the barrier and saw a policeman    and I expected him to help mebut he
just shouted "get back in, get back in” .    Two lads on the pitch came tohelp,
first they pulled me up by my arms but    the spikes caught my     jumper and my ribs.
I couldn't climb the barrier, I couldn't get a grip with my        feet and my feet
were slipping off the fence and stamping on the bodies below.    One of the men
leaned right over the fence, shielding me from the spikes and I pulled my body
over him while the other man grabbed at my right       leg and pulled it over.  I
caught the inside of my thigh and  my tracksuit on the spike but it ripped quice
easily.  As they dragged the rest  of me over, my      body was over but my left leg
was caught at the back of my knee  by the spike. I told the man    to just pull
and he just ripped my tracksuit off the spike.

When I was over, I lay on the pitch for a few minutes and several fans asked me
if I was o k a y . No p o lice asked me.  I wandered around on the pitch looking for
              and           I could see people climbing over the fence and other
fans helping them, the police were still just standing.       I wandered around for
about fifteen minutes, I could see people crying and tending to the injured.        I
could see grown men crying and hugging each other and people like me just
wandering hopelessly looking for friends.

I hadn't actually seen anyone dead on the pitch, but I was certain, at this
stage, that there would be fatalities.  As I knew my boyfriend's seat number in
the North Stand, I decided to go and find him.  As I went to find him, I passed
the first ambulance coming in.
                                                                               Page 3




I found him quite easily and as we were standing together an announcement was
made that the game was abandoned and everyone should hold on to their tickets
for the rearranged match.

As the police wouldn't let me back on to the pitch, I then stood in the stand
by the front barrier and watched the bodies being stretchered out.  By then I
could see that some of them were dead.  I saw the fans start to rip down the
advertising boards and use them as stretchers.  I could see some police on the
pitch resuscitating people but the majority of them just formed a barricade
across the centre-line and stood there.

For about ten minutes then, it seemed like all the bodies that       were being
carried out were dead.   The people in the stand were dazed and      they just felt
helpless, some were crying.   All the fans on the pitch rallied      round helping to
revive people and carry the dead and injured out.   Some of the      police were
carrying the bodies out.

I left the g r o u n d a b o u t 4.30pm with another friend who I met up with in the
stand.  He knows                               and could help me look for them.  We
decided to go back to the c a r . The traffic was too bad to drive there, so we
walked but it took about an hour.           I was lucky, I met up with all my friends   *
back at the car at 5.30pm.


Sunday 16th April 1989

I had severe bruising on my left leg and cuts at the back of my knee.  I also
had severe bruising on my right leg, all over it, but particularly bad inside
my thigh.  My ribs were cut and bruised and I still had a headache that I'd had
all of the previous day at Hillsborough.  Generally, my whole body was covered
in smaller bruises.


Since then,   I have had recurring headaches and difficulty sleeping.




                                                                                            4
