                                                                      t^oR 35*2


          RE: MAJOR INCIDENT: FA CUP SBnQ-FINAL AT HILLSBOROUffl GROUND,

N\02J^-           SHEFFIELD - LIVERPOOL FC V NOTTINGHAM FOREST PC.



                             SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989.



Andre SMYK, 'Over 21'            Police Constable 1363 S Yorks Police

Ecclesfield Police Station, 321 Hie Cannon, Ecclesfield, Sheffield.

Tn(0742)570200.



I am a Police Constable/Acting Police Sergeant in the South Yorkshire Police,

currently stationed at Ecclesfield Police Station, Sheffield.       This is within 'F '

Division (Sheffield North) of the South Yorkshire Police.




On Saturday 15th April 1989, I had attained over eight years relevant Police

Service, all of which had been served within 'F ' Division of the South Yorkshire

Police area.   During this Police Service I have regularly been involved in the

routine Policing of Football Fixtures at the Hillsborough Football ground,

Sheffield including F.A. Cup Semi Final Matches held there viz:




1)   Saturday 11 April 1981. Tottenham Hotspurs FC v Wolverhampton Wanderers FC.

2)   ?

3)   Sunday 12 April 1987. Leeds Utd v Coventry City FC.




At the present time I am attached to 'D' Duty Group at Ecclesfield Police Station.

On Saturday 15 April 1989, I was on a 'Rota' weekly leave day with 'D' Duty Group.

 I had, however, been included on the Police Operational Order for the football

event to take place at Hillsborough Ground.




At 9 am that date I paraded for duty at Ecclesfield Police Station, Sheffield for



                                                            cont.
FA CUP SEMI-FINAL

transport to the Hillsborough ground to parade for duties and briefing.             I had

previously been informed that on the Operational Match Order I was to be included

on Police Serial 46 with PS 1347 HUNT (F2) and officers including:

1)   PC   2041 Hone

2)   PC   3089. Warrilow

3)   PC   3168 Trigg (Probationer PC)

4)   PC   1639 McIntosh

5)   Myself.

We were transported to Hillsborough Ground where we established the serial group

and stood by for briefing in the South Stand seated area.    Briefing was given

at/or about 10 am by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, with instructions and

comments by other senior officers and PS 952 Charlesworth (D.I.O.)




We then resumed after briefing to 'TANGO ONE'   (Serial 46) mobile patrol in a

marked Police Personnel Carrier with instruction to Patrol Deepcar/Stocksbridge,

Sheffield area for 'public order' duties in view of the influx of Liverpool Fans

entering Sheffield from that direction. We resumed in company with Inspector

WALKER (HQ Firearms Department),   in charge of 'TANGO' mobiles 1 - 3      inclusive (in

our police vehicle).




All personnel were to be on streets in position by 11 am./II.15 a.m. and

turnstiles to ground to be opened at 12 noon.    We resumed after briefing to mobile

patrol to/and in Deepcar/Stocksbridge areas.    We were provided a 'packed' lunch to

take with us and briefed to take a cooked meal at Hillsborough ground at 3.15 p.m.

after 3.00 p.m. kick off.




Having travelled to Deepcar Section we carried out mobile patrol duties in that

area without any reported/other incident or particular sighting of Liverpool FC

Supporters.

                                                                c o n t .........
3/cont....

FA CUP SEMI-FINAL



Whilst on patrol at Stocksbridge at or about 2.30 p.m. that date we made a

licensed premises visit to the 'Silver Fox' public house (Manchester Road,

Stocksbridge), where we had observed a large number of private motor cars and

several small mini coaches in the car park of the pranises.       Whilst other officers

remained in the police vehicle.    Inspector WALKER/PS HUNT and myself entered the

premises for a 'visit'.     Inside I saw that the pranises was full with Liverpool

supporters consuming intoxicants.     They all had drinks still   'on' and were, in

general, noisy singing etc. but not abusive in a n y w a y towards us.   The licensee

was spoken to and stated that the supporters had drunk a lot but been well behaved

in general and had no complaints.     There were several hundred fans on the premises

at that time.




We then resumed patrol in the area and park/wait on the main Manchester Road

between Stocksbridge/Hillsborough.




At or about 2.45 p.m. that date I was in the police       vehicle and listening to a

Police 'UHF Burndept1 radio when I heard an officer       speaking to match control. He

was a male officer.      I did not hear his call sign.    I was attracted to the radio

message because of a sound of distress/anxiety in the broadcasters voice.        He

 sounded desperate.   He talked about people being 'crushed' at the Leppings Lane

 end turnstiles of the ground and feared for the safety of people in the       crush .

 I believe I heard something said about 'people would be killed' and something

 about 'people trying to break down the gates'.     The same caller made repeated

 requests that the gates should be opened.     I do not   recollect hearing a reply from

 Police match control.     (I do believe I heard PS GODDARD, Police Control, asking if

 'the caller' would require reinforcements from a reserve serial in the ground?).




 We, as a serial, received no instructions to attend the ground or other

                                                                cont
4/cont....

FA CUP SIMI-FINAL

instructions regarding the matter.     We ccranented on the radio broadcasts and

decided to go in to look at the situation at the Hillsborough ground.      I believe I

recollect something being said about other police resources being deployed to the

Leppings Lane end of the ground.     I believe I also heard some message/a request

for the match kick off to be delayed 15 minutes but cannot recollect a reply to

this.




On running in to the vicinity of the Hillsborough ground I recollect turning into

the top of Leppings Lane by the ATS and the Allens Cycle Shop where I saw a serial

of PCs controlling traffic.     We made comment that things must be under control.

(The junction of Leppings Lane with Catchbar Lane X Roads).




We drove down Leppings Lane and parked in Leppings Lane near to the Leppings Lane

Terrace turnstiles area.    We remained in the Police vehicle and received no

instructions.   At this time (about 2.55 p.m.) I saw that the street in Leppings

Lane was full with a crowd of what I would estimate to be several thousand

Liverpool FC supporters milling around. I thought that there seemed to be an

unusual amount of fans outside for the time, being near kick off time.      There did

not appear to be any trouble at the time but the crowd did not seem to be moving

anywhere.    The crowd seemed anxious to enter the ground.    At the time I believed

that there would be public order disturbances on a large scale and put on my

reinforced Police uniform helmet and secured it with chin strap and velcro strap

with chin cup in this belief.     I also secured the van door on the personnel

carrier because of the fans milling around it.




During this time I saw Superintendent MARSHALL standing on a wall in Leppings Lane

(by the bridge over the river) observing the crowds amassed to the rear of the

Leppings Lane Terrace.     Officers made canment upon this.   I do not recollect any

other radio messages passed by Police radios at this time.      Whilst seated in the

Police mobile at this location for sane time (5 - 10 minutes).      We received no
5/cont....

FA CUP SHUT-FINAL


further instructions about being deployed anywhere as a resource.




A short while later and whilst seated in a rear facing seat in the van I saw the

serial of PCs from the end of Leppings Lane by the ATS with Catchbar Lane, running

down the road together towards the Leppings Lane turnstiles area of the ground.        I

commented on my observations.     I heard nothing on the Police radio about

instructions.    A short while after that incident Inspector WALKER alighted the

Police vehicle and went over to the Leppings Lane turnstiles area to make

enquiries.    He then returned to the vehicle to say we should alight and be

deployed outside those turnstiles in Leppings Lane.




We as a serial alighted the vehicle and walked in Leppings Lane towards the front

of the turnstiles area.    By this time I noticed the swell of people in Leppings

Lane had decreased significantly.     They all appeared to have 'gone' but I hadn't

seen where.     Superintendent Marshall, present outside the ground, instructed us

and other officers to form a cordon across the entrance to the ground in Leppings

Lane in front of the turnstiles to prevent further supporters approaching than.

We cordoned across from the sweet shop to the bridge, preventing supporters

approaching the turnstiles at all.     At this time I believe the turnstiles had been

closed.   There were perhaps a few 100 (?) Liverpool supporters wanting to enter

 the ground by the Leppings Lane turnstiles but these were refused entry on the

 grounds of safety, even fans who were producing tickets for the ground.      This

 caused some argument.    There was no trouble however.   Whilst being deployed in

 this manner we received no further instructions.     I do not recollect any further

 radio broadcasts.




 A short while later, after being deployed in this manner, PC 1639 McIntosh who had

 been securing the unattended police vehicle, joined us at the cordon and ccnmented

 that he had just heard on channel 2 VHF that 'operation support' had been called

                                                          Cont....
6/cont....

FA CUP SB/D-FINAL

into action.    Knowing no better I presumed this was because of a public order

situation escalating.




Shortly after this I remember, I think, 2 ambulances responding to the large gate

to the side of the Leppings Lane turnstiles area.     They were allowed through the

cordon and then I didn't pay much attention as I had no idea what was taking place

and assumed they had received directions to a part of the ground.     A short while

later I observed one of the ambulances outside 'the gate' and a frantic activity

where some police officers/supporters were bringing a casualty, or several

casualties,    to the ambulance to place in it.   I remember seeing one of the

casualties being placed on the floor at the rear of the ambulance and frantic

attempts by police officers to revive the person, seemingly without result.        I

remained in the cordon in Leppings Lane as instructed and saw that the ambulances

were apparently now filling with casualties/police officers and supporters and the

nature of the casualties being placed in the vehicles appeared serious.      Despite

this fact we were still to remain in position in the cordon outside Leppings Lane

which was then supplemented in number and reinforced.




After being deployed on this cordon for some time I then recollect Superintendent

Marshall approaching the cordon in Leppings Lane from the area of the large

concertina gate C, and beckoning/motioning us with his arms for us to enter the

ground.   I do not recollect him giving any caimand just motioning.     I then ran

into the ground through the concertina gate and into the concrete quadrangle area

at the rear of the Leppings Lane terrace/West Stand area on my own and I believe

prior to the rest of officers from Serial 46.      On doing so I saw no disorder or

casualties in that area of the ground and made my way to the central tunnel from

 that area leading to the central pen area of the Leppings Lane Terraces.        As I

approached the entrance to this tunnel from the quadrangle area I saw people stood

at the mouth to it, same of whan were clearly distressed and making enquiries of
                                                                            Q
7/cont....

FA CUP sac-FINAL

me.   I had no idea of what had taken place inside the stadium and had received no

instructions or advice so I ignored these people and entered the tunnel area to

the central aisle of the Leppings Lane Terrace.     On making m y way down this tunnel

I saw no casualties in the tunnel itself, but on seeing the ground and pitch area

nearing the latter part of the tunnel I saw that the football pitch area near to

the Leppings Lane end of the ground was covered with lots of 'standing' people and

there appeared to be a lot of activity both on the pitch and at the front of the

Leppings Lane Terrace by the security fence.     People were apparently climbing over

the fence and at this time I believed that we had a public order incident and that

 the pitch had been invaded.    I do not recollect whether or not the match was still

in play or not.    I do not think it was.




My attention was then distracted by PC Horsfield of Ecclesfield Police Station

whom I saw emerge from the crowd of people in the Leppings Lane Terrace into the

 rear of the isle to the central tunnel and exit from the terraced area.     I saw

 that he was clearly distressed and was missing items of his police uniform and was

 dishevelled.    He commented 'that he had had enough' or words to that effect,

 clearly distressed.     I then believe he left via. the tunnel from the terrace.




 I remained at the rear of the terrace some time, not clearly sure of what was

 taking place at the front of the terraced area.     At this time I was unaccompanied

 and still believed what was taking place was a pitch invasion.     I believed that if

 I entered the terrace area unaccompanied I would be 'lynched' by the crowd of

 Liverpool supporters.     I had noticed by this time that there appeared to be a lot

 of anger amongst the fans in the Leppings Lane Terrace being directed towards the

  police.    I then saw several police officers forcing their way through the crowded

  terrace towards me and the exit area carrying casualties.     I assisted the officers

  to move the crowd from their way barring than.    On doing so I saw that these

  casualties being evacuated also appeared 'lifeless' but without apparent injuries
                                                                            QK'lsrr
8/cont......


FA CUP SB/Q-FINAL

and appeared to have collapsed.




On seeing these casualties being evacuated from the terraced area I then realised

that there were possibly more casualties in need of assistance at the front of the

terraced area and then made m y way through the terrace to the security fence area

behind the goal mouth area.     When I arrived there I saw that the crowd had thinned

out and there were casualties laid about apparently 'lifeless1 on the terraced

steps behind the goal mouth area.     I saw police officers frantically either trying

to revive these people or move than from the terraces through the gateway to the

pitch area, or through damaged security fencing, or to the rear of the terraced

area towards the tunnel area.     I gave assistance to assorted officers in removing

bodies from the terraced area onto the pitch area for evacuation from there.




I did this until all the bodies had been removed from the terraced area.       Whilst

doing this I was aware that a large number of persons from the front of the upper

West Stand area (above the Leppings Lane Central Tunnel) were spitting on me and I

was being covered in expectorant.     I continued as I had been with the officers

clearing bodies from the Leppings Lane Terraced area and when this was more or

less completed I was aware of supporters in the front of the West Stand area above

the terraced area throwing coins at the Police at the front of the terraced area.

Some of the coins struck my helmet, one missing my eye, being deflected by the

peak of my helmet.   Most of the fans in the terraced and stand area were clearly

angry, directing abuse at the police.     I remained in the Leppings Lane Terraced

area for same time and then because of the hostility being directed at the police,

 I feared for the safety of police officers on the terraced area.    It was at this

 time that I noticed the discarded property strewn about the terraced steps at the

 front of the central pen in the Leppings Lane Terrace beneath the perimeter wall.

This property consisted of shoes/footwear, coats, scarfes and money.     I had

 thought that in all there may have been an estimated 20/30 deaths, but on seeing

                                                                    cont....
9/cont....

FA CUP SEMI -FINAL

the quantity of this abandoned property I then believed it to be much more.                            I

also saw that a metal crush barrier to the left of the Leppings Lane Terrace

central pen, (viewed from the front), had given way and had snapped.




I saw people in the front of the upper West Stand area fighting amongst each

other.    I saw people then approaching the large amounts of abandoned

property/money at the front of the terrace trying to take this property or money.

They were advised against this.             After a lapse of sane time I then assisted other

officers to recover this property fran the terraced area to the perimeter track

area for security and identification purposes.                  This was done without

direction/order fran anyone.




Having recovered these properties to the perimeter track I then remained on the

playing field area




                                                                         4
s«pep4frti?mtieirri^wirt''i3^reF^ffi^
assi sting in the r ec overy of bod Ies).           'l3aeEeu«&eeBre4«-4e»-be»-a-»fitffl^w>»e4-feepee*0pe»

ptfiS&ntJaut n o o n © -giving--orders or instruct ions -t o a n y e n e .-— Miff* SPRBfiTi nlinfiftfcar

rniplnrrrl^TtTrtiW'i'gli    this time casualties appeared to have all been evacuated.

Despite this supporters to the front of the West Stand area were tearing down

advertising hoardings from the front of the West Stand area.                       By this time I don't

 think there were any casualties to be removed so they weren't really required as

 'make-shift' stretchers.          I thought it was more vandalism out of anger although in

hindsight this may have been done with good intent.                    The hoardings were passed on

 to the pitch area but then cleared seemingly without being used.                        There were no

 broadcasts over the police or ground public address system whilst all this was

 going on.     The first broadcast was at 3.50 p.m. (I looked at my watch when Kenny

 Dalglish made a broadcast about the incident and appeal/advice of sane nature, •Hf*"'1



                                                                                              Cont....
10/cont....

FA CUP sac-FINAL




Iasi, given some instcuction about the seriousness ofwihe inGideE.t^-»




I then rejoined the remainder of Serial 46 and PS 1347 Hunt on the pitch area near

Leppings Lane Terrace and we then left the ground and were re-deployed as TANGO 1

on patrol in the vicinity of the Hillsborough ground re public order.     Whilst on

patrol I arrested a man from the Nottinghamshire area for a public order related

offence.   The transit crew were involved in the taking of office equipment and

stationery to set up an incident roan at Hanmerton Road Police Station following

the disaster.




I was retained on duty on the serial until going off duty at 8.15 p.m. the same

date at Ecclesfield Police Station^wiihoiit further incident Or afly de-bPie'fttff'at
