Statement number       S..

Document number

Now filed in
Complaint Folder
Ref. N o       /89


Complainant            ...............


Name of witness / defendant
                                                                                                                              WP 666
                                                                                                                              (S.O. B16)
                                                                                                                              ( A m e n d e d 4.85)
                                                                                                         C & D Ref.

West Midlands                             The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 Regulation 7
                                                                                                         Date
Police                                  NOTICE OF REPORT, ALLEGATION OR COMPLAINT

                                                                          To:
F ro m :
                                                                                 Superintendent Roger Greenwood
   Mr G.J. Dear, Chief Constable

  In accordance with th e requirem ents of Regulation 7 of th e Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985, I hereby inform you of
                                 COMPLAINT                                                            which has been made against you.


  nature of
                             COMPLAINT


   On Saturday, 15 April 1989, at Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield, a
   disaster occurred in which 95 people died.

   Leslie Jones of                            Liverpool, the father of one of the
   deceased, Richard Jones, hasmade the following allegations relating to your
   duties at the ground on 15 April 1989;

    (a)       You failed to carry out your assigned duty by placing yourself in a
               position by the players tunnel. Using your radio and your eyes you
               should have been aware of the dangerous situation and controlled your
               officers accordingly.

    (b)       You failed to give instructions to your officers to monitor the pens,
               for overcrowding in relation to crowd safety at your briefings.

     (c)      You were totally ineffective in mounting a rescue. That is you made no
               attempt to organise the Police Officers in a way which would have helped
               bring about a successful rescue operation.

     (d)      You failed to send officers to the rear of Pens 3 and A to relieve
               pressure when you were in control of the area. This was when you knew
               gate *C ' was being opened to allow supporters in.



    You have the right to consult a friend at all stages of the investigation and service of this form does not necessarily imply
    that disciplinary proceedings will follow. It is served to safeguard your interests.

     You are not as the Regulation explains, obliged to say anything concerning the matter, but you mayr if you so <desire make
     a written or oral statement concerning the matter to me or to the Assistant Chief Constable. (The Chief Constable
     delegated his authority under Regulation 15 of the above Regulations to the Assistant Chief Constable).

                     HnwFVER WARNED THAT IF YOU MAKE SUCH A STATEMENT TO ME On' ^
     oniC^COWTftMg^’THE^ST/^rEMEOT MAY BE USED IN ANY SUBSEQUENT m«r«» imapv
                                                                                                                           PROCEEDINGS.




                                                                                                Investigating O ffie e f
      * Insert the w ord " report", "allegation" o r " com plaint~ as appropriate.
                               I acknowledge having been served with the original of this Notice.
  ACKNOWLEDGE­
  MENT                                                                                                                             ink     Number
                              Data                                        Sign
   (copy to ba tignad)

                               I served the original of this Notice upo
                                                                                                                                   ■n k
   SERVICE
                                                                                                                             HA U°M
