POLICE CONSTABLE 2628 KENNETH CHURMS - DEEPCAR POLICE STATION



I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, at present

stationed at Deepcar.



On Saturday, 15 April 1989, I was on duty in connection with the

F.A. Cup Semi Final game between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

which was being held at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground,

Hillsborough



My duties were those of a mobile patrol in a personnel carrier, in

company with Police Sergeant 681 HILL, Police Constables 583 DAVIES,

(driver), 2378 WEBSTER, 844 REES and 300 HAYS.



Our area of patrol was the Deepcar/Oughtibridge area, paying

particular attention to licensed premises and generally maintaining

public order.



At approximately 11.00 a.m. we took up our patrol area.   At this

time I noticed that there were numerous people waiting about outside

licensed premises, many of them wearing Liverpool colours.

Throughout the ctey until just before 3.00 p.m. frequent checks were

made of licensed premises.



Checks at public houses showed that some had few customers, whereas

others in particular, the Silver Fox, Manchester Road, Stocksbridge,

and the Blue Bail, Whamcliffe Side, were heavily patronised by

Liverpool supporters.   Both these public houses in particular

werevery full from mid-day onwards, and it was obvious that a lot of

alcohol was being consumed.   Most people's conduct throughout this
                                                                     .2 .
period was good humoured and there were no public order incidents.



At 1.30 p.m. I had occasion to speak to and report one man, for the

offence of carrying alcohol to a Designated Sporting Event.   The

vehicle contained 48 empty Lager cans.



The area where we were patrolling was sane 20-30 minutes drive from

the football ground under normal traffic conditions.   Under normal

conditions on the day of this game I would have allowed myself up to

an hour to get to the vicinity of the ground.   We advised numerous

people of the time factor but to well after half past two there were

still people in the public houses and still quite heavy traffic

making its way towards the ground.



By approximately 2.50 p.m. we had made our way towards the ground.

On route, I had heard a broken message over the radio believing

there to be crowd control problems at the Leppings Lane turnstiles.



Police Sergeant 681 HILL asked if our 'Tango' mobile was to be

directed to any particular area, and we were told to stay on patrol

around the ground.



Shortly after 3.00 p.m. we were in the Penistone Road North area.     A

further radio message was heard saying there was serious crowd

problems inside the ground at the Leppings Lane end.   At this time a

further message was passed from Ground Control instructing all

officers to go to the ground.



We went there via. Penistone Road North and Penistone Road.   With




                                                                            155?
                                                                                  \
                                                                        .3.
the rest of the officers I entered the ground via. the access

between the North Stand and the Spion Kop.



I looked towards the Leppings Lane end and saw a large number of

Police Officers standing on the playing field.     The game had been

stopped.     In the distance people were seen to be climbing the fence.



I was still not fully aware of the situation and believed that a

pitch invasion was taking place.    We walked along the front of the

North Stand, expecting to begin to move supporterseither back into

the Leppings Lane Terrace or out of the ground.



My view of what actually happened was blocked by other people until

I arrived at the Leppings Lane end behind the goal      and   I         thensaw

that a large portion of the crowd - those at the front - were being

crushed against the large steel fence, some were obviously in great

pain which could be seen on their faces.     The small fence gate was

open, and a number of officers were trying to remove people through

this gate.    I went to assist.



My first sight was of a young man of about 15 years lying on the

ground, close to'the gate.     I could see officers on the terracing

who were pulling people free from a large crush close along the

steel fence area.    There appeared to be relentless pressure from the

crowd who were still pushing forward towards the steel fence.       I

could see people pushed up against the steel fence.     Sane were

screaming and shouting.    Sane I could now see were obviously

beginning to suffer pain and injury.    I could see people being

pulled fran the gateway but it was quite obvious it was too small a
Within moments I could see that things were worsening all the time I

could see people were dying.    I could do nothing to help them as

people were being pulled through the gate - sane were dead, sane

were alive.



My best recollection of what I saw was a large very overweight man

about 25 years of age.    He was lying on his side, I felt his pulse

but it was obvious he was dead. I saw a small child of about 12

years of age.    He was beside the goal post area.    He had a freckled

face, he was in dark clothing and I saw someone placing a coat over

the top half of his body.    He was obviously dead.



At no time did I see anyone with visible injuries.



Although people around me were screaming and shouting I remember

seeing Police Sergeant 681 HILL running with a person, holding his

arm with another officer and bringing him clear of the gate which

was crowded with officers, in an attempt to free people.



At this and moments later I was stood on the pitch with PS.681 HILL

when I turned around and in the distance towards the players

entrance I saw Brian Clough, who was stood looking over towards our

direction.



I could hear people making threatening remarks towards him and

people moving towards him.     Together with PS.681 HILL, and sane

others we pushed our way through the crowd and pushed the crowd away

from him.     I then stopped in the players' tunnel entrance.   Whilst
in this position I had numerous people asking about casualties, and

being very abusive towards all officers present.     A good number of

these were obviously strongly under the influence of alcohol.    One

man came towards us, and PS.681 HILL spoke to him.     He was very

drunk and staggered a few yards away from me and fell flat on his

face.   He was moved by other supporters.



At 4.30 p.m. all mobile officers were ordered back to their

vehicles, together with PS.681 HILL, PC.844 FEES, and PC.2378

WEBSTER, we made our way back to the vehicle.



We resumed patrol.   PC.300 HAYS was separated from us.



We then continued duties which consisted of generally watching and

assisting keeping the traffic flowing up out of Sheffield along the

A6102 and A616.



At 6.00 p.m. we went to the ground.   There we had a break.   At 7.00

p.m. we were ordered to be on stand-by duties at Niagara Sports

Club/Ground.



I went off duty at 1.30 a.m.
