                                                                                                    1
Incident        105     110589 O P 5012            TYPING SERVICE DOCUMENT
           *    .                                               OFFICERS REPORT NUMBER    RS

                                                                                         Stat ion

Surname                  NAYLOR

Forenames

Age                                                      Date of birth

Address                  S.YORKS.POLICE, HACKENTHORPE


Occupation                POL PC1494

Telephone

 Number of Pages

                          260489                                                           Signed


               RICHARD ANTHONY NAYLOR          PC 1494

               E GROUP HACKENTHORPE




  s</
 ‘T> f
     faa       On Saturday 16 April         1989 I reported for work at Hackenthorpe at

               8 . 30am for transport to Hillsborough for duties at the Semi Final.

               We arrived at Hillsborough at 9.10am for briefing at 9 . 30am.



               Briefing finished at 10.10am when I took a meal prior to taking up

               position in the West stand at the rear of Leppings Lane terracing.



               I was on serial 13 under supervision of PS 2001 BURMAN and Inspector

               BULLAS.



               On reaching the West stand I was designated to cover the emergency

               exit gate situated in the front right hand corner of the s t a n d , near

               to the police control         room and directly behind gate no.    1 on the

               Leppings Lane t e r r a c i n g .




                                                                                                    i
                                                                             PAGE
                                                                             R9

I took up this position at 11.30am and stayed at or near to the

emergency g a t e , right up u n t i 1 kick-off time at 3.00pm.



Throughout this period I spoke to many of the Liverpool            supporters

arriving in the stand all of whom were friendly,           happy and none of

who m appeared to have been drinking intoxicants.



At approximately 2 . 50pm,      as the players came onto the field,      I

remember   looking at the Leppings Lane terracing immediately in front

of my position in the stand and noticing there appeared to be an

unusual amount of spaces in the sections of terracing behind gates 1

and 2 .



I was aware that the match was all ticket and 1 felt that 10 minutes

before kick off the ground would have been completely full.



As the match kicked off at 3.00pm I noticed a sudden surge of

approximately 150 to 200 spectators rush past the side of the West

stand onto the terracing behind gate 1, which had previously been

relatively sparsely p o p u l a t e d .   This seemed strange because prior to

this spectators had been filing into this part of the ground in a

steady flow of 8 or 10 at a t i m e .       At the same time I saw a surge of

spectators pushing forwards in the two centre           ‘pens'   of the Leppings

Lane terracing resuiting in a sort of domino effect with all

supporters suring onto the fencing around the perimeter of the

terracing.     As supporters continued to stream past the side of the

stand where I was positioned several of them tried to climb over the

fence leading to the exit where I was standing in an effort to gain

entry to the s t a n d .
                                                                        PAGE
                                                                        R9

At this t i m e , I was together with PS Burman and PC 2498 Scholey and

we prevented supporters gaining entry to the stand in this way.              The

next thing I noticed was supporters directly behind the Leppings Lane

goal climbing the perimeter fence to escape what was obviously a

terrific crush on the terraces in pens 3 and 4.           About the same time

spectators started climbing into the West stand from the rear of the

terracing behind the Leppings Lane end goal.        The West stand started

to become very crowded with people standing all along the front of

the stand and it became difficult to move around the stand at all,

with people standing in the gangways.        Because of this myself,    PS

Burman and PC Scholey stayed by the emergency gate at the front of

the stand and prevented people coming into the stand over the fencing

and stopping the situation in the stand becoming any more crowded.                 I

noticed at this time that the attitude of the supporters on the

Leppings Lane terracing started to become hostile towards the police,

accusing    'us' of causing this by opening a g a t e .



As more and more spectators got onto the ground I saw people being

given mouth to mouth and heart massage and it became apparent that

people were badly injured or even d e a d .



However,   from the time the game was stopped it seemed 20 minutes or

so before any message or instructions were passed over the police

radio and I cannot remember any directions for police officers to go

onto the pitch or stay where they were and it was apparently left to

individual officers d i s c r e t i o n .



We remained in the stand in an effort to keep the situation calm and

to try to prevent any worsening of the overcrowding in the s t a n d .
                                                                                          PAGE
                                                                                          R9

           ’   After   it was eventually announced the match was abandoned we
    *4 -


               continued to prevent spectators leaving via the emergency gate as the

               instructiona were for spectators to remain in their positions until

               emergency vehicles had cleared.



               After the crowd had eventually cleared we returned to the gymnasium

               which was when I was first aware of the numbers of c a s u a l t i e s .

END OF REPORT



•                                                   I           I




#
