                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

'                                  .•                     REF:               F/RH/DR
                                                                             s f XSSI/ USX.
■    chief superintendent Herold, ,'F- D ^ s i o n        sa.ATI0N,DEPT;     ,p , ^  .
                                                          STATION/DEPT:      >F. DHQ
    A/Superintendent Smith and Inspector Calvert          DATE:
    — t   -----------------                                                . 1 8 August 1981

          SUBJECT:   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND
                     EDUCATION OF CLUB STEWARDS

          You are both aware of my feelings that Club Stewards at Hillsborough often
          do less than they should and are at times not aware of our function and
          operation and our respective roles'.

          I crossed swords with them    personally once or twice last season and in an
          effort to set things right for the coming season I have arranged, through
          the Club Chairman and the Secretary - Mr. England - for the stewards to
          attend in the gymnasium at 1 pm on Saturday, 22 August 1981, prior to
          starting their duty, and I should like you to address them.

          They should be told very bluntly that each of them should be aware of the
          location of their respective fire points, emergency exits, the recently
          introduced evacuation procedures, how to react to the broadcasting of the
          nursery rhyme records, etc.etc. They should also have draw* to their
          attention the Ground Rules of the Club, and in particular the recently
          introduced (and even more recently revised) Rule 15 which, in effect,
          appoints police officers as- agents- of the Club and allows us to deny
          admission to the ground on the Club's behalf.

          We should stress to the stewards that       the admission of spectatorsand the
          'packing of those ."spectators at the bigger games on to the terracing is
           primarily their "function and not a police one.

          Such unruly behaviour as the throwing of cushions, etc., also falls within
          their responsibility. -              ^                     ’
               m

          When I received critical letters from the Club Chaizjnan^last year after
          several of the matches, I replied to the effect that much of the crdticsm
          he levelled at the police'should more properly have been levelled at his
          own administration and the stewards. . .

          We should cooperate- fully with, them and they with u s , and not pull in
          opposite directions.

          I remember one particular incident (I believe during the Derby County
          game last year) when the steward on the South. Stand Terracing close to our
          new Control Box quite deliberately ignored fans climbing the railings
          between the Leppings Lane Terracing and the South Stand Terracing when I
          and a number of other officers had witnessed it and drawn it to his attention
          The steward subsequently maintained that the fans in question had occupied
          those seats for the whole of the time, obviously with a view to 'taking the
          easy way out1.

          That is not their function, and indeed it would be my intention jja certain
          circumstances to call upon stewards to give statements of evidence that
          might support a prosecution. In the past we have never done, that but they
          would be good and relatively independent witnesses.

           I anK§ure yovT'vili both understand what I have in mind and get the message
             rer to the stewards. I' have already personally told the Club Chairman and
          /V.hp Secretary of mv wipws and they both support them.




                       7 r
     (iii   Overall role


     (c) .Training - safety procedures
     f        iiiiz.0n   txructi i o n s
     (e)    Use on Spion Kop and Leppings Lane terraces in
            relation to packing and generally.

2.   Access to ground - turnstiles, Leppings Lane, in relation
     to away supporters (lack of available turnstiles at major
     matches).

3.   Sale of programmes outside the ground.

4.   increase security on entry in V7est Stand to prevent previousl
     used tickets being used.

5.   Movable barrier in West Stand to' allow greater number of away
     supporters at certain matches - this was promised last year
     when the alteration took place.

6.   Re-examine positioning of barriers on Leppings Lane terraces
     to allow easier access.

7.   Turnst iles/Penistone Road - feasibility of.J correct money*
     turnstiles to speed flow of home supporters.

8.   Common keys required for all locks in ground.

3-   Examination and marking of fire points etc in ground.

10. Closed circuit television - evaluation
