                                                                                       M IR .15     t
                                                                                                t

OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised - £ * f h / ? o   i x i r           Number


Title    cLju/ 9y fw.                             Ol* \ c/                                              &<Y /9f 7
(Includei source ancTairiy
                 incTahy document number i f rklevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action                        Ik .
                                                                                                                      Receiver




Document registewa/indexed as indicated                                                                               Indexer


No(s) of actions raised

Statement reader's instructions                                                                                  Statement Reader


                                                                                                                 sSS’&S
Indexed as indicated                                                                                                  Indexer


No(s) of actions raised                                                                                                          Q=>,
Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No(s)                                                                                             ftss Inoexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
Fire Safety and Safety of Places
       of Sport Act 1987
                              CHAPTER 27


              ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
                                    P art   I
                                F ir e S a f e t y

            Exemption from requirement to have fire certificate
Section
 1. Power to exempt from requirement to have fire certificate.
 2. Exemption from requirement to have fire certificate:
    supplementary.

                     Charges fo r fire certification work
 3. Charges for fire certification work.

                    Means o f escape andfor fighting fire
 4.    Means of escape: scope of regulation.
 5.    General duty as to means of escape and for fighting fire.
 6.    Codes of practice. :
 7.    Improvement notices.

                  . Interim duties as to safety o f premises
. 8.   Duties as regards safety pending determination o f applications for
       fire certificates.

                  Premises involving serious risk to persons
 9. Special procedure in case of serious risk: prohibition notices.

                           Inspections ojpremises       :v
10. Inspections of premises.
11. Disclosure of information obtained in premises.;
                Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


                                Civil and other liability
  Section
  12. Civil and other liability.

                                      Miscellaneous
  13.    Removal of exemption for premises used for public religious
         worship.                                                         °
  14.    Breaches of fire certificate requirements: restriction of defence
  15.    Automatic means for fighting fire.
  16.    Special provision for certain premises.
  17.    Extension of power to apply Act.
  18.    Application to Crown etc.


                                         P a r t II

                            S a fe ty o f S p o rts G ro u n d s

   Application o f Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975 to all sports grounds
  19. Application of Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 to all SDorts
      grounds.

                          Designation: spectator capacity
 20.     Designation of grounds: variation in qualifying spectator capacity.

                                 Safety certificates
 21.     Safety certificates: police presence.
 22.     Safety certificates: appeals.

                    Grounds involving serious risk to persons
 23. Special procedure in case of serious risk: prohibition notices.
 24.     Prohibition notices: appeals.

                  Enforcement: inspections and obstruction
 25.     Enforcement: inspections and offence of obstruction.


                                       P art       III
                    S afety, o f S ta n d s   at   S ports G   rounds

 26.     Safety certificates for stands at sports grounds.
27.      Contents of safety certificates for stands.
28.      Issue of certificates.
29.     Amendment, cancellation etc. of certificates.
30.     Appeals.
-31.    Regulations,          .
32.     Alterations and extensions.
33.     Exclusion of other statutory requirements.
34.     Enforcement. .
35.     Powers of entry and inspection.
36.     Offences.
37.     Civil and other liability.
38.     Service o f documents.
39.     Power to modify Part for classes o f stand.
40.     Application to Crown.
41.     Interpretation.
           Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987      c. 27


                                      P a r t IV

                         I n d o o r S p o r t s L ic e n c e s

                    Licensing in England and Wales
Section
42. Licensing of indoor sports premises in London.
43. Licensing of indoor sports premises outside London.

                            Licensing in Scotland
44.   Licensing of indoor sports premises in Scotland.


                                       Pa   rt   V

                     M   is c e l l a n e o u s a n d   G   eneral


                                  Miscellaneous
45. Entertainment licences: removal of exemption.
46. Entertainment licences: fees for variation.
47. Luminous tube signs: England and Wales.
48. Luminous tube signs: Scotland.

                                       General
49. Repeals and transitional and saving provisions.
50. Short title, commencement and extent.

      Schedules:
          Schedule 1—Fire precautions: special provision for certain
                      premises.
          Schedule 2—Extension of application o f Safety of Sports
                      Grounds Act 1975 to sports grounds.
          Schedule 3—Indoor sports licences: consequential
                      amendments.
          Schedule 4— Repeals.
          Schedule 5—Transitional and saving provisions.
                                  ELIZABETH II                                       c. 27




 Fire Safety and Safety of Places
        of Sport Act 1987
                               1987 CHAPTER 27




A n A ct to am end the Fire Precautions A ct 1971 and o th e r
   enactm ents relating to fire precautions; to am end the Safety o f
   Sports G ro u n d s A ct 1975 and m ake like provision as respects
   stands a t sports grounds; to extend as respects in d o o r sp orts
   premises, an d am end, the statu to ry provisions regulating
   entertainm ent licences; and for connected purposes.
                                                                    [15th M ay 1987]

                     by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with
       e i t e n a c te d


B      the advice and consent o f the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
       Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
       authority of the same, as follows:—


                                        P art   I

                                    F ire S a fe ty

             Exemption from requirement to,have fire certificate

                   Precautions Act 1971 (in this Part referred to as “ the Power to exempt
principal Act ) shall have .effect with the following amendments.          from requirement

  (2) In section 1 (designated uses r e q u i r i n g c o v e r c e r t i f i c a t e s ) —   c e itE S *
    (a) after , subsection , (3) there shall be inserted • the following 1971 c-40-
        subsect i on—                                                  °
               ,                   under this ■section mayz-as respects any
              designated use, specify descriptions o f premises which qualify
              for exemption by a fire authority under section 5A o f this Act
              from j the.;^requirement, for "'a j\firejoertifirate, in respect o f
         i; : premises which are p u tjp that-use.’’; and
                  Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


          (b) in subsection (4) (methods o f description), after the words
               subsection (3)’’ there shall be inserted the words “or (3A)” ,
              after the words “ use for any purpose” there shall be inserted the
              words ‘or their situation, construction or arrangement” , and
              for the words that subsection” there shall be substituted the
              words “ subsection (3) or (3A) above” .
   (3) In section 5(3) (duty o f fire authority to inspect premises on
application for fire certificate) after the words “duty o f the fire authority”
there shall be inserted the words “ to consider whether or not, in the case
ol premises which qualify for exemption under section 5A o f this Act to
grant exemption and, if they do not grant it, it shall be their duty” .
      (4) After section 5 there shall be inserted the following sections—

fire°auUiority      5 A —Q) A        authority may, if they think fit as regards
to gram          any premises which appear to them to be premises qualifying
exemption in     for exemption under this section as respects any particular
particular       use grant exemption from the requirement to have a fire
cascs-           certificate covering that use.
                    (2)    Exemption under this section for any premises as
                 respects any use of them may be granted by the fire authority
                 with or without the making o f an application for the
                 purpose,—
                      (a) on the making of an application for a fire certificate
                          with respect to the premises covering that use; or
                       (b) at any time during the currency of a fire certificate
                            with respect to the premises which covers that use.
                  ,.(3) In deciding whether or not to grant exemption under
                 this section for any premises the fire authority shall have
                         to   the circumstances o f the case and in particular to
                 the degree o f seriousness o f the risk in case o f fire to persons
                 in the premises.
                   (4) F o r the purpose o f making that decision the fire
                 authority may—
                      (a) require the applicant or, as the case may be, the
                          occupier of the premises to give such information as
                          they require about the premises and any matter
                          connected with, them; and
                     (b) cause to be carried out an inspection of the relevant
                       ' building.
                 ^ ^ r6 ^ re authorjty shall not grant exemption under this
               section for any premises without causing an inspection to be
             <earned out under subsection (4) above unless they have
 ■,       : ;v         ^ e ^ e m is e s to be inspected (under that or any other
               power) within the preceding twelve months.
                  (6)               The effect o f the grant o f exemption under this section
                as respects any particular use o f premises is that, during the
;j" " !       •-P4Er?ncy.of the exemption, no fire certificate in respect of the
            .;; premises is required to cover that use and accordingly—          /
 r- i              j SQ            the gfa;ht is made on an application for a fire
                      V ^ ^ f i c a t e , the grant disposes of the application or
                       1 o f so much o f it- as relates to that use; and
                Fire Safely and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987         c. 27             3


                     (b) where the grant is made during the currency o f a fire       Part I
                         certificate, the certificate shall wholly or as respects
                         that use cease to have effect.
                   (7) On granting an exemption under this section, the fire
                authority shall, by notice to the applicant for the fire
                certificate or the occupier of the premises, as the case may be,
                inform him that they have granted exemption as respects the
                particular use or uses o f the premises specified in the notice
                and of the effect o f the grant.
                   (8) A notice o f the grant o f exemption for any premises as
                respects a particular use o f them may include a statement
                specifying the greatest number o f persons of a description
                specified in the statement for the purposes of that use who, in
                the opinion o f the fire authority, can safely be in the premises
                at any one time.

                   (9) Where a notice o f the grant o f exemption for any
                premises includes a statement under subsection (8) above, the
                fire authority may, by notice served on the occupier o f the
                premises, direct that, as from a date specified in the notice, the
                statement—
                     (a) is cancelled; or
                     (b) is to have effect as varied by the notice;

                and, on such a variation the statement shall be treated, so long
                as the variation remains in force, as if the variation were
                specified in it.

Withdrawal         5B.—(1) A fire authority who have granted an exemption
of exemptions
under s.5A.     under section 5A o f this Act from the requirement to have a
                fire certificate covering any particular use o f premises may, if
                they think fit, at any time, withdraw the exemption in
                accordance with subsections (2) to (4) below.
                   (2) In deciding whether or not to withdraw an exemption
                they have granted the fire authority shall have regard to all the
                circumstances o f the case and in particular to the degree of
                seriousness of the risk in case of fire to persons in the premises.
                   (3) The fire authority may withdraw an exemption they
                have granted as respects any particular use of premises
                without exercising any of the powers o f inspection or inquiry
                conferred by section 19 of this Act but they shall not withdraw
                the exemption without first giving notice to the occupier o f the
                premises that they propose to withdraw it and the reasons for
                the proposal, and giving him an opportunity of making
                representations on the matter.
                   (4) An exemption shall be withdrawn by serving a notice on
                the occupier of .the premises to which the exemption relates
                stating that the exemption will cease to have effect as respects
                the particular use or uses o f the premises specified in the
                notice on such date as is so specified, being a date not earlier
                than the end of the period o f fourteen days beginning with the
                date on which service of the notice is effected.
4                  c. 27          Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987

       Part I
                                 (5)     If premises cease to qualify for exemption under section
                               5A o f this Act a fire authority who have granted an exemption
                               under that section shall notify the occupier o f the premises of
                               the fact and date of the cessation of the exemption.”
Exemption from       2*—(1) After section 8 o f the principal Act there shall be inserted the
requirement to     following section—
have fire         “Change of
certificate:      conditions         8A-—(!) If, during the currency of an exemption granted
supplementary.    affecting       under section 5A of this Act for any premises, it is intended, to
                  premises for    carry out in relation to those premises any proposals to which
                  which
                  exemption
                                  this section applies, the occupier shall, before the carrying out
                  has been        of the proposals is begun, give notice of the proposals to the
                  granted.        fire authority; and if the carrying out of the proposals is begun
                                  without such notice having been given, the occupier shall be
                                  guilty of an offence.
                                    (2)   This section applies to the following proposals, namely
                                  any proposal—
                                        (a) to make—
                                             (i)   an extension of, or structural alteration to, the
                                                   premises which would affect the means of
                                                   escape from the premises; or
                                             (ii) an alteration in the internal arrangement of the
                                                  premises, or in the furniture or equipment with
                                                  which the premises are provided, which would
                                                  affect the means o f escape from the premises;
                                                  or
                                       (b) on the part of the occupier, to begin to keep
                                           explosive or highly flammable materials of any
                                           prescribed kind anywhere under, in or on the
                                           building which constitutes or comprises the
                                           premises in a quantity or aggregate quantity greater
                                           than the quantity prescribed foi; the purposes of this
                                           paragraph as the maximum in relation to materials
                                           of that kind; or
                                       (c) in a case where the notice o f exemption under
                                           section 5A o f this Act includes a statement under
                                           subsection (8) o f that section, to make such a use of
                                           the premises as will involve there being in the
                                           premises at any one time a greater number of
                                           persons in relation to whom the statement applies
                                           than is specified or treated as specified in the
                                           statement.
                                                                                                 above
                                 shall be liable— .
                                      (a)    bn suriimary conviction^ to a fine not exceeding the
                                            statutory maximum; ’•
                                    ,.                                                       fine or to
                                 ....*: v;: i m p r i s o n m e n t ■for a term not exceeding two years
                 . ;              '             or both.” "                     i. - . r . •            ’
                                                   Sii'5 vo %*g>x; -s..                 .•
                 .        sfcti6n_19(2) ofithe.principal Act (premises within powers of
                 inspection etc.' o f inspectors), after paragraph (a), there shall be inserted
                 the following paragraph—                 Ki ?
            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987           c. 27                      5


     “(aa) any premises in respect of which there is in force an exemption            Part I
          under section 5A of this Act from the requirement for a fire
         certificate with respect to them;” .

                     Charges fo r fire certification work
    3. After the section 8A of the principal Act inserted by section 2 above        Charges for fire
there shall be inserted the following section—                                      certification work.
“Charges for     8B.—(1) Where a fire authority—
Issue or
amendment           (a) issue a fire certificate under section 5 of this Act, or
certificates        (b) except in a case falling within subsection ( 2 ) below,
                         amend a fire certificate or, as an alternative to
                         amendment, issue a new fire certificate, under
                         section 8 of this Act,
              the applicant for the certificate or, as the case may be, the
              occupier of the premises to which the amended or new
              certificate relates shall pay to the authority such fee as the
              authority determine.
                 (2) No fee shall be chargeable for the amendment o f a fire
              certificate, or issue of a new fire certificate embodying
              amendments, under section 8(6) of this Act in a case where the
              amendment or amendments is or are made in consequence of
              the coming into force of regulations under section 12 of this
              Act.
                 (3) A fee charged by a fire authority under this section in
              connection with the- issue of a fire certificate or the
              amendment o f a, or issue of a new, fire certificate shall not
              exceed an amount which represents the cost to the authority
              o f the work reasonably done by them for the purposes o f the
              issue o f the certificate or, as the case may be, the amendment
              of the certificate or issue o f the new certificate, other than the
              cost of any inspection of the premises.”

                    Means o f escape andfor fighting fire
 4.—(1) The following amendments o f the principal Act with regard to               Means o f escape:
means o f escape from premises in case of fire shall have effect.                   scope of
                                                                                    regulation.
   (2) In section 5 (applications for and issue o f fire certificates), the
following subsection shall be added at the end—
               “(5) In this Act, “escape” , in relation to premises, means
             escape from them to some place o f safety beyond the building
             which constitutes or comprises the premises and any area
             enclosed by it or enclosed with it; and accordingly, for the
             purposes of any provision of this Act relating to means of
             escape, consideration may be given to, and conditions or
             requirements imposed as respects, any place or thing by
             means of which a person escapes from premises to a place of
             safety.”
  (3) In section 43(1) (interpretation), after the definition o f “designated
use” , there shall be inserted the following—
     “ ‘escape’ has the meaning assigned to it by section 5(5) of this Act
           and ‘means of escape’ is to be construed in accordance with that
           subsection;” .
6                     c.' 27           Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


         Part I         5.    For section 9A o f the principal Act (duty to provide certain premises
G eneral duty as to   with means o f escape in case o f fire) there shall be substituted the
means o f escape      following section—
and for fighting
fire.                 -D uty as to        9A.—( 1) All premises to which this section applies shall be
                      escape and       P r id e d w ith -
                      for fighting           (a).; • such means of escape in case: of fire, and
                      fire                   (b) such means for fighting fire,
                                       as may reasonably be required in the circumstances of the
                                       case.

                                          (2) The premises to which this section applies are premises
                                       which are exempt from the requirement for a fire certificate by
                                       virtue of—

                                             (a) a provision made in an order under section 1 of this
                                                 Act by virtue o f subsection (3) of that section, or
                                              (b)' the grant of exemption by a fire authority under
                                                   section 5A of this Act.
                                         (3) In the event of a contravention of the duty imposed by
                                       subsection (1) above the occupier of the premises shall, except
                                       as provided in subsection (4) below, be guilty of an offence
                                       and liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level
                                       5 on the standard scale.

                                          (4) A person is not guilty of an offence under this section in
                                       respect o f any contravention of the duty imposed by
                                       subsection (1) above which is the subject of an improvement
                                     . notice under section 9D of this Act.”

Codes o f practice.     6.    After the section 9A of the principal Act substituted by section 5
                      above there shall be inserted the following sections—
                      -C odes o f                   The Secretary of State may from time to time,
                                          9 b .— ( l )
                      m ean ert0 after consultation with such persons or bodies of persons as
                      escape and    appear to him requisite-—
                      for fighting         ( a ) prepareandissue codes of practice for the purpose
                      fire.
                                                 o f providing practical guidance on how to comply
                                                 with the duty imposed by section 9A of this Act; and
                                           (b) revise any such code by revoking, varying,
                                                 amending or adding :to the provisions o f the code.
                                      . (2) A code prepared in .pursuance of this section and any
                                    alterations proposed to be made'on a revision o f such a code
                                    shall be laid before both Houses o f Parliament, and the
                                    Secretary o f State.shall, not is^ue th e code or revised code, as
                                    thecase maiy ;be; mjtil ^fter the €iiid of the period of 40 days
                                   /beginning' w i t h i f e ^ a ^ o n N ^ i c ^    or the proposed
                                    alterations were so^aid/to"                A'      '

                                        .. (3) If, within Ae.f|eriod mentioned in subsection (2) above,
                                       either ^ o u M ,r^ p lY ^ ^ K a t’“^h0o^e.^be■,n6t' issued or the
                                       proposed alterations'be not made, as the case niay be, the
                                       Secretary o f State shall not issue the code or revised code (but
                                      -^withoutprejudice'to-his fpower7uiider that subsection to lay
                                       further codes or proposed alterations before Parliament).
                 Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987                  c. 27


                          (4) For the purposes of subsection (2) above—                         Part I

                             (a) where the code or proposed alterations are not laid
                                 before both Houses of Parliament on the same day,
                                 the later day shall be taken to be the day on which
                                 the code or the proposed alterations, as the case
                                 may be, were laid before both Houses, and
                             (b) in reckoning any period of 40 days, no account shall
                                 be taken of any time during which Parliament is
                                 dissolved or prorogued or during which both
                                 Houses are adjourned for more than four days.
                    (5) In this Act references to a code of practice under this
                  section are references to such a code as it has effect for the time
                  being, with any revisions, under this section.
Legal effect        9C.—(1) A failure on the part o f a person to observe any
practice   °f     provision o f a code of practice under section 9B of this Act
                  shall not of itself render him liable to any criminal or civil
                  proceedings.
                     (2)   If, in any proceedings whether civil or criminal under
                  this Act, it is alleged that there has been a contravention on
                  the part of any person of the duty imposed by section 9A of
                  this Act—
                              (a) a failure to observe a provision o f a code of practice
                                  under section 9B of this Act may be relied on as
                                  tending to establish liability, and
                              (b) compliance with such a code may be relied on as
                                  tending to negative liability.”

  7.—(1) After the section 9C of the principal Act inserted by section 6                       Improvement
above there shall be inserted the following sections—                                          notices.

"improve-          9D.— (1) Where a fire authority are o f the opinion that the
notices          duty imposed by section 9A o f this Act has been contravened
                 in respect o f any premises to which that section applies, they
                 may serve on the occupier o f those premises a notice (in this
                 Act referred to as “an improvement notice”) which—

                              (a) states they are o f that opinion;

                              (b) specifies, by reference to a code o f practice under
                                  section 9B o f this Act if they think fit, what steps
                                  they consider are necessary to remedy that
                                  contravention; and .
                              (c) requires the occupier to take steps to remedy that
                                   contravention within such period (ending not
                                   earlier than the period Within which an appeal
                                   against the improvement notice can be brought
                                 ; under section 9E of this Act) as may be specified in
                                   the notice. "          ‘ ' •’
                  ■ •'■    ■■■■" •   '■   ' ■   ■■■   ■ ■ - . ■ s . - r * ? - . 5 .>


                    (2)      Where an improvement notice has. been served under
                ‘ subsecti on( 1) above—         :;r-V   :W.-;
8            c. 27      Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


    Part I                   (a) the fire authority may withdraw that notice at any
                                 time before the end of the period specified in the
                                 notice; and

                             (b) if an appeal against the improvement notice is not
                                 pending, the fire authority may extend or further
                                 extend the period specified in the notice.

                           (3) Where any premises are premises to which section 9A of
                        this Act applies and—

                             (a) the building which constitutes or comprises the
                                 premises is a building to which at the time o f its
                                 erection     building    regulations     imposing
                                 requirements as to means of escape in case of fire
                                 applied; and

                             (b) in connection with the erection of that building
                                 plans were, in accordance with building regulations,
                                 deposited with a local authority,

                        the fire authority shall not in pursuance of subsection (1)
                        above serve an improvement notice requiring structural or
                        other alterations relating to the means of escape from the
                        premises unless the requirements of subsection (4) below are
                        satisfied in relation to those premises.
                                                    i
                           (4) The requirements of this subsection are satisfied in
                        relation to such premises as are mentioned in subsection (3)
                        above if—

                             (a) regulations are in force under section 12 of this Act
                                 applying to the premises in relation to any use of
                                 them as respects which exemption under section 5A
                                 o f this Act has been granted, being regulations
                                 which impose requirements as to means of escape in
                                 case o f fire, and the fire authority are satisfied that
                                 alterations to the building which constitutes or
                                 comprises the premises are necessary to bring the
                                 premises into compliance with the regulations in
                                 respect of those requirements; or

                              (b) the fire authority are satisfied that the means of
                                   escape in case of fire with which the premises are
                                   provided are inadequate in relation to any such use
                                   o f the premises by reason of matters or
                                   circumstances of which particulars were not
                  . .   i          required.by o r under the building regulations to be
                 ; K -; i; i :     supplied to the local authority in connection with
                                  .the deposit of.plans.-.

                 ::. . . >! (5) In this section “structural or other alterations relating
                         to means o f escape from the premises?, in relation to any such
                         premises as are mentioned in this section, means structural or
                 5c ■ other alterations directly connected with the provision of the
                         premises with adequate means of escape in case of fire.
              Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987           c. 27             9


               (6)    Subsections (3) to (5) above extend to England and              Part I
              Wales only.

Rights of         9E.—(1) A person on whom an improvement notice is
against       served may, within twenty-one days from the date on which
improvement    the improvement notice is served, appeal to the court.
notices.
                  (2) On an appeal under this section, the court may either
               cancel or affirm the notice, and, if it affirms it, may do so either
               in its original form or with such modifications as the court
               may in the circumstances think fit.
                  (3) Where an appeal is brought under this section against
               an improvement notice, the bringing of the appeal shall have
               the effect of suspending the operation of the notice until the
               appeal is finally disposed of or, if the appeal is withdrawn,
               until the withdrawal of the appeal.

^ ~ S            9F.—(1) It is an offence for a person to contravene any
to offences
              requirement imposed by an improvement notice.
                (2)   Any person guilty of an offence under subsection (1)
              above shall be liable—

                    (a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding the
                        statutory maximum;

                    (b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine, or
                        imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years,
                        or both.”

   (2)    In section 14(1) of the principal Act (exercise of certain powers of
fire authority in Scotland where building standards regulations as to
means of escape apply), for the words “or 8” there shall be substituted the
words “, 8 or (in relation to premises to which section 9A applies) 9D(1)
and (2)” .

  (3)    In section 17(1) of the principal Act (duty of fire authorities to
consult other authorities before requiring alterations to buildings), in'
paragraph (b), after the words “ section 8(4) or (5)” there shall be inserted
the words “ , section 9D” and after the words “ would have to be taken”
there shall be inserted the words “ or, in the case o f a notice under section
9D, which must be taken” .

  (4)      In section 48(4) of the Building Act 1984, (which modifies the effect1984 c. 55.
of initial notices under that Act for the purposes o f the exercise o f powers
of a fire authority ‘ to require structural alterations where building
regulations apply)—

      (a) after the words “ For the purposes o f ’ there shall be inserted the
          words “ section 9D and” ; and

      (b) in paragraph (b), after the words “the references in" there shall
          be inserted the words “subsection (4)(b) o f section 9D and” and
          for the words “ that section” there shall be substituted the words
          “section 13” .
10                    c. 27       Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


         Part I                          Interim duties as to safety o f premises

Duties as regards       8.—(1) The following amendments shall be made in section 5
safety pending        (applications for fire certificates) and section 7 (offences) of the principal
determination o f     Act.
applications for
fire certificates.       (2) In section 5—
                            (a) in subsection (2), after the words “fire authority” , there shall be
                                 inserted the words “shall notify the applicant of his duties under
                                 subsection (2A) below and” ; and
                            (b) after subsection (2) there shall be inserted the following
                                 subsection—
                                      “(2A) Where an application is made for a fire certificate
                                    with respect to any premises it is the duty of the occupier to
                                    secure that, when the application is made and pending its
                                    disposal—
                                         (a) the means of escape in case of fire with which the
                                              premises are provided can be safely and effectively
                                              used at all material times;
                                         (b) the means for fighting fire with which the premises
                                              are provided are maintained in efficient working
                                              order; and
                                         (c) any persons employed to work in the premises
                                              receive instruction or training in what to do in case
                                              of fire.”
                         (3) In section 7, after subsection (3), there shall be inserted the
                       following subsection—
                                     “(3A) If, pending the disposal of an application for a fire
                                   certificate with respect to any premises, the premises are put
                                   to a designated use, then, if any requirement imposed by
                                   section 5(2A) of this Act is contravened by reason of anything
                                   done or not done to or in relation to any part of the relevant
                                   building, the occupier shall be guilty of an offence.”
                          (4) In section 7, after subsection (5), there shall be inserted the
                      " following subsection—
                                      “(5A) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (3A)
                                    above shall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not
                                    exceeding level 5 on the standard scale.”

                                        Premises involving serious risk to persons

Special procedure         9.—(1) For section 10 o f the principal Act (court's power to prohibit
in case o f serious    or restrict use o f certain premises until excessive risk to persons in case of
risk: prohibition      fire is reduced) there shall be substituted the following s e c tio n -
notices.
                       "Special        10.—(1) This section applies to—
                       procedure in
                       case of            (a) ; any premises which are being or are proposed to be
                       serious risk:             put to a use (whether designated or not) which falls
                       prohibition               within at least one of the classes of use mentioned in
                       notices.                  section l(2),of this Act, other .than premises o f the
                                               ; description given in section 2 of this Act; and
                                           (b) any premises to which section 3 of this Act for the
                                                 time being applies.            •   ; , ; ."
               Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987          c. 27             11


                 (2) If as regards any premises to which this section applies         Part I
               the fire authority are of the opinion that use of the premises
               involves or will involve a risk to persons on the premises in
               case of fire so serious that use of the premises ought to be
               prohibited or restricted, the authority may serve on the
               occupier of the premises a notice (in this Act referred to as “ a
               prohibition notice” ).
                 (3) The matters relevant to the assessment by the fire
               authority, for the purposes of subsection (2) above, of the risk
               to persons in case of fire include anything affecting their
               escape from the premises in that event.
                  (4) A prohibition notice shall—
                    (a) state that the fire authority are o f the opinion
                        referred to in subsection (2) above;
                    (b) specify the matters which in their opinion give or, as
                        the case may be, will give rise to that risk; and
                    (c) direct that the use to which the prohibition notice
                        relates is prohibited or restricted to such extent as
                        may be specified in the notice until the specified
                        matters have been remedied.
                  (5) A prohibition notice may include directions as to the
               steps which will have to be taken to remedy the matters
               specified in the notice.
                  (6) A prohibition or restriction contained in a prohibition
               notice in pursuance o f subsection (4)(c) above shall take effect
               immediately it is served if the authority are of the opinion, and
               so state in the notice, that the risk o f serious personal injury is
               or, as the case may be, will be imminent, and in any other case
               shall take effect at the end o f a period specified in the
               prohibition notice.
                 (7) Where a prohibition notice has been served under
               subsection (2) above the fire authority may withdraw the
               notice at any time.”
   (2) After the section 10 o f the principal Act substituted by subsection
(1) above there shall be inserted the following sections—
•■Rights of       io a .— (1) A person on whom a prohibition notice is
against        served may, within twenty-one days from the date on which
prohibition    the prohibition notice is served, appeal to the court,
notices.          (2 ) On an appeal under this section, the court may either
               cancel or affirm the notice, and, if it affirms it, may do so either
                in its original form or with such modifications as the court
                may in the circumstances think fit.
                  (3)    Where an appeal is brought under this section against
               a prohibition notice, the bringing of the appeal shall not have
               the effect of suspending the operation of the notice, unless, on
               the application of the appellant, the court so directs (and then
               only from the giving of the direction).
Provision as    r 10B.—(1) It shall be an offence for any person to
too ences'     contravene any prohibition or restriction imposed by a
               prohibition notice.
  12                                      Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987

             Part I
                                        (2) In any proceedings for an offence under subsection (1)
                                     above where the person charged is a person other than the
                                     person on whom the prohibition notice was served, it shall be
                                     a defence for that person to prove that he did not know and
                                     had no reason to believe the notice had been served.
                                       (3) Any person guilty of an offence under subsection (1)
                                     above shall be liable—
                                           (a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding the
                                               statutory maximum;
                                           (b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine, or
                                               imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years,
                                               or both.”
                          (3)     In section 43(1) of the principal Act (interpretation), after the
                        definition o f “ prescribed” there shall be inserted the following
                        definition—
                             “ “prohibition notice” has the meaning assigned by section 10(2) of
                                  this Act;” .                                              v

                                                       Inspections o f premises
 Inspections o f           10. Section 18 of the principal Act (enforcement) shall be amended—
 premises.
                             (a) by the insertion in subsection (1), after the word “inspectors” ,
                                  of the words “and cause premises to be inspected” ; and
                             (b) by the insertion, after subsection (2), of the following
                                  subsection—
                                              (3)     In performing the duty imposed by subsection (1)
                                          above so far as it requires premises in their areas to be
                                          inspected, fire authorities shall act in accordance with such
                                          guidance as the Secretary of State may give them.”
Disclosure o f            11. Section 21 of the principal Act (restriction on disclosure of
inform ation
                       information obtained in premises) shall be amended—
obtained in
premises.                   (a) by the insertion, at the beginning, of the words “(1) Subject to
                                subsection (2) below,”; and
                            (b) by the insertion, at the end, of the following subsections—
                                         (2)     Nothing in subsection (1) above prohibits the
                                   disclosure of information to an enforcing authority within the
1974 c.37.                         meaning of the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 in
                                   order to enable that authority to discharge any function
                                   falling within its field of responsibility.
                                       (3)    Section 18(7) of the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act
                                   1974 (meaning in Part I of that Act o f ‘enforcing authority’
                                   and of such an authority’s ‘field of responsibility’) shall apply
                                   for the purposes of this section as it applies for the purposes
                                   o f that Part.”

                                                      Civil and other liability
Civil and other
                         12-— (D After section 27 of the principal Act there shall be inserted the
liability.            following section—

1978 c.30.
                      other'iiabllity.     27A' Exc®Pl j1} so far as this Act otherwise expressly
                                         provides, and subject to section 18 of the Interpretation Act
                                         1978 (offences under two or more laws), the provisions of this
                                         Act shall not be construed as—
            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987                 c. 27                       13


                  (a) conferring a right of action in any civil proceedings                Part I
                      (other than proceedings for the recovery of a fine) in
                      respect of any contravention of a provision of this
                      Act, of any regulations thereunder or of any fire
                      certificate or notice issued or served thereunder by
                      the fire authority; or
                  (b) affecting any requirement or restriction imposed by
                      or under any other enactment whether contained in
                      a public general Act or in a local or private Act; or
                  (c) derogating from any right of action or other remedy
                      (whether civil or criminal) in proceedings instituted
                      otherwise than under this Act.”
  (2 )   In consequence of subsection         (1 )   above, section   4 3 (2 )   of the
principal Act shall be omitted.

                                Miscellaneous

   13. Premises appropriated to, and used solely or mainly for, public                   Removal o f
religious worship shall cease to be exempt from the requirement for a fire               exemption for
certificate if put to a designated use and accordingly—                                  premises used for
                                                                                         public religious
      (a) in section 2 of the principal Act (exemptions), there shall be                 w o rsh ip ..
          omitted the words from “of any of the following” to “premises”
          where last occurring; and
      (b) in section 12(1) (fire regulations), for the words “any description
          falling within any paragraph o f ’ there shall be substituted the
          words “the description given in” and the words “other than
          paragraph (d)” shall be omitted.

   14. In section 7 ( 4 ) of the principal Act (offence of contravening fire             Breaches o f fire
certificate requirements except where person charged does not know of                    certificate
his responsibility), after the words “Provided that a person” there shall be             requirements:
inserted the words “other than the occupier of the premises” .                           restriction o f
                                                                                         defence.

   15. In section 5 ( 3 )(c) (fire authority to be satisfied regarding means             A utom atic means
for fighting fire before issuing a fire certificate with respect to any                  for fighting fire.
premises) and section 6(1 )(d) (contents of a fire certificate regarding
means for fighting fire) of the principal Act the words from “for use” to
“ the building” shall be omitted.

    16.— ( 1 ) After section 2 8 of the principal Act there shall be inserted the        Special provision
following section—                                                                       for certain
                                                                                         premises.
••Special        2 8 A.— (1 ) This Act shall have effect in relation to premises
factory?" °f          descriptions specified in Part I of Schedule 2 to this Act
office,        subject to the modifications specified in Part II of that
railway and    Schedule,
shop
premises.
            of that Schedule by amending, omitting or adding to the
            descriptions o f premises or the modifications for the ^inie
            being specified in it if it appears to him to be necessary or
            expedient in connection with any provision made by health
            and safety regulations under section 15 of the Health'and                    1974 c. 37.
            Safety at Work etc. Act 1 9 7 4 . .
 •4                  c. 27         Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


         Part I                       (3)    The power to make an order under this section is
                                    exercisable by statutory instrument which shall be subject to
                                    annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of
                                    Parliament.”
                       (2) After the Schedule to the principal Act, which shall become
                     Schedule 1 to that Act, there shall be inserted as Schedule 2 to that Act the
                     Schedule set out in Schedule 1 to this Act.
                        (3) In the principal Act—
                             (a) in section 34 (modification of certain enactments relating to
                                 Scotland) for the words “the Schedule” there shall be
                                 substituted the words “Schedule 1” ; and
                             (b) in section 43(1) (definitions) in the definition of “the court” the
                                 words “ and the Schedule thereto” shall cease to have effect.

Extension o f           17. Section 35 of the principal Act (power for Secretary of State to
power to apply       apply Act to vessels and movable structures) shall be amended by the
Act.
                     insertion, at the end of paragraph (b), o f the words and
                          (c) places of work in the open air o f any prescribed description.”

A pplication to         18.—(1) Section 40 of the principal Act (application of Act to Crown
Crow n etc.          etc.) shall have effect with the following amendments.
                        (2) In subsection (l)(a) (provisions applying to premises occupied by
                     the Crown) after “ 4” there shall be inserted “ 5(2A), 5A, 5B,” and for the
                     words “9A (except subsection (4))” there shall be substituted the words
                     “ 9A (except subsections (3) and (4)), 9B and 9C” .
                       (3) In subsection (l)(b) (provisions applying to premises owned but not
                     occupied by the Crown), after “8” there shall be inserted “ 8A, 8B,” , after
                     “9A” there shall be inserted “9B, 9C, 9D, 9F,” and after “ 10,” there shall
                     be inserted “ 10B,” .
                       (4) After subsection (10A), there shall be inserted the following
                     subsection—
                          “(1 OB) This Act shall apply to premises occupied by the National
                       Radiological Protection Board as if they were premises occupied by the
                       Crown.”      ‘



                                                           P art   II

                                              S a fe ty o f S p o rts G ro u n d s

                      Application o f Safety o f Sports Grounds A ct 1975 to all sports grounds

Application o f         19.—(1) For the purpose of extending the provisions of the Safety of
Safety o f Sports
                     Sports Grounds Act 1975 (in this Part referred to as “the principal Act” )
G round s Act 1975
to all sports        which apply to sports stadia to other sports grounds and making a minor
grounds.             correction the amendments to the principal Act specified in Schedule 2 to
1975 c.52.           this Act shall have effect.     >               ,:
                       (2): In ; consequence :of those amendments the following other
                     amendments of the principal Act shall be made, that is to say—
            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987           c. 27                     15


       (a) for section 2(2) (obligatory terms of safety certificates) there           P a r t II
              shall be substituted the following subsection—
                   “(2) In so far as an order under section 15A below so
                 requires as respects any class of sports ground, a safety
                 certificate shall include such terms and conditions as may be
                 provided for in the order.” ;
       (b) section 15 (power of Secretary of State to extend the principal
              Act to other classes of sports grounds) shall cease to have effect;
       (c) there shall be inserted as section 15A the following section—
"Power to           15A.— (1) The Secretary of State may, as respects any
for classes of sPecified class of sports ground, by           order modify the
grounds.        provisions of this Act (except section 1(1) above) in their
                 application to sports grounds of that class.
                   (2) An order under this section may—-
                       (a) make different modifications in relation to different
                            activities at the same class of ground; and
                       (b) include such supplementary and transitional
                            provision as the Secretary of State thinks
                            expedient.”; and
       (d) in section 18 (orders and regulations), after subsection (1), there
              shall be inserted the following subsection— ,
                    “(1A) Regulations under any provision of this Act may
                 make different provision for different classes of sports
                 ground.”
                           Designation: spectator capacity
  20. After section 1(1) of the principal Act (designation of sports                Designation o f
grounds with spectator capacity of more than 10,000) there shall be                 grounds:
inserted the following subsections—                                                 variation in
                                                                                    qualifying
               “(1A) The Secretary of State may by order substitute, for            spectator capacity.
            the number for the time being specified in subsection (1)
            above, such other number as he considers appropriate; but no
            order made under this subsection shall affect the validity of
            any designation previously made.
               (IB) An order under subsection (1A) above may make
            different substitutions for different classes of sports ground.”

                              Safety certificates
   21. In section 2 of the principal Act (contents of safety certificates),         Safety certificates:
after subsection (2), there shall be inserted the following subsection—             police presence.

               “(2A) No condition o f a safety certificate shall require the
            provision of the services at the ground of any members of a
             police force unless the.extent of the provision of their services
            is reserved for the determination of the chief officer of police
             oftheforce.”                              r ,

  22.—(1) Section 5 of the principal Act {appeals; to Secretary of State            Safety certificates:
against determinations etc. of local authority) shall have effect with the          appeals.
amendments specified in subsectipns (2) to (6) below.' '
  (2)   In subsections (1), (2) and (3) for the words “Secretary of State”
wherever occurring, there shall be substituted the word “court” .
                    c. 27         Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport A ct 198 7


       P a r t II
                      (3) After subsection (3) there shall be inserted the following
                    subsections—
                                     “(3 A) An appeal to the court under this section in England
                                   and Wales shall be by way of complaint for an order, the
                                   making of the complaint shall be deemed to be the bringing
1980 c.43.                         of the appeal and the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 shall
                                   apply to the proceedings.
                                     (3B) An appeal to the court under this section in Scotland
                                   shall be by summary application.
                                     (3C) In England and Wales any of the following persons
                                   may appeal to the Crown Court against an order under this
                                   section, namely—
                                        (a) the local authority; and
                                        (b) any interested party.
                                     (3D) In Scotland any of the following persons may appeal
                                   against an order made in an appeal under this section,
                                   namely—
                                        (a) the local authority; and
                                        (b) any interested party,
                                  notwithstanding that that person was not party to the
                                  proceedings on the application.”
                      (4) Subsection (4) shall be omitted.

                      (5) In subsection (5), for the words “subsections (3) and (4) above” ,
                    there shall be substituted the words “this section” .
                      (6) Subsections (6), (7) and (8) shall be omitted.

                      (7) In section 6(1) of the principal Act (power to make regulations) for
                    paragraph (c) (appeals), there shall be substituted the following
                    paragraph—
                                       “(c) prescribe the time within which appeals under
                                            section 5 above are to be brought.”
                       (8) In section 7 of the principal Act (supplementary provisions relating
                    to determinations and appeals)—
                           (a) in subsection (1), for the words from “ person" to the end of
                                 paragraph (b) there shall be substituted the words “ applicant
                                 for a safety certificate, he shall be deemed to have withdrawn his
                                 application” and for the words after “ section 6 above” , there
                               : shall be substituted the words “an appeal against the authority’s
                           ;     determination may be brought.” ;
                        (b) for subsection (2), there shall be substituted the following
                            subsection—
                                     ,**(2) Subsection (1) above shall not have effect if an appeal
                                  is brought before the expiry of the period there mentioned,
                                  but if the ,appeal is withdrawn or the court upholds the
                                  authority’s determination, the appellant shall be deemed to
                       v          have withdrawn his application on the date o f the withdrawal
                                  o f his appeal or o f the court’s determination.”;
           Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987          c. 27                     17


     (c) in subsection (3), for the words “ notice is given of an appeal”           P a r t II
         there shall be substituted the words “ an appeal is brought” , the
         words subject to subsection (4) below,” shall be omitted and
         for the words “ Secretary of State" there shall be substituted the
         word “court"; and
     (d) subsections (4) and (5) shall be omitted.

                Grounds involving serious risk to spectators

   23.—(1) For section 10 of the principal Act (emergency procedure by            Special procedure
magistrates’ court order), there shall be substituted the following               in case o f serious
section—                                                                          risk: prohibition
                                                                                  notices.
"Special         10.—(1) If the local authority are of the opinion that the
procedure in
case of
              admission   of spectators to a sports ground or any part o f a
serious risk: sports ground involves or will involve a risk to them so serious
prohibition   that, until steps have been taken to reduce it to a reasonable
noticcs.      level, admission of spectators to the ground or that part o f the
              ground ought to be prohibited or restricted, the authority
              may serve a notice (in this Act referred to as a “prohibition
              notice”) on such persons as are specified in subsection (6)
              below.
                 (2) A prohibition notice shall—
                    (a) state that the local authority are o f that opinion;
                    (b) specify the matters which i n their opinion give or, as
                         the case may be, will give rise to that risk; and
                    (c) direct that no, or no more than a specified number
                         of, spectators shall be admitted to, or to a specified
                         part of, the sports ground until the specified matters
                         have been remedied.
                 (3) A prohibition notice may prohibit or restrict the
              admission of spectators generally or on a specified occasion.
                 (4) A prohibition notice may include directions as to the
              steps which will have to be taken to reduce the risk to a
              reasonable level and these may require alterations or
              additions to the ground or things to be done or omitted which
              would contravene the terms or conditions of a safety
              certificate for the ground or for any stand at the ground.
                 (5) No prohibition notice shall include directions
              compliance with which would require the provision of the
              services at the sports ground of any members of a police force
              unless the chief officer of police of the force has consented to
              their inclusion and the extent of the provision of their services
              is reserved for his determination.
                 (6) A prohibition notice shall be served on the persons
              specified in the following paragraphs in the circumstances
              specified in those paragraphs, that is to say—
                  (a) if a general safety certificate is in operation   for the
                      ground, on the holder o f it;
                  (b) if the prohibition or restriction applies          to an
                      occasion in respect o f which a special            safety
                      certificate for the ground is in operation,       on the
                      holder of it;
18               c. 27       Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


     Part   II                     (c) if no safety certificate is in operation for the ground,
                                        on the person who appears to the local authority to
                                        be responsible for the management of the ground;
                                   (d) if the prohibition or restriction applies to an
                                        occasion and no safety certificate is in operation for
                                        the ground, on each person who appears to the local
                                        authority to be responsible for organising an
                                        activity at the ground on that occasion;
                                   (e) if a general safety certificate is in operation for a
                                        stand at the ground, on the holder of it;
                                   (f) if the prohibition or restriction applies to an
                                        occasion in respect of which a special safety
                                       certificate for a stand at the ground is in operation,
                                        on the holder of it;
                             but the validity of a prohibition notice served on any person
                             under aiiy o f the foregoing provisions shall not be affected by
                             a failure to serve another person required to be served with
                             such a notice under those provisions.
                                (7) A prohibition or restriction contained in a prohibition
                             notice shall take effect immediately it is served if the authority
                             are of the opinion, and so state in the notice, that the risk to
                             spectators is or, as the case may be, will be imminent, and in
                             any other case shall take effect at the end o f a period specified
                             in the notice.
                                (8) A copy of any prohibition notice shall be sent by the
                             local authority to each o f the following, namely—
                                   (a) the chief officer o f police; and
                                   (b) where the local authority is in Greater London or a
                                       metropolitan county, the fire authority, or, in any
                                       other case, the building authority.
                               (9) The local authority who have served a prohibition
                            notice may, in any case where it appears appropriate to them
                            to do so, amend the prohibition notice by notice served on the
                            persons specified in subsection (6) above (subject to the saving
                            in that subsection), and copies shall be sent to the officer and
                            authorities specified in subsection (8) above.
                               (10) A notice under subsection (9) above amending a
                            prohibition notice shall specify the date on which the
                            amendment is to come into operation.
                               (11) Where a notice has been served under subsection (1) or
                            (9) above the local authority may withdraw the notice at any
                            time.”
                    (2)    In consequence o f those amendments section 12 o f the principal Act
                 (offences) shall be amended as follows—
                       (a) in subsection (l)(d) (contravention of certificate terms), after
                            the w o rd ; “contravened” there shall be inserted the words
                            “otherwise than in pursuance of a prohibition notice” ;
                       (b) in subsection (1 )(e) (admission of spectators in contravention of
                           section 10 order), for the words “an order” there shall be
                           substituted the words “a prohibition notice” ; and
                      (c) in subsection (4) (due diligence defence), for the word “order”
                           there shall be substituted the words “prohibition notice” .
              Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987       c. 27


   (3) In section 17(1) (definitions)—                                              P a r t II
      (a) after the definition o f “qualified person” there shall be inserted
           the following—
         “ "prohibition notice” has the meaning assigned to it by section
            10(1);” , and
      (b) in the definition o f “ safety certificate” , after the word
           “certificate” there shall be inserted the words “ , except with
           reference to a stand at a sports ground,” and at the end there
           shall be inserted the words “and, where it refers to a stand,
           means a safety certificate (whether general or special) under
           Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
            1987” .
  24.    After section 10 of the principal Act there shall be inserted theProhibition
following section—                                                        notices: appeals.

••Appeals         io a .— (1) Any person aggrieved by a prohibition notice
prohibition   may aPPealto the court against the notice if he does so within
notices.      such period as the Secretary o f State may by regulations
              prescribe.
                 (2) Subsection (1) above applies to any amendment of a
              prohibition notice as it applies to the prohibition notice in its
              original form.
                  (3) An appeal to the court under this section in England and
              Wales shall be by way of complaint for an order, the making
              of the complaint shall be deemed to be the bringing of the
              appeal and the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 shall apply to          1980 c.43.
              the proceedings.
                 (4) An appeal to the court under this section in Scotland
              shall be by summary application.
                 (5) On an appeal under subsection (1) above, the court may
              either cancel or affirm the notice or, in the case of an appeal
              against an amendment, annul or affirm the amendment and,
              if it affirms the notice or the notice as amended, as the case
              may be, may do so either in its original form or as amended,
              as the case may be, or with such modifications of the notice as
              the court may in the circumstances think fit.
                 (6) Where an appeal is brought under this section against a
              prohibition notice or an amendment of it, the bringing of the
              appeal shall not have the effect o f suspending the operation of
              the notice or the notice as amended, as the case may be.
                 (7) In England and Wales any o f the following persons may
              appeal to the Crown Court against an order under this
              section, namely—
                     (a) any person aggrieved by the notice;
                     (b) the local authority;
                     (c) the chief officer of police; and
                     (d) where the local authority is in Greater London or a
                          metropolitan county, the fire authority, or, in any
                          other case, the building authority.
                 (8) In Scotland any of the following persons may appeal
              against an order made in an appeal under this section,
              namely—
20                    c. 27        Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


       P art II                         (a) any person aggrieved by the notice;
                                        (b) the local authority;
                                        (c) the chief officer of police; and
                                        (d) the building authority;
                                   notwithstanding that that person was not party to the
                                   proceedings on the application.
                                     (9)    The persons who are, for the purposes of this section,
                                   “aggrieved” by a prohibition notice are the persons on whom,
                                   in accordance with section 10(6) of this Act, the notice is
                                   required to be served.”

                                        E nforcem ent: inspections and obstruction

Enforcement:            25.—(1) After the section 10A of the principal Act inserted by section
inspections and       24 above there shall be inserted the following section—
offence o f
obstruction.          ••Enforce-      10B.—(1) It shall be the duty of every local authority to
                      menl-        enforce within their area the provisions of this Act and of
                                   regulations made under it and for that purpose to arrange for
                                   the periodical inspection of designated sports grounds; but
                                   nothing in this subsection shall be taken to authorise a local
                                   authority in Scotland to institute proceedings for an offence.
                                      (2) In performing the duty imposed by subsection (1) above
                                   so far as it requires designated sports grounds in their areas to
                                   be inspected, local authorities shall act in accordance with
                                   such guidance as the Secretary of State may give them.
                                      (3) For the purposes of subsection (1) above, “periodical”
                                   means at least once in every twelve months.”
                          (2)    In section 12(6)(d) of the principal Act (obstruction of person
                       exercising powers of entry and inspection under that Act to constitute an
                       offence), for the word “wilfully” there shall be substituted the word
                       “intentionally” .

                                                            P art       III
                                         Safety   of   Sta n d s   at   S ports G   rounds


Safety certificates      26.—(1) This Part applies in relation to a sports ground which—
for Stands at               (a) provides covered accommodation in stands for spectators, and
sports grounds.
                            (b) is not a designated sports ground.
                         (2) A certificate under this Part (referred to as a “safety certificate”) is
                       required in respect o f the use, at a sports ground in relation to which this
                       Part applies, o f each stand which provides covered accommodation for
                       500 or more spectators to view activities at the ground; but one certificate
                       may be issued in respect o f several such stands.
                          (3) The Secretary o f State may by order amend subsection (2) above by
                       substituting a smaller number for the number for the time being specified
                       in it.
                          (4) The power to make an order under subsection (3) above is
                       exercisable by statutory instrument which shall be subject to annulment
                       in pursuance o f a resolution of either House of Parliament.
                          (5) A stand in respect of the use of which a safety certificate under this
                       Part is required is referred to in this Part as a "regulated stand” .
            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987           c.27                      21



   (6 ) It shall be the function of the local authority to determine whether           P a r t III
any, and if so, which of the stands at a sports ground in their area is a
regulated stand, and to issue safety certificates.
   (7) In determining whether any stand at a sports ground in their area
is a regulated stand the local authority may apply any criteria which are
appropriate for that purpose.
   (8 ) In discharging their function of determination as respects the stands
at sports grounds in their areas, local authorities shall act in accordance
with such guidance as the Secretary of State may give them.,
   (9) A final determination of a local authority that a stand at a sports
ground is a regulated stand shall be conclusive of the question subject
only to an appeal under section 30 below.
   (10) A safety certificate in respect of the use of a regulated stand at a
sports ground may be either—
       (a) a certificate in respect of the use of the stand for viewing an
            activity or a number of activities specified in the certificate
            during an indefinite period commencing with a date so specified;
            or
       (b) a certificate in respect of the use of the stand for viewing an
            activity or a number of activities specified in the certificate on an
            occasion or series of occasions so specified;
and any reference in this Part to a safety certificate’s being “ for” a stand
is a reference to its covering the use of the stand for viewing an activity or
activities during an indefinite period or, as the case may be, on an
occasion or occasions.
   (11) In this Part—
       “final” , in relation to a determination, is to be construed in
            accordance with section 28 below;
      “general safety certificate” means such a safety certificate for a stand
            as is mentioned in subsection ( 10 )(a) above;
      “special safety certificate” means such a safety certificate for a stand
            as is mentioned in subsection ( 10 )(b) above; and
      “stand” , in relation to a sports ground, means an artificial structure
            (not merely temporary) which provides accommodation for
            spectators and is wholly or partly covered by a roof, and, in
            relation to the number of spectators in a stand provided with
            cpvered accommodation, “covered” means covered by the roof
            or other part of the structure which constitutes the stand.

   27.—(1) A safety certificate for a regulated stand shall contain such            Contents o f safety
terms and conditions as the local authority consider necessary or                   certificates for
expedient to secure reasonable safety in the stand when it is in use for            stands.
viewing the specified activity or activities at the ground, and the terms and
conditions may be such as to involve alterations or additions to the stand
or any installations in or serving the stand.
   (2) In so far as an order under section 39 below so requires as respects
any class o f stand at sports grounds, a safety certificate shall include such
terms and conditions as may be provided for in the order.
   (3) No condition of a safety certificate shall require the provision o f the
services in or in the vicinity of the stand of any members of a police force
unless the extent of the provision of their services is reserved for the
determination of the chief officer of police of the force.
22                     c. 27       Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987

        P a r t III
                         (4) Without prejudice to subsection ( 1) above, a safety certificate for a
                       regulated stand may include a condition that the following records shall
                       be kept—
                            (a) records of the number of spectators accommodated in covered
                                accommodation in the stand; and
                            (b) records relating to the maintenance of safety in the stand.
                           (5) A general safety certificate shall contain or have attached to it a plan
                       of the stand to which it applies and the area in the immediate vicinity of
                       it, and .the terms and conditions in the certificate or in any special safety
                       certificate issued for the stand shall be framed, where appropriate, by
                       reference to that plan.
                          (6 ) A safety certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground may
                       include different terms and conditions in relation to different activities
                       taking place at the ground.
                         (7) Nothing in a safety certificate for a regulated stand at a sports
                       ground shall derogate from any requirements imposed by regulations
1975 c.52.             under section 6 (2 ) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

Issue o f                2?’ (U F ° r ^ e purposes of this Part, the following persons qualify for
certificates.
                       the issue of a safety certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground,
                       that is to say—
                           (a) the person who qualifies for the issue of a general safety
                               certificate is the person who is responsible for the management
                               of the ground;and
                           (b) the person who qualifies for the issue of a special safety
                               certificate for viewing an activity from the stand on any
                               occasion is the person who is responsible for organising that
                               activity.
                         (2) The local authority for an area shall, in respect of any stand at a
                      sports ground in their area which appears to them to be a regulated stand,
                      make a preliminary determination whether or not that stand is a
                      regulated stand and, if they determine that it is, they shall serve a notice
                      on the person who appears to them to qualify for the issue of a general
                      safety certificate stating their determination and the effects of it.
                         (3) Subject to subsection (4) below, a preliminary determination that a
                      stand at a sports ground is a regulated stand shall become final at the end
                      of the period of two months beginning with the date of the notice of it.
                         (4) A local authority may revoke a determination of theirs that a stand
                      at a sports ground is a regulated stand—
                           (a) at any time before it becomes final, or
                           (b) on considering an application for a general safety certificate for
                               the stand, whether the determination has or has not become
                               final.           .

                        (5) A local authority may, at any time before a determination of theirs
                      that a stand at a sports ground is a regulated stand becomes final,
                      withdraw the notice of it and serve a further notice under subsection (2 )
                      above on another person, but if they do so the period of two months at
                      the end of which the determination becomes final shall be treated as
                      beginning with the date of the further notice.' •
            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987         c. 27                        23


  (6 ) If a local authority receive an application for a general safety              P art III
certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground in their area, it shall be
their duty—
      (a) if they have not already done so, to determine whether the stand
           is a regulated stand and, if they determine that it is, to determine
           whether the applicant is the person who qualifies for the issue of
           the general safety certificate for it;
      (b) if they have made a determination that the stand is a regulated
           stand and do not decide to revoke it, to determine whether the
           applicant is the person who qualifies for the issue of the general
           safety certificate for it;
and a determination made under paragraph (a) above that a stand is a
regulated stand is, when made, a final determination.
  (7) If the local authority, on an application made under subsection (6 )
above in relation to a stand which they have determined or determine is a
regulated stand, determine that the applicant is the person who qualifies
for the issue of the general safety certificate they shall (if no such
certificate is in operation) issue to him such a certificate.
   (8 ) If a local authority receive an application for a special safety
certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground in their area as respects
which stand a general safety certificate is in operation, it shall be their
duty to determine whether the applicant qualifies for the issue of a special
safety certificate for it and, if they determine that he does, they may issue
to him a special safety certificate.
  (9) The local authority shall, if they determine that an applicant for a
safety certificate does not qualify for the issue of the certificate, serve on
him a notice stating their determination.
  (10) The local authority shall send a copy of an application for a safety
certificate for a regulated stand at a sports, ground to the chief officer of
police and where the local authority is in Greater London or a
metropolitan county, the fire authority or, in any other case, the building
authority for the area in which it is situated, and shall consult them about
the terms and conditions to be included in the certificate.
   (11) The local authority may, by notice, require an applicant for a
safety certificate to furnish them within such reasonable time as they may
specify in the notice with such information and such plans of the ground
as they consider necessary for the purpose of discharging their functions
in respect of the issue of safety certificates for the regulated stands at the
ground.
  (12) If an applicant for a safety certificate fails to comply with a
requirement under subsection ( 11 ) above within the time specified by the
local authority, or within such further time as they may allow, he shall be
deemed to have withdrawn his application.

  29.—(1) The local authority who have issued a safety certificate for a          Amendment,
regulated stand at a sports ground—                                               cancellation etc.
                                                                                  o f certificates.
    (a) shall, if at any time it appears to them that the stand in respect
         of which it was issued is not or has ceased to be a regulated
;        stand, revoke their previous determination and, by notice to its
         holder, cancel the certificate;
    (b) may, in any case where it appears appropriate to them to do so,
         amend the certificate by notice to its holder; or
24                c. 27         Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


      P art III           (c) may replace the certificate.
                    (2) A safety certificate may be cancelled, amended or replaced under
                  subsection ( 1) above either on the application of the holder or without
                  such an application.
                    (3) Section 27 above shall apply on the amendment or replacement of a
                  safety certificate.
                     (4) A notice under subsection (l)(b) above amending a general safety
                  certificate shall specify the date on which the amendment to which it
                  relates is to come into operation, and the date so specified may be a date
                  later than the date of issue of the notice.
                     (5) If the local authority receive an application for the transfer of a
                  safety certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground from the holder
                  to some other person it shall be their duty to determine whether that
                  person would, if he made an application for the purpose, qualify for the
                  issue of the certificate; and if they determine that he would, they may
                  transfer the certificate to him and shall in any case notify him of their
                  determination.
                    (6 ) An application under subsection (5) above may be made either by
                  the holder of the safety certificate or by the person to whom it is proposed
                  that it should be transferred.
                      (7) The local authority shall send a copy of an application for the
                   transfer of a safety certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground to
                   the chief officer of police and where the local authority is in Greater
                   London or a metropolitan county the fire authority or, in any other case,
                   the building authority for the area in which it is situated.
                     (8 ) The local authority shall consult the chief officer of police and where
                   the local authority is in Greater London or a metropolitan county, the fire
                   authority or, in any other case, the building authority about any proposal
                   to amend, replace or transfer a safety certificate.
                     (9) The holder of a safety certificate may surrender it to the local
                   authority, and it shall thereupon cease to have effect.
                     (10) The local authority may cancel a safety certificate if the holder dies
                   or (if a body corporate) is dissolved.

 Appeals.            30.—(i) A person who has been served with a notice of a
                   determination, which is or has become a final determination, of a local
                   authority that any stand at a sports ground is a regulated stand may
                   appeal against the determination to the court.
                     (2) Any person who, on an application for the issue or transfer to him
                   of a safety certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground, has been
                   served with a notice of the determination of a local authority that he does
                   not or, in the case of an application for a transfer, would not qualify for
                   the issue of the certificate may appeal against the determination to the
                   court.
                     (3) An applicant for a special safety certificate for a regulated stand at
                   a sports ground may also appeal to the court against a refusal of his
                   application on grounds other than a determination that he does not
                   qualify for the issue of the certificate.
            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987          c. 27                  25


  (4) An interested party may appeal to the court against—                         P a r t III

     (a) the inclusion of anything in, or the omission of anything from,
         a safety certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground; or
     (b) the refusal of the local authority to amend or replace a safety
         certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground.
  (5) Any appeal under this section shall be brought within the period
prescribed under section 31 below.
  (6 ) An appeal to the court under this section in England and Wales shall
be by way of complaint for an order, the making of the complaint shall be
deemed to be the bringing of the appeal and the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 c.43.
1980 shall apply to the proceedings. .
  (7) An appeal to the court under this section in Scotland shall be by
summary application.
  (8 ) In this section “ interested party”, in relation to a safety certificate,
includes—
      (a) the holder of the certificate;
      (b) any other person who is or may be concerned in ensuring
           compliance with the terms and conditions of the certificate;
      (c) the chief officer of police; and
      (d) where the local authority is in Greater London or a
           metropolitan county, the fire authority or, in any other case, the
           building authority.
  (9) Subject to subsection (10) below, if a local authority serve on any
applicant for a safety certificate a notice of a determination of theirs that
he does not qualify for the issue of the certificate, he shall be deemed to
have withdrawn his application on the expiry of the period within which
an appeal must, by virtue of subsection (5) above, be brought.
  (10) Subsection (9) above shall not have effect if an appeal is brought
before the expiry of the period referred to in that subsection, but if the
appeal is withdrawn or the court upholds the authority’s determination,
the appellant shall be deemed to have withdrawn his application on the
date of the withdrawal of his appeal or of the court’s order on the appeal.
   (11) Where an appeal is brought against the inclusion of any term or
condition in a safety certificate (whether it was included in the certificate
originally or only on its amendment or replacement), the operation of
that term or condition shall be suspended until the court has determined
the appeal.
  (12) In England and Wales any of the following persons may appeal to
the Crown Court against an order under this section, namely—
     (a) the local authority; and
     (b) any interested party.
  (13) In Scotland any o f the following persons may appeal against an
order under this section,'namely—
    . (a) the local authority; and
      (b) any interested party,
notwithstanding that that person was not party to the proceedings on the
application.         •‘ .
26                     c. 27        Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


      P art III          31.—(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations—
Regulations.               (a) prescribe the procedure (subject to the provisions of this Part)
                                for the issue, cancellation, amendment, replacement and
                                transfer of safety certificates for regulated stands at sports
                                grounds and the particulars to be given in applications for their
                                issue, amendment, replacement or transfer;
                           (b) authorise local authorities to determine, subject to such limits
                                or in accordance with such provisions as may be prescribed by
                                the regulations, the fees (if any) to be charged in respect of
                                applications for the issue, amendment, replacement or transfer
                                of safety certificates or in respect of applications for the
                                cancellation of safety certificates for stands which have ceased
                                to be regulated stands; and
                            (c) prescribe the time within which appeals under section 30 above
                                 are to be brought.
                         (2) Regulations under this section may contain such incidental and
                       supplementary provisions as the Secretary of State thinks expedient.
                          (3) The power to make regulations under this section is exercisable by
                       statutory instrument which shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of
                       a resolution of either House of Parliament.
                          (4) It shall be the duty of the Secretary of State, before making
                        regulations under this section, to consult with such persons or bodies of
                        persons as appear to him requisite.

A lterations and           32.—(1) If while a general safety certificate for a regulated stand at a
extensions.             sports ground is in operation it is proposed to alter or extend the stand or
                        its installations, and the alteration or extension is likely to affect the safety
                        of persons in the stand, the holder of the certificate shall, before the
                        carrying out of the proposals is begun, give notice of the proposals to the
                        local authority.
                          (2)    Subsection (1) above in particular requires notice when it is
                        proposed to alter the entrances to or exits from a regulated stand at a
                        sports ground (including any means of escape in caise of fire or other
                        emergency) or the means of access to any such entrances or exits.

 Exclusion o f other      33.—(1) While a general safety certificate is in force under this Part for
 statutory              a regulated stand at a sports ground, the following provisions shall not
 requirements.          apply to the stand, that is to say—
 53 & 54 Viet. c.59.         (a) section 37(1) of the Public Health Acts Amendment Act 1890
                                   (platforms for public occasions);
 1971 c.40.                  (b) any provision of the Fire Precautions Act 1971 or of a fire
                                   certificate issued under that Act in so far as it relates to any
                                   matter in relation to which requirements are imposed by the
                                   terms and conditions of the safety certificate;
 1$82 c.45.                  (c) . section 89 of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 (which
                                   makes provision as to the safety of platforms, stands and similar
                                   structures) in so far as that section relates to any matter in
                                   relation to which requirements are imposed by the terms and
                                   conditions of the safety certificate;              _
 1984 c.55.                    (d) sections 24 and 71 o f the Building Act 1984 (exits, entrances etc.
                                   in the case o f certain public and other buildings); and
           Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport A ct 1987       c. 27                    27


     (e) any provision of a local Act in so far as it relates to any matter       P a r t III
         in relation to which requirements are imposed by the terms and
         conditions of the safety certificate.
   (2) Where an enactment provides for the licensing of premises of any
class or description and the authority responsible for licences thereunder
is required or authorised to impose terms, conditions or restrictions in
connection with such licences, then, so long as there is in operation with
respect to the premises a safety certificate under this Part covering the use
of the premises by reason of which a licence under that enactment is
required, any term, condition or restriction imposed with respect to those
premises in connection with any licence under that enactment shall be of
no effect in so far as it relates to any matter in relation to which
requirements are imposed by the terms and conditions of the certificate
under this Part.
   (3) A person required by or under a local Act to do anything that would
involve a contravention of the terms or conditions of a safety certificate
under this Part shall not be treated as having contravened that Act if he
fails to do it.

   34.—(1) It shall be the duty of every local authority to enforce within      Enforcement.
their area the provisions of this Part and for that purpose to arrange for
the periodical inspection of sports grounds at which there are regulated
stands, but nothing in this subsection shall be taken to authorise a local
authority in Scotland to institute proceedings for an offence.
   (2)    In performing the duty imposed by subsection (1) above so far as it
requires sports grounds in their areas to be inspected, local authorities
shall act in accordance with such guidance as the Secretary of State may
give them.

  35. A  person authorised by—                                                  Powers of entry
                                                                                and inspection.
    (a)   the local authority,
    (b)   the chief officer of police, or
    (c)   where the local authority is in Greater London or a
          metropolitan county, the fire authority or, in any other case, the
          building authority,
may, on production if so required of his authority, enter a sports ground
at any reasonable time, and make such inspection of the stands and such
inquiries relating to them as he considers necessary for the purposes of
this Part, and in particular may examine records of the number of
spectators accommodated, and the maintenance of safety, in the
regulated stands at the ground, and take copies of such records.

  36.—(1) Subject to subsections (2), (5) and (6 ) below, if—                   Offences.
    (a) spectators are admitted to a regulated stand at a sports ground
         on an occasion when no safety certificate which covers their use
         o f the stand is in operation for it, or
    (b) any term or condition of a safety certificate for a regulated stand
         at a sports ground is contravened,
any responsible person and, if a safety certificate is in operation, the
holder of the certificate, shall be guilty of an offence.
  (2) No offence under subsection (l)(a) above is committed if—
28                          Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


     P art III       (a) the determination that the stand is a regulated stand is not a
                         final one, or
                     (b) an application has been made for a general safety certificate for
                         the stand and has not been withdrawn or deemed to have been
                         withdrawn.
                    (3) In subsection (1) above “ responsible person” means the person who
                 is concerned in the management of the sports ground or of the regulated
                 stand in question or in the organisation of any activity taking place at the
                 ground at the time when an offence is alleged to have been committed.
                    (4) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) above shall be
                 liable—
                       (a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding the statutory
                           maximum; or
                      (b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine or to imprisonment for a
                          term not exceeding two years or both.
                   (5) Where any person is charged with an offence under subsection (1)
                 above it shall be a defence to prove—
                      (a) that the spectators were admitted or the contravention of the
                          certificate in question took place without his consent; and
                      (b) that he took all reasonable precautions, and exercised all due
                          diligence to avoid the commission of such an offence by himself
                          or any person under his control.
                    (6 ) Where any person is charged as a responsible person with an offence
                 under subsection (l)(a) above it shall be a defence to prove that he did not
                 know of the determination that the stand in relation to which the offence
                 is alleged to have been committed is a regulated stand.

                    (7) Any person who—
                      (a) in purporting to carry out a requirement under section 28(11)
                          above or for the purpose of procuring a safety certificate or the
                          cancellation, amendment, replacement or transfer of a safety
                          certificate, knowingly or recklessly makes a false statement or
                          knowingly or recklessly produces, furnishes, signs or otherwise
                          makes use of a document containing a false statement; or
                      (b) fails to give a notice required by section 32(1) above; or
                       (c) intentionally obstructs any person in the exercise of powers
                           under section 35 above, or without reasonable excuse refuses,
                           neglects or otherwise fails to answer any question asked by any
                           person in the exercise of such powers,
                  shall be guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine
                  not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale.
                    (8 ) Where an offence under this Part which has been committed by a
                  body corporate is proved to have been committed with the consent or
                  connivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of, a
                  director, manager, secretary or other similar officer o f the body
                  corporate, or any person who was purporting to act in that capacity, he,
                  as well as the body corporate, shall be guilty of that offence and be liable
                  to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
           Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987        c. 27                       29


  (9)    Where the affairs of a body corporate are managed by its members,              P a rt III
subsection (8 ) above shall apply to the acts and defaults of a member in
connection with his functions of management as if he were a director of
the body corporate.

  37. Except in so far as this Part otherwise expressly provides, and            Civil and other
subject to section 18 of the Interpretation Act .1978 (offences under two or     liability,
more laws), the provisions of this Part shall not be construed as—                    c-30-
     (a) conferring a right of action in any civil proceedings (other than
          proceedings for the recovery of a fine) in respect of any
          contravention of this Part or of any of the terms or conditions
           of a safety certificate thereunder; or
     (b) affecting any requirement or restriction imposed by or under
           any other enactment whether contained in a public general Act
           or in a local or private Act; or
     (c) derogating from any right of action or other remedy (whether
           civil or criminal) in proceedings instituted otherwise than under
           this Part.

   3 8 . —( l ) Any notice or other document required or authorised by or by     Service of
virtue of this Part to be served on any person may be served on him either       documents,
by delivering it to him or by leaving it at his proper address or by sending
it by post..
  (2) Any notice or other document so required or authorised to be served
on a body corporate or a firm shall be duly served if it is served on the
secretary or clerk of that body or a partner of that firm.
   (3) For the purposes of this section, and of section 7 of the
 Interpretation Act 1978 (service of documents) in its application to this
 section, the proper address of a person, in the case of a secretary or clerk
 of a body corporate shall be that of the registered or principal office of
 that body, in the case of a partner of a firm shall be that of the principal
 office of the firm, and in any other case shall be the last known address of
 the person to be served.

    39.—(1) The Secretary of State may, as respects any specified class of        Power to modify
 stand at sports grounds, by order modify the provisions of this Part in          Part j o r classes of
                                                                                  stand.
 their application to stands of that class.
   (2) An order under this section may—
      (a) make different modifications in relation to different activities
          taking place at sports grounds; and
      (b) include such supplementary and transitional provision as the
          Secretary of State thinks expedient.
    (3) The power to make an order under this section is exercisable by
 statutory instrument which shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of
 a resolution of either House of Parliament.
   (4) It shall be the duty of the Secretary of State, before, making an order
 under this section, to consult with such persons or bodies of persons as
 appear to him requisite.

    40.—(1) Sections 26 to 29 above bind the Crown, but shall have effect,        Application to
 in relation to premises occupied by the Crown, with the substitution of a        Crown,
 reference to the Secretary of State for any reference to the local authority.
30                  c. 27      Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


      P a r t III     (2)    Nothing in this Part shall be taken to authorise the entry of premises
                    occupied by the Crown.

Interpretation.       41. In this Part—
                        “building authority” means—
                                     (a) in England outside Greater London and the
                                  metropolitan counties, or in Wales, the district council;
                                     (b) in Scotland, the local authority within the meaning of
1959 c.24.                        the Building (Scotland) Act 1959;
                         “ the court” means, in relation to a sports ground in England and
                               Wales, a magistrates’ court acting for the petty sessions area in
                               which it is situated and, in relation to a sports ground in
                               Scotland, the sheriff court within whose jurisdiction it is
                               situated;
                         “ general safety certificate” has the meaning assigned to it by section
                               26(11) above;
                         “ local authority” means—
                                      (a) in Greater London, the London borough council or the
                                   Common Council of the City of London;
                                      (b) in England, in the metropolitan counties, the district
                                   council;
                                      (c) in England outside Greater London and the
                                   metropolitan counties, or in Wales, the county council;
                                      (d) in Scotland, the regional or islands council;
                          “means of access” includes means of access from a highway or, in
                                Scotland, from a road;
                          “notice” means a notice in writing;
                          “ safety” does not include safety from danger inherent in
                                participation in a sporting or competitive activity;
                          “safety certificate” has the meaning assigned to it by section 26(2)
                                above;
                           “special safety certificate” has the meaning assigned to it by section
                                26(11) above;
                           “spectator” means any person occupying accommodation provided
                                in stands for spectators at a sports ground;
                           “sports ground” and “designated sports ground” have the same
  1975 c.52.                    meaning as in the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, and
                           “stand” has the meaning assigned to it by section 26(11) above; and
                                 “ regulated stand” has the meaning assigned to it by section
                                 26(5) above.
           Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987

                                                                                        P a r t III
                                  P a r t IV

                         I n d o o r S ports L icences

                      Licensing in England and Wales

   a'}__( i \ Tn Schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963 (licensing Licensing o f
of certain public entertainments in London), after paragraph 3 there shall JJ.e°°JesspJ r s
be inserted the following paragraphs                                       London.
                                                                                    1963 c.33.
                           “Indoor sports licences
                  3 A.—(1) Subject to sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) below, no
             premises in a London borough or the City of London shall
             be used for any entertainment which consists of any sporting
             event to which the public are invited as spectators (a sports
             entertainment” ) except under and in accordance with the
             terms of a licence granted under this paragraph by the
             Council.
                   (2) Sub-paragraph (1) above does not require a licence in
              respect of any occasion when the sporting event which
              constitutes the entertainment is not the principal purpose tor
              which the premises are used on that occasion; but this
              provision does not apply in relation to a sports complex.
                    (3) Sub-paragraph (1) above does not appiy to a sports
              entertainment held in a pleasure fair.
                    (4) The Council may grant to any applicant, and from time
               to time renew, a licence for the use of any premises specified
               in it for any sports entertainment on such terms and
               conditions and subject to such restrictions as may be so
               specified.
                     (5) Subject to the next following sub-paragraph and to
               paragraph 19(3) of this Schedule, a licence granted under this
               paragraph shall, unless previously cancelled under paragraph
                8 or revoked under paragraph 10(4) of this Schedule, regain
                in force for one year or for such shorter period specified in the
                licence as the Council think fit.
                     (6 ) The Council may grant a licence under this paragraph
                in respect of such one or more particular occasions only as
                may be specified in the licence, and a licence granted by virtue
                of this sub-paragraph is hereafter in this Schedule referred to
                as an “ occasional sports licence” .
                      (7) Where a licence has been granted under this paragraph
                 to any person the Council may if they think fit transfer that
                 licence to any other person on the application of that other
                 person or the holder of the licence.
                      (8 ) In this paragraph—
                            “ premises” means any permanent or temporary
                                  building and any tent or inflatable structure and
                                  includes a part of a building where the building is
                                  a sports complex but does not include a part of
                                  any other building;
                             “ sporting event” means any contest, exhibition or
                                  display of any sport;
                             “ sports complex” means a building -
32                 c. 27     Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


      P art IV                          (a) which provides accommodation and facilities
                                             for both those engaging in sport and
                                             spectators, and
                                        (b) the parts of which are so arranged that one or
                                             more sports can be engaged in simultaneously
                                             in different parts of the building; and
                                      “sport” includes any game in which physical skill is
                                           the predominant factor and any form of physical
                                           recreation which is also engaged in for purposes
                                           of competition or display, except dancing (in any
                                           form).
                                 3B.—(1) An applicant for the grant, renewal or transfer of
                              a licence under paragraph 3A of this Schedule other than an
                              occasional sports licence shall give to the Council, to the
                              commissioner of police in whose district the premises to
                              which the application relates are situated and to the fire
                              authority not less than twenty-one days’ notice of his
                              intention to make the application.
                                 (2) An applicant for the grant, renewal or transfer of an
                              occasional sports licence shall give to the Council and the fire
                              authority not less than fourteen days’ notice of his intention
                              to make the application.
                                 3C. The person making an application for the grant,
                              renewal or transfer of a licence under paragraph 3A of this
                              Schedule shall on making the application pay to the Council
                              such fee as the Council may fix.”
                     (2) The consequential amendments of the said Schedule 12 specified in
                   Schedule 3 to this Act shall also have effect.

Licensing o f        43. In Schedule 1 to the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions)
indoor sports      Act 1982 (licensing o f certain public entertainments), for paragraph 2
premises outside   (certain sports) there shall be substituted the following paragraph—
L ondon.
1982 c. 30.                          “2.—(1) Subject to sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) below, no
                                  premises shall be used for any entertainment which consists
                                  of any sporting event to' which the public are invited as
                                  spectators (a “ sports entertainment”) except under and in
                                  accordance with the terms o f a licence granted under this
                                  paragraph by the appropriate authority.
                                     (2) Sub-paragraph (1) above does not require a licence in
                                  respect of any occasion when the sporting event which
                                  constitutes the entertainment is not the principal purpose for
                                  which the premises are used on that occasion; but this
                                  provision does not apply iiv relation to a sports complex.
                                     (3) Sub-paragraph .(1) above does not .apply to a sports
                                  entertainment held in a pleasure fair.
                             ;       (4) The appropriate authority may grant to any applicant,
                                ,,and from tim e.tp time.renew^.a jicenbe for the use of any
                               . .premises specified in it for any ,sports entertainment on such
                                  terms and.conditions and subject to such restrictions as may
                                  be so specified.            i-ciio
                                     (5)    The appropriate authority may grant a licence under
                                  this paragraph in -re sp ec to fsu c h one or more particular
                                  occasions only as may be specified in the licence.
           Fire Safely and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987

                                                                                    P a r t IV
              (6 ) In this paragraph—
                   “premises” means any permanent or temporary
                         building and any tent or inflatable structure and
                         includes a part of a building where the building is
                         a sports complex but does not include a part of
                         any other building;
                    “sporting event” means any contest, exhibition or
                         display of any sport;
                    “ sports complex” means a building—
                       (a) which provides accommodation and facilities
                            for both those engaging in sport and
                            spectators, and
                       (b) the parts of which are so arranged that one or
                            more sports can be engaged in simultaneously
                            in different parts of the building; and
                    “ sport” includes any game in which physical skill is
                          the predominant factor and any form of physical
                          recreation which is also engaged in for purposes
                          of competition or display, except dancing (in any
                          form).”

                            Licensing in Scotland

  44.        (l) After section 41 of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 Licensing o f
                                                                                   indoor sports
(“ the 1982 Act”) there shall be inserted the following section—                   premises in
" In d o o r        41A.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) below, a licence to be Scotland.
sports           known as an “ indoor sports entertainment licence” shall be 1982 c.45.
ment‘licences, required for the use of premises as a place of public sports
                 entertainment.
                    (2) Subsection (1) above shall not apply to any occasion on
                 which the entertainment of the public by the sport is not the
                 principal purpose for which the premises are used but this
                 provision does not apply in relation to a sports complex.
                    (3) Without prejudice to paragraph 5 of Schedule 1 to this
                  Act, a licensing authority may attach conditions to an indoor
                  sports entertainment licence—
                       (a) restricting the use of the premises to a specified kind
                             or specified kinds of public sports entertainment;
                   (b) limiting the number o f persons to be admitted to the
                        premises;
                   (c) fixing the days and times when the premises may be
                        open for the purposes of public sports
                        entertainment.
                (4) In this section—
                      “premises” means any permanent or temporary
                           building and any tent or inflatable structure and
                           includes a part of a building where the building is
                           a sports complex but does not include a part of
                           any other building;
                      “public sports entertainment” means any sporting
                           event to which the public are invited as
                            spectators;
34                   c. 27      Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


       P a r t IV                       “ sporting event” means any contest, exhibition or
                                              display of any sport;
                                        “sports complex” means a building—
                                           (a) which provides accommodation and facilities
                                                 for both those engaging in sport and
                                                 spectators; and
                                           (b) the parts of which are so arranged that one or
                                                 more sports can be engaged in simultaneously
                                                 in different parts of the building; and
                                        “ sport” includes any game in which physical skill is
                                              the predominant factor and any form of physical
                                              recreation which is also engaged in for purposes
                                              of competition or display, except dancing (in any
                                              form).” .
                       (2) On and after the date of coming into force of this section an
                     application made (but not decided) before that date for the grant or
                     renewal of a licence for the use of premises as a place of public
                     entertainment shall, where the entertainment for which the premises are
                     to be used will be a public sports entertainment as mentioned in section
                     41A of the 1982 Act, be treated for all purposes as an application for a
                     grant or renewal (as the case may be) of a licence under the said section
                     41A.
                        (3) On and after the date of coming into force of this section a licence
                     granted or renewed before that date for the use of premises as a place of
                     public entertainment under section 41(2) of the 1982 Act shall, where the
                     entertainment for which the premises are to be used will be a public sports
                     entertainment as mentioned in section 41A of the 1982 Act, be deemed for
                     all purposes to have been granted or renewed under the said section 41 A.
                        (4) In section 9 of the 1982 Act (which makes provision for licensing
                     authorities to resolve when licensing is to be required) in subsection ( 1)
                     after the words “to 43” there shall be inserted the words “(except section
                     41A)” .
                       (5) In section 41 of the 1982 Act (which makes provision for public
                     entertainment licences) in subsection (2 ) after paragraph (a) there shall be
                     inserted the following paragraph—
                                    “ (aa) premises in respect of which a licence is required
                                 under section 41A of this Act while such premises are being
                                 used for the purposes mentioned in that section;” .


                                                             Part V

                                           M   is c e l l a n e o u s a n d   G   eneral


                                                        Miscellaneous

Entertainment          45. The Royal Albert ,;HaU . shall cease to be exempt from the
licences: removal    requirement for a public entertainment licence under paragraph -1 of
o f exemption.       Schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963.
1963 c. 33.
Entertainment          46. In Schedule 1 to the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions)
licences: fees for   Act 1982 (licensing o f certain public entertainments), after paragraph 16,
variation.           there shall be inserted the following paragraph—■
1982 c. 30.
           Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987       c. 27                     35


              “ 16A. An applicant for the variation of the terms,                Part   V
            conditions or restrictions on or subject to which an
            entertainments licence is held shall pay a reasonable fee
            determined by the appropriate authority.”

  47. In section 10 of the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions)         Luminous tube
Act 1982 (luminous tube signs of certain voltage to have firemen’s             signs: England
                                                                               and Wales.
switches)—                                                                     1982 c. 30.
     (a) in subsection (1), for the words “ 650 volts” there shall be
          substituted the words “ the prescribed voltage” ; and
     (b) after subsection (1), there shall be inserted the following
          subsections—
               “ (1A) In subsection (1) above “ the prescribed voltage”
            means 1000 volts A.C. or 1500 volts D.C. if measured
             between any two conductors or 600 volts A.C. or 900 volts
             D.C. if measured between any conductor and earth.
                (IB) The Secretary of State may, by order made by
             statutory instrument, substitute such different voltages for
             those for the time being specified in subsection (1 A) above as
             appear to him to be appropriate for this purpose having
             regard to the current regulations of the Institution of
             Electrical Engineers.”

  48. In section 98 of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 (power         Luminous tube
of Secretary of State to make regulations for safe operation of electrical     signs: Scotland.
                                                                               1982 c. 45.
luminous tube signs) in subsection (2) for the words “normally exceeding
650 volts” there shall be substituted the words “ of such description as
may be specified in regulations made under subsection (1) above” .

                                  General

  49.—(1) Subject to subsection (2) below, the enactments mentioned in         Repeals and
Schedule 4 to this Act are hereby repealed to the extent specified in the      transitional and
                                                                               saving provisions.
third column of that Schedule.
   (2) The transitional and saving provisions contained in Schedule 5 to
this Act shall have effect.

  50.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Fire Safety and Safety of Places        Short title,
of Sport Act 1987.                                                             commencement
                                                                               and extent.
 (2) This Act shall come into force on such day as the Secretary of State
may appoint by order made by statutory instrument; and different days
may be so appointed for different provisions or for different purposes.
   (3) This Act does not extend to Northern Ireland and—
      (a) in Part IV, sections 42 and 43 extend to England and Wales only
           and section 44 extends to Scotland only; and
      (b) in Part V, sections 46 and 47 extend to England and Wales only
           and section 48 extends to Scotland only.
   (4) Except as provided by an order under subsection (5) below, Parts II
 and III o f this Act do not extend to the Isles of Scilly.
    (5)   The Secretary of State may by order direct that Parts II and III of
 this Act shall, subject to such exceptions, adaptations and modifications
 as may be specified in the order, extend to the Isles of Scilly.
36            c. 27     Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


     Part V     (6 ) An order under subsection (5 ) above may contain such incidental
              and consequential provisions, including provisions conferring powers or
              imposing duties on the Council of the Isles of Scilly, as the Secretary of
              State thinks necessary.
                 (7)   An order under subsection (5) above shall be subject to annulment
              in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
               Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987                                    c. 27                     37


                                       SCHEDULES

                                            SCH ED U LE 1                                                          Section 16.

            F irf. P recautions: S pecial P rovision              for   C ertain P remises

        SCH ED U LE T O BE IN SER TED AS S C H E D U L E 2 T O FIRE
                        PREC A U TIO N S ACT 1971

                                           “ SC H ED U LE 2

                         Special P rovision          for   C ertain P remises

                                                  P art I

                                              T he P remises
   1. Subject to paragraph 2 below, the following are the descriptions o f premises
in relation to which this Act is subject to the modifications specified in relation to
them in Part II—
      (a) premises constituting, o r forming part of, a factory within the meaning
           o f th e F a c to rie s A c t 1961 a n d prem ises to w h ic h se ctio n s 123(1) a n d 124 9 & 10 Eliz. 2 c.34.
             o f th a t A c t (a p p lic a tio n to electrical s ta tio n s a n d in stitu tio n s) a p p ly (in
             th is S ch ed u le re fe rre d to as “ fac to ry p re m ise s” );
      (b) office premises within the meaning o f the Offices, Shops and Railway                                     1963 c.41.
          Premises Act 1963, o r premises deemed to be such premises for the
          purposes o f that Act (in this Schedule referred to as “ office premises” );
      (c) railway premises within the meaning o f that Act o f 1963, or premises
          deemed to be such premises for the purposes o f that Act (in this
          Schedule referred to as “ railway premises” ); and
      (d) shop premises within the meaning o f that Act o f 1963, or premises
          deemed to be such premises for the purposes o f that Act (in this
          Schedule referred to as “ shop premises").
 2. Premises which are deemed to form part o f a mine for the purposes o f the
Mines and Quarries Act 1954 are excluded from the descriptions o f premises 2 & 3 Eliz. 2 c.70.
mentioned in sub-paragraphs (b) to (d) o f paragraph 1 above.

                                                   P art II

                                          T he M odifications
   3.— (1) This paragraph applies to premises in respect o f which a fire certificate
is required which are factory premises, office premises, railway premises or shop
premises, and which—
      (a) are held under a lease or an agreement for a lease or under a licence and
          consist o f part o f a building all parts o f which are in the same
           ownership; or
      (b) consist o f part o f a building in which different parts are owned by
           different persons.
   (2) In relation to premises to which this paragraph applies this Act shall have
effect with the following modifications.
   (3) F o r the references to the occupier in sections 5(2A), 5A(4), 5A(6), 5A(8),
 5B(3), 5B(4), 5B(5), 6(5), 7(1), 7(3A), 7(4), 8(2) (except paragraph (c) and the
 insertion made by sub-paragraph (5) below), 8(4), 8(5), 8(7), 8B(1), 9(5)(b),
 9A(3), 9D(1) and 12(8)(b) there shall be substituted—
38              c. 27          Fire Safety ami Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


     Sc h . 1       (a) in the case o f premises failing within sub-paragraph (l)(a) above,
                        references to the owner o f the building;
                     (b) in the case o f premises falling within sub-paragraph (l)(b) above,
                         references to the persons who between them own the building.

                   (4) For the words “ a fire certificate” where they occur in section 6(8) and where
                they first occur in section 7(6) there shall be substituted the words “ a copy o f the
                fire certificate” and in section 6(8) at the end o f the subsection there shall be
                inserted the words “ and the fire certificate shall be sent to the owner o f the
                building or, as the case may be, the person who owns the p art o f the building of
                which the premises consist.”

                  (5) In sections 8(2) and 8A(1) after the words “ fire authority;” there shall be
                inserted the words “ and the occupier shall, before the carrying out o f the
                proposals is begun, furnish to the persons responsible for giving notice o f the
                proposals to the fire authority any information in his possession which is relevant
                to those proposals;” .

                  (6) In section 8A(1) for the references to the occupier (except the reference
                inserted by sub-paragraph (5) above) there shall be substituted—
                        (a) in the case o f premises—
                                  (i) falling within sub-paragraph (l)(a) above; and
                                   (ii) in relation to which it is intended to carry out proposals
                                falling within subsection (2)(a) or (c) o f that section,
                            references to the owner o f the building; and
                        (b) in the case o f premises—
                                  (i) falling within sub-paragraph (l)(b) above; and
                                   (ii) in relation to which it is intended to carry out proposals
                                falling within subsection (2)(a) or (c) o f that section,
                            references to the persons who between them own the building.

                   (7) The expressions “ owner o f the building” and “ the persons who between
                 them own the building” do n o t include the Crown in the modifications made—
                        (a) by sub-paragraph (3) above o f sections 7( 1), 8(7), 9A(3) and o f the word
                            “ occupier” in the third place where it occurs in section 8(2); and
                        (b) by sub-paragraph (6) above o f the word “ occupier” in the second place
                            where it occurs in section 8A(1).

                   4. In section 6(1) as it has effect in relation to factory premises there shall be
                 inserted after paragraph (e) the following paragraph—
                                   “ (0 particulars as to any explosive or highly flammable materials
                                   which may be stored or used in the premises,” .

                   5. In section 8 as it has effect in relation to factory premises—       .
                        (a) for paragraph (c) o f subsection (2) there shall be substituted the
                            following paragraph-^-                    “
                                   “ (c) the occupier o f the premises proposes to begin to store or use
                                   explosive-or ; highly sflammable materials in the premises or
                                   materially to increase the extent o f such storage or use,” ; and
                        (b) in subsection (3) for the words from “ keep explosive” to “ that kind"
                            there shall be substituted the words “ store or use explosive or highly
                            flammable materials in the premises or materially to increase the extent
                            o f such storage or use” .       •‘ •
                                                                                                                           39
             Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987                             c. 27

                                                                                                              Sch . 1
  6 In section 8A as it has effect in relation to factory premises, for paragraph
(b) o f subsection (2) there shall be substituted the following p a r a g r a p h -
                “(b) on the part o f the occupier o f the premises to begin to store
                or use explosive or highly flammable materials in the premises or
                materially to increase the extent o f such storage or use, .
                                                                                                            38 & 39 Viet. c.17.
  7 Where a licence issued under the Explosives Act 1875 or the Petro*e“ ™ 18 & 19 Geo. V
rrnnsnlidation) Act 1928 is in force with respect to factory premises, office c.32.
SeSlfshopprtlesor Jailwaypremises, action 31ofthisAc, M - t a
effect inrelationtoanyterm,conditionorrestrictionimposedinconnectionw
the issue, renewal, transfer or variation o f such licence.
   8 Where any premises (“ the relevant premises )
    ’ (a) are premises for which a fire certificate is r e q u i r e d premises for wh.ch
      W   a fire certificate is in force, premises to which section 9A o f h s Ac
          applies o r premises to which regulations under section 12 o f this Act
            apply, and
      (b)   are factory premises, office premises, shop premises or railway
           premises,                                                  .    .
 section 28 shall apply to the premises or to any other premises comprised in the
 same building—                                                             .
               (i) with the substitution o f the foregoing words (reading this
             section” for “ section 28” ) for subsection (1);
               (ii) with the insertion, in subsection (2)(a), after “ 8(5) of
                “ 9D(1)” ; and                                                                      .
                   (iii) with the substitution, for subsection (2)(c) o f the following
                     “ (c) in order to secure compliance with section 9A                                a
                           p ro v isio n o f re g u la tio n s u n d e r sectio n 12 o f th is A c t, .
40            c. 27         Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


                                                    SCHEDULE2
Section 19.
                 E xtension    of   A pplication   of S afety of S ports G rounds A ct 1975 to
                                                   S ports G rounds
                        Section                                    Amendment

              Section 1(1).                   F o r the words “a stadium ” , substitute the words
                                                 “ a sports ground” .
                                              F o r the words “ any sports stadium” , substitute
                                                 the words “ any sports ground” .
              Section 1(2).                   F or the word “ stadium ” , wherever occurring,
                                                 substitute the word “ ground” .
              Section 1(3).                   F o r the word “ stadium” , wherever occurring,
                                                  substitute the words “ sports ground” .
              Section 1(4).                   For the words “ ‘designated stadium’” , substitute
                                                  the words ‘“ designated sports ground’” .
                                              For the words “ a stadium ” , substitute the words
                                                  “ a sports ground” .
               Section 2(1), (3) and (4).     F o r the word “ stadium” , wherever occurring,
                                                  substitute the words “ sports ground” .
               Section 3.                      F o r the word “ stadium ” , wherever occurring,
                                                  substitute the words “ sports ground” .
               Section 4(7).                   F o r the word “ stadium” , substitute the words
                                                   “ sports ground” .
               Section 8.                      F o r the word “ stadium ” , wherever occurring,
                                                   substitute the words “ sports ground’’.
               Section 9(1).                   For the Word "stadium ” , substitute the words
                                                   “ sports ground” .
               Section 9(l)(b).                F or the words from “ sections 168” to “ relate” ,
                                                   substitute “ section 89 o f the Civic Government
                                                   (Scotland) Act 1982 (which makes provision as
                                                   to the safety o f platforms, stands and other
                                                   structures), in so far as that section relates” .
               Section 12(1).                  F o r the word “ stadium ” , wherever occurring,
                                                   substitute the words “ sports ground” .
               Section 12(2).                  Om it the words “ stadium or other” .
               Section 17(1).                  F o r the words “ ‘designated stadium’” , substitute
                                                  the words “ ‘designated sports ground’” .
                                               Om it the definition o f “ sports stadium” .
            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987               c. 27                   41


                                 S C H ED U LE 3
                                                                                         Section 42.
                            I ndoor Sports L icences

                          C onsequential A mendments

                                    Preliminary
  1. In this Schedule references to paragraphs are references to paragraphs o f
Schedule 12 to the London Governm ent Act 1963.                                          1963 c.33.

                                   Amendments

                            Music and dancing licences
  2. In paragraph 1, at the end, there shall be inserted the following sub-
paragraph—
              “ (7) In this paragraph 'premises’ includes any place.”

                           Boxing and wrestling licences
  3. In paragraph 4—
     (a) in sub-paragraph (1), after the words “ which is provided” there shall be
          inserted the words “ wholly or mainly in the open air” and the words “ at
          the Royal Albert H all” shall be omitted;
     (b) in sub-paragraph (5), for the words “ ‘occasional sports licence’” there
          shall be substituted the words “ ‘occasional outdoor boxing or wrestling
          licence’” ; and
     (c) after sub-paragraph (6), there shall be inserted the following sub-
          paragraph—
                 “ (7) In this paragraph ‘premises’ includes any place.”
  4. In paragraph 5(1) and (2), for the words “ occasional sports licence” there
shall be substituted the words “ occasional o utd o o r boxing or wrestling licence” .

                       Licences continued during applications
  5. In paragraphs 6A and 6B, after the words “ paragraph 1” there shall be
inserted “ ,3A” .          .

                      Transmission and cancellation o f licences
    6. In paragraphs 7 and 8, after the words “ paragraph 1” there shall be inserted
“ , 3A” .

              .   Power to impose general terms etc. by regulations
  7. In paragraph 9(1), after the words “ paragraph 1” there shall be inserted “ ,
3A” .

                                    Enforcement
 ' 8. In paragraph:.i 0(1), (2)(a) and (4), after the words “ paragraph 1” there shall
 be inserted.?, 3A” . l . . ___
   9. In paragraph 12(1) after the words “ paragraph 1" there shall be inserted “ ,
 3A” and, for the word “ either” , there shall be substituted the word “any” .

                            Provisional grant o f licences
   10. In paragraph 17(1), after the words “ paragraph 1” there shall be inserted
   3A” .    ■
    42                c. 27         Fire Safety ami Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


            Sch . 3                                 Variation o f licences
                        11. In paragraph 18, after the words “ paragraph 1" there shall be inserted “ ,
                      3A” .

                                                            Appeals
                         12. In paragraph 19—
                           (a) in sub-paragraphs (1 )(a) and (3), after the words “ paragraph 1” there
                                 shall be inserted  3A” ; and
                           (b) in sub-paragraph (4), after the words “ paragraph 2(1)” there shall be
                                 inserted the words “ , 3B(1)” .

                                                   Meaning o f “premises ”
                         13. Paragraph 20 shall be omitted.

    Section 49.                                        SCHEDULE4

                                                            R epeals
                        Chapter               Short title                         Extent o f repeal

                       1963 c.33.        London Governm ent              In Schedule 12, in paragraph
                                           Act 1963.                        1(6), the words “ o r the Royal
                                                                            Albert Hall", paragraph
                                                                            4(1 )(b) and paragraph 20.
                       1971 c.40.        Fire Precautions Act          . In section 2, the words from “o f
                                            1971.                           any o f the following” to “ any
                                                              i
                                                                            premises” where last occurring.
                                                                         In section 5(3)(c), the words from
                                                                            “ for use" to “ the building” .
                                                                         In section 6(1 )(d), the words from
                                                                            “ for use" to “ the building” .
                                                                          In section 12(1), the words
                                                                            “ other than paragraph (d)” .
                                                                         In section 43(1), in the definition
                                                                            o f “ the court” , the words “ and
                                                                            the Schedule thereto” .
                                                                         Section 43(2).
                       1974 c.37.        Health and Safety at            Section 78(4).
                                           W ork etc. Act 1974.
                       1975 c.52.        Safety o f Sports              Section 5(4), (6), (7) and (8).
                                           G rounds Act 1975.           In section 7, in subsection (3), the
                                                                          words “ . subject to subsection
                                                                           (4) below,” and subsections (4)
                                                                           and (5).
                                                                        In section 12(2), the words
                                                                           “ stadium or other".
                                                                        Section 15.
                                                                        In section 17(1), the definition o f
                                                                           “ sports stadium” .


n
             Fire Safety ami Safety o f Places of Sport Act 1987


                                        SC H E D U LE 5
                                                                                             Scction 49.
                      T   r a n s it io n a l a n d   S a v in g P r o v is io n s


                                           Preliminary

   1. In this Schedule—
       “ the 1963Act” means the London Governm ent Act 1963;                                 1963 c.33.
        “ the 1971   Act” means the Fire'Precautions Act 1971;                               1971 c.40.
        “ the 1975 Act” means the Safety o f Sports G rounds Act 1975;and                    1975 c.52.
        “ the 1982Act" means the Local G overnm ent (Miscellaneous Provisions)               1982 c.30.
      Act 1982.

                  Certain certificates deemed to be fire certificates
    2. Where immediately before a fire certificate becomes required by o r under the
 1971 Act in respect o f any premises a fire certificate issued or deemed to be issued
 under regulations made under the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 (a                  1974 c.37.
 “ 1974 Act certificate") was in force in respect o f those premises, the 1974 Act
 certificate shall continue in force and shall be deemed to be a fire certificate within
 the meaning o f the 1971 Act validly issued with respect to the premises with
 respect to which it was issued and to cover the use o r uses to which those premises
 were being put immediately before a fire certificate becomes required by o r under
 the 1971 Act in respect o f those premises; and, w ithout prejudice to the generality
 o f the foregoing, the 1974 Act certificate—
      (a) may be amended, replaced or revoked in accordance with the
          provisions o f the 1971 Act; and
      (b) shall be treated as imposing in relation to the premises the like
          requirements as were previously imposed in relation to the premises.

                             Charges fo r fire certification work
    3. Section 8B o f the 1971 Act which is inserted by section 3 o f this Act does not
 apply as respects an application for a fire certificate made before the said section
 3 comes into force.

                                Fire safety: emergency orders
   4. The substitution effected by section 9 o f this Act o f section 10 o f the 1971
 Act shall not affect any order o f the court in force under that section when that
 substitution comes into force a n d any such order may be enforced, or an appeal
 made against it. accordingly.

                     Sports grounds: certain existing designations
    5. Any designation o f a sports ground made under section 1 o f the 1975 Act by
• virtue o f an order under section 15 o f that Act and in force immediately before
  the repeal o f section 15 by section 19 o f this Act shall not be affected by the repeal
  but shall continue in force as if made under section 1 as amended by section 19 o f
  (and Schedule 2 to) this Act.

                             Sports grounds certificates: appeals
    6. The amendments effected by section 22 o f this Act in section 5 o f the 1975
  Act shall not affect any appeal pending when those amendments come into force
  and any such appeal may be determined (with o r without an inquiry and report
  thereon), and the decision on the appeal shall have effect, accordingly.
£   44              c. 27           Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987

r        Sch . 5                                  Sports grounds: emergency orders
                      7.    The substitution effected by section 23 o f this Act o f section 10 o f the 1975
                    Act shall not affect any order o f the court in force under that section when that
                    substitution comes into force and any such order may be enforced, modified or
                    cancelled, o r an appeal made against it, accordingly.


                                            Entertainment licences fo r sports generally
                      8. W here the use o f any premises for the purpose o f an entertainment will, by
                    virtue o f the amendments effected by section 42 o f this Act in the 1963 Act or by
                    section 43 o f this Act in the 1982 Act, require to be covered by a licence, then, if
                    an application for a licence to cover their use for th at entertainment has been
                    made (and not withdrawn) when the amendments come into force, the use o f the
                    premises for that purpose shall continue to be lawful pending the disposal o f the
                    application.
                      9. The amendment o f Schedule 1 to the 1982 Act effected by section 46 o f this
                    Act does not apply as respects an application made before that section comes into
                    force.

                                                         Boxing or wrestling licences
                       10.     Any licence under paragraph 4 o f Schedule 12 to the 1963 Act covering the
                    use o f premises for a boxing o r wrestling entertainment which was granted before
                    the date o f the coming into force o f the amendments effected by section 42 o f (and
                    Schedule 3 to) this Act shall, if it relates to premises to which the paragraph 3A
                    inserted by that section applies—
                            (a) have effect as from that date as if granted under the paragraph 3A
                                inserted by those amendments by the Council on and subject to terms,
                                conditions and restrictions corresponding to those on and subject to
                                which it was held immediately before that date; and
                            (b) in the case o f a licence granted or renewed for a specified period, remain
                                in force, subject to paragraphs 8, 10(4) and 18 o f the said Schedule 12,
                                for so much o f that period as falls on or after that date.

                                                   PR IN TE D IN EN G LA N D BY J A D O L E
                                     Controller and C hief Executive o f H er Majesty's Stationery Office and
                                                    Queen's P rinter o f Acts o f P arliam en t
                                              Reprinted in the S tandard Parliam entary Page Size.
                                                              1st Im pression May 1987
                                                     .    2nd Im pression November 1988

                                         LONDON: PUBLISHED BY HER MAJESTY'S STATIONERY OFFICE


                                                               Price £5.10 net

                                                             IS B N 0 10 542787 X
                                                                        ( 542771)




                                                              * I*"-'   i.Vll   .




                   . ■■ '
                                                                                                                .Y .: ;
                   ' ■■ -                                 ■v 10 riji-wj bv.v ■
                                                          MVur i lit,
