STATEMENT PAGES
 3140 - 3480
Incident 102      260390 QP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT.

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER S1277

                                                                                 Station

^Prname            BURNS
 Forenames         ROBERT

 Age                                     Date of birth

 Address            'B' DIVISION                                 Sheffield Archives Ref:       /   •6


 Occupation        POL PS1757

 Telephone

 IC                'Height                Build

 Hair colour

 Hair type

%     s                                   Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses           Use                    Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated                                                                              Signed


           I commenced duty at Womfcwell Police Station at 9.00 a.m. (0900) on

           Saturday, 15 April 1989 (150489). Paraded serial 15 officers, 8 male

           and 2 female Constables.
           2342 BEARD                        2654 RICH&MSSON

           1543 AITKEN                         78 BOOTH

             853 BURKE                       1675 RICH

           2192 LLEWELLYN                    2364 FORD

           3107 PEARSON                      3023 MARTIN
           On completion, travelled to Hillsborough* Sheffield, by personnel

           transit van.
           Full match Order, parade and briefing at 9.SO a.m. (0950) in the North
           Stand conducted by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD. On conclusion,

           packed meal supplied and taken.

m          Further detailed briefing of my serial 15 and serial 14, Sergeant

                                                                                             3140
                                                                 PAGE    2
                                                                 S1277

1341 CRAWFORD and 'Bl' officers, by Inspector WHITE, in situ of our

areas of respective responsibilities. This briefing was conducted

on the terraces area of the West Stand with both serials. My serial

responsible for Liverpool supporters entering through turnstiles

numbered 9 to 16 inside the ground from Leppings Lane. Searching

regards prohibited weapons and items, alcohol, banners or missiles.

Location being in the tunnel of the North pen and cantilever terraces

between the North pen and North stand.
Emergency evacuation procedure explained and officer from my serial,

P.C. 853 BURKE, deputed to the internal gate between the North and

Middle pens on the terraces. This internal gate was definitely open,

not locked by padlock at this time.
At 11.00 a.m. (1100) my serial comttenced their detail at Leppings Lane
turnstiles, the Match Order stating turnstiles numbered 1 to 16

between gate 'A' and 'B'. I questioned this with Inspector WHITE at

this location and was told the Order was wrong, ny responsibility was

for turnstiles 9 to 16.
Turnstiles 1 to 8 were cordoned off by a moveable crowd control

barrier. This being placed between turnstiles 8 and 9. Officers frcm
another serial did take up position at turnstiles 1 to 8, for

supporters to the North Stand. Having 8 male officers, one was

allocated to each turnstile more or less working as a pair for

searching purposes.   This enabled me to hold the two female officers

in reserve with instructions to search any females. At seme early

stage I was aware of at least two ground stewards on duty at the

moveable crowd barrier between turnstiles 8 and 9. Two other ground
stewards were on the inside of gate 'B', being their responsibility

for opening for access in and out of Police Officers.   These gates

have plastic viewing inserts at head height.
Brown tickets         North Stand         Entry by turnstiles 1 to 8
                                                                    PAGE    3
                                                                    S1277

Red tickets           West Stand seating Entry by turnstiles 9 to 16.
Purple tickets        Standing terraces     Entry to ground via

                      under West Stand      turnstiles 'A' to 'G'

                      and open cantilever

                      terrace between the
                      West Stand and North

                      Stand (area shewn 'NW'

                      on plan)

Shortly after 11.00 a.m. (1100) my officers were briefed by Inspector

WHIIE. We had a general patrol of my area of responsibility i.e. the

North pen leading into terrace area, cantilever standing terrace and

visited ground staff at the snack bar situated at this corner at the
rear of the West Stand.   I spoke with these males, three, regarding

their security.   They were advised to close the metal serving hatch

at the first signs of any trouble and request my attention. The

snack bar was open to customers at this time. All turnstiles under

my supervision were open and maimed by operators at about 11.30 a.m.

(1130).   From about 12 noon (1200), whilst on duty inside the ground

at the turnstiles at Leppings Lane, small groups of Liverpool
supporters were entering the grounds.     Jovial, friendly, males,

females and children, all were searched with no problems, between then

and a gradual build up to 2.30 p.m. (1430).     Items of property i.e.

large flags and penknives were confiscated, labelled and handed into
the property store.   The amount of supporters during these times was

very light and unusual for a large Cup match. Many groups of youths

were seen to be standing outside on Leppings Lane. Although stated

these supporters were friendly, many were complaining about not having

the other end of the ground where they could have received more
ticket allocation being a larger club than Nottingham Forest, with a

larger support and following.    This was their main grievance other
                                                                 PAGE     4
                                                                 S1277

than being forced to being searched three times over.

At about 2.30 p.m. (1430) large numbers of Liverpool fans arrived

outside on Leppings Lane turnstiles.   I presumed arrivals under Police

escort from the special train. The atmosphere of friendly fans began

to change, they were noisy and boisterous, shouting and pushing to

get through the turnstiles.
Turnstile operators were complaining, seme fans were getting in by
climbing over the turnstile. Many were identified and being unable

to produce a ticket or stub, had to be manhandled and forcibly

ejected outside through gate 'B'. This is a usual practice at

matches, as fans waiting to enter through turnstiles 'A' to 'G', form

up outside gate 'B'
At about 2.45 p.m. (1445) the situation inside and outside got worse.

As their numbers increased the situation became electric. Crushing

was occurring outside.   Numerous fans, male and female with children,

young and elderly, were complaining about being crushed outside. Many
wera in a distressed state, sweating, breathless and pale in colour,

some rubbing their chests. There were too many to deal with

individuals. Many pleading to help the people outside.
During this time, which I can only describe many of these young male

fans by their actions as animals, fans outside were shouting for

assistance, banging on the metal gate 'B', they were being crushed.
Fans were being crushed inside the actual turnstiles.    Incidents were

happening all the time. The panic similar to mass hysteria made
searching impossible and I instructed my serial to act only on public

order. Numbers started to climb outside walling onto the roof of the

turnstile building at the same time as others cleared the turnstiles

wera running towards the ground entrances, pushing others aside to

gain better haste. Many were actually jumping over the turnstiles

and fleeing towards the ground.   Turnstile operators were shouting
                                                                 PAGE    5
                                                                 S1277

and complaining many were getting through with no tickets by climbing

over the turnstiles. The majority of these late arrivals were

obviously under the influence of alcohol, the air at this location

thick with the smell of alcohol. The breeze from outside where the

crushing was taking place, carried a sickly smell of stale alcohol

into the ground.

There was far too many to be able to take action against. This was

becoming a volatile situation. A large number had climbed onto the

perimeter walling, onto the lower roof of the turnstiles and were

jumping off from a height of about some 8 to 9 feet (8' to 9'), into

the ground. Many fans inside the ground were handing their full

tickets up to those on the roof and due to their numbers, we were

unable to prevent this.   Complaints and requests for help outside from

those entering the turnstiles were becoming numerous. At this stage,

being unable to communicate with match Control, by personal radio, due

to volume of air traffic, static and noise caused by fans, I had to

shout to Inspector BENNETT, who had arrived at my location, regards

the situation of people outside being allegedly crushed, asking him

for assistance from Control.   Due to the volume of air traffic/static

and volume of noise in the area, it was apparent the Inspector was

unable to make contact.   I was requesting the opening of the outer
gate 'B', be opened temporarily to relieve crushing pressure.

Inspector BENNETT climbed onto the roof of the turnstiles and walling

to view the situation outside the ground.   I cpuld see through the

turnstiles and over the heads of fans, outside the ground onto

Leppings Lane. There was a mass of supporters waiting to get inside

the grounds.   It was obvious to me that the closer to kick off time

became, this volume of supporters were not going to get inside the

ground by then, a disaster would occur outside the turnstiles.The

situation by this time was chaotic, outside and inside the
                                                                  PAGE     I
                                                                  S1277

ground.   Supporters fighting to get through turnstiles, others coining

over the walling onto the roof, in droves. Whilst dealing with an

incident of fans crushing to get through a turnstile, part of the
metal rain guttering above roe collapsed and struck roe across the

shoulders.

During these incidents which were out of control, even to 100 Police

Officers, Police Constable RICH, on my serial, brought to my

attention one of these fans that had jumped from the roof was an off

duty Liverpool Police Officer.   He had been shown a plastic type
warrant card, believed             or similar name.    I believed he was

referring to a male I had just seen jump down from the roof with

others, aged about middle thirties, deep tan complexion, dressed in

red pullover and wearing a red and yellow Liverpool flat cap. Police

Constable RICH informed roe that the one I described was a friend of

the alleged officer he had spoken to. This officer stating he had no
ticket.   These two with others had run off in the direction of the

North pen area. Whilst engaged, I challenged a middle aged male

inside the ground I had seen handing a ticket to a young boy aged

about 14 years on the roof of the turnstiles.   Stated to be his son

and they had got separated outside.   The same person was seen on two

other occasions of the same actions but disappeared before I could

get to him.
Due to the situation not alleviating i.e. crushing, pushing and

complaints, at the turnstiles.   The operators refusing admission with

brown and purple tickets, causing complete blockage, these holders

could not get back outside whilst stuck in the narrow entrances.      It

was obvious to roe the operators were also reaching breaking point

with the volume of supporters and their actions.      I was aware of the

presence of other officers from another serial who had been outside/

inside the ground with myself.   One unidentified female officer
                                                                PAGE    7
                                                                S1277

stated they had cone inside as they were being crushed by the

pressure outside.   To alleviate this situation, I instructed the
operators by shouting to be heard, to let these supporters through as
quickly as possible with whatever colour of ticket they had in their

possession and we would transfer them whilst inside the ground. This

seemed to increase and flow, those with brown tickets were

transferred through by myself assisted by two ground stewards, by

opening the crash barrier between turnstiles 8 and 9. There were

numerous of these fans mainly mannerly, middle aged male and female,
who thanked us for assistance. Many in a distressed condition still

complaining of crushing outside.   Red ticket holders were pointed in

the direction of the steps leading up to the West Stand upper seating

area. There were ground stewards on duty checking these tickets.

Purple tickets holders ware directed towards the North pen tunnel and

cantilever standing area 'NW'. During this time fans ware still
pouring over the walling and running in all directions, nothing or no

one could have stopped them.
Whilst transferring these fans towards the North Stand, I was aware

of Police Constables PEARSON, BOOTH and BURKE struggling with an

adult male, who was finally arrested and escorted towards me by the

latter two officers.   He was still struggling and the barrier was
opened to let them through into the walkway towards the rear of the

North Stand and Police Charge Office. This male was drunk,

disorderly and force being used to restrain him.

At this time, later informed by Police Constable BOOTH, 3.00 p.m.
(1500) time of arrest, I became aware of a large volume of supporters

rushing and pushing in my direction, still others ccming off the roof

and joining them.   There appeared to be a mass of them running off

towards the area of the North pen and cantilever area 'NW'. In order

for this amount to gain access to the terraces via the middle tunnel,
                                                                 PAGE        8
                                                                 S1277

they would have had to perform a 'U' turn in front of roe, travel

through the open large gate in the walling which separates the rear

inside enclosure between gates 'B' and 'C'.    I suddenly encountered

fans in possession of purple tickets having entered from turnstiles 1

to 8 whilst transferring others with brown tickets from my turnstiles

9 to 16, jostling and pushing against each other. Shortly after this

the crowd situation appeared to calm down and I was not aware the

match had started or the actual time.
Later I learned from Police Constables RICH, AITKEN and RICHARDSON,

that our gate 'B' had been opened from the inside by two Police

Officers at the same time Police Constables BOOTH and BURKE were

struggling to arrest their prisoner.    The officers stated they had

argued against this action.   The officers and two gate stewards had
moved to the side of an adjacent Portacabin to avoid the stampede.       I

had no knowledge of this gate having been open but would explain the

mad stampede of the large volume of fans rushing past me towards the

North end of the West Stand. I was also informed that gate 'C' had

also been opened prior to gate 'B'. Police Constable RICH informed

me that as soon as the pressure of fans was released at gate 'B', it

was immediately closed again.
Whilst filtering stragglers through the turnstiles, I received radio

communication from match control 'ALL AVAILABLE OFFICERS TO THE

PERIMETER TRACK'. Gate 'B' was opened from the inside to let numerous

officers into the ground and then closed.     I immediately told all
turnstile operators to close their respective outside sliding doors

which was complied with without question. Likewise ran round to
operators manning turnstiles 'A' to 'G', this also complied with.

As nryself and my serial offiers were making our way at the rear of

the West Stand towards the South end, I suddenly was confronted by a

small number of Liverpool fans emerging from the middle tunnel of the
                                                                  PAGE    9
                                                                  S1277

West Stand terraces, in tears, requesting help.   These males were

sweating profusely, clothing stuck to their bodies and were gasping
for air. They informed me many more of them were in the terraces and

were being crusted and trampled. These youths were sat down at the

outside of the tunnel.

I itrmediately ran down into the tunnel towards the rear of the

terraces. Many more youths and adult males were found to be pushing

to get past their fellow supporters, standing at the mouth of the

tunnel.   These people initially refused my shouts to move, stating

they had paid their money, had tickets and were not moving for

anyone.   They were becoming aggressive and I had to forcibly move

them to allow injured persons through.
The situation on these terraces was one of chaos. I went to the left

side of the middle barrier, where I found large numbers of sweating,
gasping males had to be pulled out of the crowd and assisted into the

tunnel to assist their breathing.   The air inside the tunnel was

cool. The air at the rear of the terraces was dense and heavy,

strong smell of stale alcohol. Again having to force my way onto the

terrace, I dragged two teenage youths under each arm frcm the

terraces up and out of the tunnel into the fresh air at the rear.
These youths I had found lying down on the terraces being trampled on

by others.   They had been unable to walk of their own accord due to

breathing difficulties.   I ensured they would be alright by them

nodding their heads, they being able to speak and laid them down in

the recovery position.
On returning to the terraces many more were found in a collapsed

condition, some three or four yards (3 or 4 yds) into the terraces.

Other youths were pushing and standing on them. They would not listen

to shouting of backing off.
Numbers of these youths and adults were assisted to their feet and
                                                                 PAGE 10
                                                                 S1277

pushed towards the tunnel exit. This was in the area of the right

of the tunnel looking towards the playing area. Other officers were

lifting and carrying people from the front of the terraces.

I picked up another teenager off the ground who appeared unconscious,

dragged him backwards towards the tunnel.   By this time some of the

supporters were actually helping their friends and Police Officers by

walking with the injured and others out of the tunnel.
The youth I had dragged into the tunnel, I managed to carry with an

unknown male supporter, out into the open and laid him down beside

two other injured and apparently unconscious youths.     I checked

recovery position seemed to help his breathing although his eyes were

still closed. A further youth was laid beside him by a friend and
this person asked me to help him. This youth was also laid in the

recovery position.   His eyes were open and staring, obviously in a

state of shock. His friend was told to keep him quiet by talking to

him. A young policewoman, number 2342, suddenly told me a youth to my

left lying face down had gone blue.   He was turned on his back, the
officer applied mouth to mouth resuscitation whilst I applied cardiac

massage.   His colour resumed with a faint heart beat. He vomited

slightly, frothy and opened his eyes. He was in a deep state of

shock, the whites of his eyes were bloodshot and grey, staring at the

ground.    He was spoken to quietly to soothe him. He closed his eyes

although his breathing became more regular. At the same time whilst

knelt down with these youths, I was talking to two others beside me.

The one with the friend knelt down beside him, declined to get up and

just wanted to lie in the face down position. He was left alone and

told to get up when he felt better.
Still kneeling over the youth the female officer and myself

resuscitated, in order to relax I looked up and around me.     I can

only describe the area and situation around me as like a
                                                                 PAGE 11
                                                                 S1277

battlefield.    Bodies were littered everywhere, sane coloured blue,

obviously dead.    The scene was carnage, many supporters walking about

like Zombies, in shock and tears. Others trying to help their injured

friends.    To my left a heavy built woman aged 40 to 50 was kneeling

down beside an adult male, who had turned dark blue, attempting to
revive him by mouth to mouth.    The woman gave up this hopeless task

and walked across to myself and policewoman.    She stated she was a

nurse and asked if the youths beside me were alright. After looking

at the youths' faces, stated this was a dreadful day and walked

slowly away towards other injured persons. The woman was in total

shock, obviously a Liverpool fan, being dressed all in red
clothing.    Even at this stage supporters and Police were running out

of the tunnel carrying injured and dead. I was being accidentally

kicked and trampled in the panic.
A male suddenly appeared at my side and asked if these youths beside

me were alright.    He stated there were ambulances outside the gates,

get this one to one and leave the others that are beyond help.     I
picked up the youth we had resuscitated under the arms and two males

took hold of his legs, the policewoman at the side. As we had only

travelled about ten yards (10 yds) towards the open outer gate 'C',

the policeman shouted ' He has gone blue' and I.applied cardiac
massage. He again recovered colour and I could feel his heart beating.

At this stage whilst applying massage, I was asked by a smartly

dressed male if I had any oxygen or a stretcher. Stated he was a
doctor from Liverpool and was informed that this was the second time

the youth had arrested.    He confirmed a pulse.   I believe he was

wearing a brown suit, aged about 30years, brown hair and sallow

complexion. He appeared agitated to be a doctor. (I believe this       is

the same person that appeared on television at about lunch time the

following day, Sunday, stating he was a doctor at Liverpool University


                                                                            3150
                                                                 PAGE 12
                                                                 S1277

and making profound statements against Police actions).    However,

within seconds, I think, whilst still applying massage, a male and

female first aid officer arrived with oxygen masks and cylinder which

was given, followed by an ambulance trolley. The youth was placed on

the trolley, wheeled out of gate 'C', turned left and placed in the
right hand side of an ambulance.   I informed the attendant that this

youth had arrested twice.

The only identity of this youth is by description: male, aged about

18/20 years, white spotty face, blonde/fair hair thin build and

features.   Denim jacket and trousers, dark check shirt.

Returned them to the inner area. Numerous injured persons, leg and
hip injuries were assisted to waiting ambulances and ambulance buses,

backwards and forwards.
I ran across one middle aged male with silver coloured hair, stood

alone in the middle of the now partially deserted area, crying

loudly. On his behalf I accepted a cup of water frcm a ground
attendant walking round with a tray. This was handed to the male and

I walked with him to the side and sitting him down, attempted to

console him.   Being requested by female to attend distraught male

friand.
At this time I was aware of being in a void, feeling of time standing

still.    Spectators were leaving the upper and lower parts of the West

Stand in volume procession, directed by a cordon of Police and
Specials through the middle gate and out of gate 'B', shielded frcm a

large number of dead outside the ground behind green sheeting.

Finally positioned in the area behind the West Stand as my serial

started to rejoin me. A young family came and stood nearby me, their

young son handed a Mars bar with thanks. Groups of youths still
leaving from the North pen and cantilever, many in hatred towards

police, shouting 'bastards'. On the other hand, numerous people,
                                                                 PAGE 13
                                                                 S1277

youths and adults walked across and shook hands with words of thanks

and sorry.   Heads lowered with tears in their eyes.   I was still

being requested to attend youths in distraught condition, consoling

them in their anxiety. Attending to collapsed females, fainting

after finding friends and relatives.
As the rest of my serial rejoined me at gate 'B' I was confronted by

a distraught female, having walked frcm the direction of the North

Stand, directed to me by Police Constable RICH. The woman explained

she was searching for her missing husband.   Had been to the Casualty

Office and directed by Police to return to her husband's car in case

he was waiting for her, if not, to return to the Casualty Room. She

pointed to a male being spoken to by Police Constable RICH and
pleaded with me to clear him off. He had been following her for the

last half hour saying he was a reporter seeking a story. This male

walked towards me complaining. He was told to clear off and if I saw
him near the woman again I would arrest him personally.    His presence

was making the woman more distraught. Aged about early twenties,

pale complexion, wearing spectacles. Stated he was a reporter for

Sheffield Star.    In his hands, notepaper pad and pen.   He waited away

in the opposite direction from the woman, very downcaste. Informed to

return with serial to the North Stand for de-briefing and stand

down.   Serial stood down at 6.30 p.m. (1830) and returned to

Wombwell.    This was the first time I became aware of time, after 3.00

p.m. (1500).    To finalise, having worked various serials and different

locations over a number of years at Hillsborough, large Cup and league

matches, I have never seen supporters, including Liverpool fans, act

in such a disorderly manner and arrive late in such vast numbers. The

majority including teenagers were well behaved and orderly.     It was

apparent the minority of large numbers, without tickets, were

determined to gain access into this ground by any means available and


                                                                           3152
                                                                         PAGE
                                                                         S1277

        no amount of Police Officers were going to stop them. Numerous were

        under the influence of alcohol to the extent they behaved like

        hooligans and were uncontrollable.

        From what I witnessed inside the terraced end of the West Stand, I

        can only visualise as mass hysteria.     I am positive that many of

        these fans were not aware of being trampled, crushed or killed, OR.

        if aware, did not care. Perhaps on reflection they became animals

        fighting for survival in the heavy atmosphere being created by body

        heat.     It is worthy of note that this was the only area of the ground
        where the sun was shining into.    Being on duty in the inside of

        Leppings Lane, seeing and hearing the mass of the crowd outside, I
        agree in full with the actions taken by Superintendent MARSHALL.       I

        saw the state and pleading of supporters entering the ground.    I am

        certain if these gates had not been opened many would have died

        outside the turnstiles.     I myself became very apprehensive for my

        safety shortly after 2.45 a.m. (0245).

                                                    ROBERT BURNS PS1757 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME:              DATE

^^NESS TO SIGNATURE
OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
Incident 102      260390 QP8064          DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER S847

                                                                         Station
^surname
  rr               AITKIN
Forenames         ALEXANDER AITKEN
Age                                         Date of birth
Address            S. YORKS POLICE
                   HOYLAND, BARNSLEY

Occupation         POL PC1543
Telephone

IC                Height                    Build
Hair colour

     r type


«    s

Facial hair

Glasses           Use
                                            Complexion



                                            Accent
Number of Pages 7

Dated              270489                                         A AITKIN Signed


           ALEXANDER AITKEN

           POLICE CONSTABLE 1543

           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE, HOYLAND
           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I was on duty at Hillsborough
           Football Ground, Sheffield in connection with the FA Cup Semi-Final

           between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.

           I attended at the ground with other officers at 9.45 am (0945)that

           date and at 10.15 am (1015) we were briefed in the North Stand by

           Senior Police Officers.
           I was detailed to Serial 15 under the command of PS BURNS and

           Inspector WHITE.
           At 11.15 am (1115) together with Serial 14 we went to the terrace

           immediately in front of the West Stand where both Serials were

           briefed by Inspector WHITE.    The duty of our Serial was to search
                                                                 PAGE     2
                                                                 S847

supporters entering the ground at the Leppings Lane end of the ground

by turnstiles 1-16. These supporters were to be supporters with
tickets for the West Stand.

The serial took up position at around 11.30 am (1130).The gates were

to open at 12 noon (1200).

On the outside of the turnstiles were another serial who were

searching supporters before they entered the ground.

At 12 noon (1200) when the turnstiles opened a small number of

spectators began to make their way into the ground.

By 2.30 pm (1430) the volume of spectators increased but even at this
time there was still ample time to search them as they came through.

The fans up until this point were mostly good natured and in a jovial

mood, although some had mentioned to me that Liverpool should have

had the other end of the ground, because they had a bigger following

than Notts. Forest.

About 2.40 pn (1440) a fan appeared on top of the turnstiles.    He

wasn't wearing any football colours.   I shouted to him to get back

down to the other side but he said he couldn't because crowds were

beginning to gather outside.   I looked through the turnstiles and saw
that the crowd was beginning to build up but even at this stage there

did not appear to be anything out of the ordinary.     I shouted to the

youth on the roof of the turnstiles again to come down into the ground

(It was my intention that if he didn't have a ticket to arrest him and

take him to the Police Rocm). If he did have a ticket I would have

taken the ticket off him given him a stem warning and allowed him
into the ground.   One or two more youths then appeared on the roof and

I looked through the turnstiles and saw that there was by now a large

number of supporters gathering and some were conplaining of the

crush. An Inspector then arrived at the scene and went on to the
roof of the turnstiles.   I thought at that time to remove the youths


                                                                              3155
                                                                    PAGE      :
                                                                    S847

on the roof.    He then went to the edge of the roof and began to help

supporters out of the queue on the other side and over the wall. A

number of fans cane into the ground by this method.     I stopped what

fans I could and took the tickets off them because some were

attempting to pass their tickets back through the turnstiles,

obviously for supporters who had not got tickets on the outside.

Around 2.45 pn (1445) the crowd outside was beginning to grow and

supporters were complaining. A number of them were directing abuse at

Police officers again stating that they should have had the other end

of the ground, calling us 'Dickheads' and stating that the

organisation could have been better.    It was obvious by now that large

numbers had gathered outside the turnstiles. The fans who were now

coming in were being more aggressive towards the Police. The men on

the turnstiles began having trouble with some of the supporters.
Seme spectators had gone to the wrong turnstiles with the wrong

tickets. I spoke to one turnstile man who was complaining that a fan

with a ticket for the Spion Kop was attempting to gain entry.       I spoke

to the spectator and told him he would have to go to the otter end of

the ground and he wasn't admitted.     I told the turnstiles man that
should spectators have standing tickets to allow them through in view

of the crowd that had gathered.    (I had also heard earlier a rumour

that a ticket toat was selling tickets at the Leppings Lane end of

the ground.    They were tickets for the other end of the ground and

that he had gone when approached by the Police).
By this time things were getting more hectic and        fans were     still
coming over the wall at the turnstiles and we were helping them down

in case of injury. At one stage the top of a stone pillarhad come

loose and I asked the supporters to pass it down        because if itfell

into the crowd someone would have been killed or seriously injured.

At this stage we were clearing people away from the turnstile area to


                                                                                  3156
                                                                    PAGE   4
                                                                    S847

get them into the ground.     People coming into the ground were now

complaining of the crowd outside.     Some were breathless.   People

outside were shouting for us to open the gates and were waving their

tickets saying that they had got tickets and to let them. Others

were complaining that a lot of them on the outside didn't have

tickets. I then saw an officer on horseback trying to make his way

to the front of the turnstiles but appeared to be engulfed by

supporters who were still blaming the South Yorkshire Police for

giving them the wrong end of the ground.

A Police Constable then came frcm somewhere behind us and told one of

the stewards that he had come to open the gate adjacent to the

turnstiles.     The steward said that he wouldn't open the gates.   I
spoke with the officer and said that we couldn't open the gates and

that I believed there were a number of supporters outside who did not

have tickets.    He told me that he had come to open the gates

because of the volume of supporters outside and that the otter gate had

been opened to ease the situation outside.    This gate was then opened

and about two hundred supporters came through and then with PC FORD
and the stewards we closed the gate. This had eased the pressure
outside considerably although there was still several fans outside.

Most of the fans that came in by this gate, I believe, made their way

to the North Section of the terrace.

Things then got back to normality and I can recall looking at my

watch at 3.02 (1502) and saying to PC FORD 'They should have kicked

off by now'. Only a minute or so after this a fan came running from

the tunnel towards us and said that we should get in there because it

was bedlam.
With other officers I ran into the tunnel which was clear apart from

a few spectators making their way out. On arrival at the end of the
tunnel I could see some spectators trying to climb the perimeter


                                                                               3157
                                                                    PAGE       5
                                                                    S847

fence but with the amount of spectators in that section which was the

Centre South Section it was inpossible to get near the front. With

other officers I began to move spectators at the back requesting them

to go down the tunnel.     Some of than did so without question.    Others

wouldn't move, telling officers to 'Fuck off. I've got a ticket'.

Eventually enough fans were moved and I moved forward to the

perimeter fence and began to help people out who had been injured.
These people were taken to the area of the tunnel and they were sat

against walls until medical attention arrived. At this stage I do

not believe that anyone had realised the enormity of the disaster.         I

then went back into the ground.     I then with another officer and

supporters carried out a man who was unconscious and took him to the

back.     I gave him heart massage but he remained unconscious.    I was
then joined by a man who stated he was a male nurse.     He examined the

man and stated he had a pulse and that he should be left in the prone

position.    This I did.   By this time I saw that a number of St John's

Ambulance Ambulances had arrived at the rear of the tunnel.        I asked

some supporters to 'keep an eye' on this man and I returned to the

terrace.    The situation of the terrace by this time was chaotic and

more people were asked to go out of the tunnel but still some took no

notice.     I then began to help people through the gate in the

perimeter fence.     I saw that there were several people crushed against

the wall just below the perimeter fence. They were lying in a pile

about four feet high, there appeared to be a large number.        It was

obvious that these people were dead and that a major disaster had

occurred.     I assisted in getting people through the gate and on to

the perimeter track. A number of people were taken through this

way.    I eventually found myself on the perimeter track and supporters

and Police alike were taking these people on makeshift stretchers to

the other end of the ground.     I went on to the field to assist where


                                                                                   3158
                                                                         PAGE   f
                                                                         S847

I could.   On the field I saw some supporters   m a k in g   their way

towards the Spion Kop.     They obviously wanted to vent their anger at

the Notts Forest fans. I persuaded some to return to the other end.

A cordon was put up in the middle of the field. This was short lived
and I decided to make my way back round to the rear of the Leppings

Lane end as I knew that there was not a great number of Police

Officers. I made my way round to that end again, helping fans at

that end of the ground as well as other fans. A lot of uninjured

fans were also in distress and I helped ccmfort some of then. A

large number of officers had now arrived at the rear of the West Stand

by this time and I assisted with getting the injured to ambulances

nearby. Whilst at the rear of the stand I saw a supporter come round

with a man I believe to be the Chairman of Liverpool F.C.          I heard

the supporter to say to this man, that's the gate that was opened, we

didn't break it down, it's not damaged.     I said that no one had said

that the gate had been forced open.    Some fans were abusing Police
Officers, some called us murderers and some were still complaining

about Liverpool having the wrong end of the ground.          However, this

abuse was taken by the officers and the majority of Liverpool

supporters were sympathetic towards us and kept the angry element

under control.     Several fans came and shook hands with me and thanked

me, seme said that they were sorry for the behaviour of a small

number of their fans.
By 4.30 pn (1630) things began to ease, most of the crowds had left,

the injured had gone to hospital.     The relatives and friends of

people who were missing were directed towards the Police room under

the North Stand.     I then returned into the terrace and saw that there

was a lot of debris, clothes, shoes etc scattered about on the

terrace. I saw that a crash barrier had broken and Liverpool scarves

wera hanging from it.     I then joined other members of my serial. We


                                                                                    3159
                                                                       PAGE
                                                                       S847

        mads our way to the North Stand and there we were debriefed.

         I also wish to add that whilst on duty at the turnstiles, just after

         the crowd had been let through the gate, the steward on the gate

         remarked to me that it was the worst crowd he had ever seen in all
        his years at Hillsborough.




                                                             A AITKIN SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:
          TIME:            DATE:

^nWESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                3160
Incident 102      260390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER S1357

                                                                          Station
surname           RICH
Forenames         KEVIN LAURENCE
Age                                        Date of birth
Address


Occupation        POL PC1685
Telephone

IC                Height                   Build
Hair colour

  ir type


« es

Facial hair

Glasses           Use
                                           Complexion



                                           Accent

Number of Pages
Dated                                                                K RICH Signed


          On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I canmenced duty at 9.00 am (0900)

          at Wdmbwell Police Station.    Together with other officers, I travelled

          to the Hillsborough Football Ground in respect of the Nottingham

          Forest v Liverpool football match.
          I was to join part of Serial 15 which was commanded by Police Sergeant

          1757 BURNS.

          On arrival at the ground, I attended a general briefing, in the North

          Stand, from the various commanders.      On completion of the briefing I

          went with the serial, and also serial 14, Police Sergeant CRAWFORD'S

          serial, to the Leppings Lane Terraces. There we had a specific

          briefing from the Section Inspector, Mr WHITE.

          Whilst standing on the terracing, Mr WHITE pointed out the layout of

          the terracing.   He made reference to the fact that for normal matches
          the access gates between the enclosures north/centre north and centre
                                                               PAGE     2
                                                               S1357

south/south were kept locked and were manned by Police Officers.

However, in anticipation of the size of the crowd, the gates were
locked in the OPEN position.

Mr White briefed the serial and instructed that we should be

positioned inside the ground, alongside turnstiles 9-16. The duties

were to supervise entry, search people for alcohol and other

contraband (flags etc). On coupletion of entry the serial were then

to enter the Leppings Lane terrace at the rear, and supervise crowd

behaviour.   On completion of the game, we went to assist in the

clearing of the ground. Mr WHITE in closing said that in an ideal

situation he would have used our two serials in the terracing to

help locate and distribute the crowds within the enclosures.

The serial took up position in front of the Gate 'B' and turnstiles 9-

16 at around 11.00 am (1100). The turnstiles at this stage were not

open and the time was used to familiarise ourselves with the club

officials, and other facilities that were present in the area, snack

bars, programme sellers, etc.

The turnstiles opened at about noon (1200) and from this time onward
there was a steady trickle of fans entering the ground.   The great

majority at this time had already been searched prior to entry into

the ground. However, there was no animosity and the second search
afforded a certain amount of rapport with the fans.   It was noticeable

that all the people entering the ground at this time were honest,

decent people, well dressed and well behaved. One or two came through

with cans of 'pop' but they quickly disposed of this in a proper

manner when challenged.   On two occasions I took possession of items

that I considered unsuitable for use in the terracing, one a pair of

sticks from a banner, and the second a stone bottle, but once again

the fans accepted my decision in good part, and agreed to collect

their property after the game.
                                                                 PAGE      3
                                                                 S1357

From the opening of the turnstiles at 12 noon (1200) until sometime

after 2.00 pn (1400), the entry flow to the ground gradually

increased, without problem, like any other football match.

At some stage, turnstiles 9 and 10 were barriered off to the Leppings

Lane end and used for the entry to the North Stand. This reduced, by

two, the number of turnstiles available.

As the time progressed, I became gradually aware of a build-up of

supporters outside the ground, though my view of the proceedings was

limited to what I could see through the turnstile. As the crowds

built up I became conscious of people having difficulty in entering

through the turnstile.   The crush outside was such that the

turnstiles, on occasions, were unable to function properly and people
were being injured in the turnstile passage. More than one man

emerged from the turnstile bent double and I saw one man physically

sick.

From these people entering the ground, I began to understand that

there were difficulties outside the ground, and it was about this time
that I became aware of people banging and shouting outside and many

appeared to be kicking and banging on the concertina gate.     Given all
this information I formed the opinion that there were great masses of

people outside, although I was not aware of any specific difficulty.

It was about this time that a youth appeared on top of the wall above

the turnstiles.   He was told to get down, but he was shouting that

people were in difficulties outside the gates.   He attempted to gain

entry to the ground, but I took hold of him and ejected him through

Gate 'C'. I did not use Gate 'B' because I was aware of a vast number

of people outside. On my return to position, I saw that the

roof and surrounding wall were literally covered with supporters who

had climbed into the ground.   Some were endeavouring to enter the

ground, some were complaining of the crush outside, and others were
                                                                 PAGE      4
                                                                 S1357

brandishing valid entry tickets.    It was about this time that we were

joined by an Inspector and other officers.    I do not know his name, he

was not our section Inspector.    He climbed on to the roof of the

turnstile and beckoned other officers to do so, but none did.    This

Inspector began helping people into the ground, and at one stage the

turnstile roof was literally covered with spectators. At this stage

I received an instruction, from whom I know not, that provided these

spectators had tickets, then we should admit them.    The persons on

the roof began to enter the ground.    The majority of people had

tickets but many did not.   The persons who had gained access then

began to pass the unchecked tickets back over the roof and over the
wall.

At one stage, one person who was attempting to gain access came into

my grasp, he began saying, "I've got a ticket, I've got a ticket."

He also showed me a Merseyside Police Warrant Card, the name on it, I

believe,          Dr similar.   I made ccrrment to him about having more

sense, and he became quite angry complaining about the things that
were going on outside, and the lack of professionalism on the part of

South Yorkshire Police. As he passed into the ground, I made comment

to Police Sergeant BURNS that he was a Police Officer.

I became aware of a general upsurge in activity both inside and

outside the ground, and that people were still climbing in and passing

unused tickets backwards.   The banging on the metal gate increased,
when I saw one of the club stewards on the gate go to the opening

mechanism.   I looked at him and he said, "I'm opening this gate, I'll
take responsibility", and proceeded to open the concertina gate.       I

did not see who assisted in the opening. As the crowds entered the

ground I had to take refuge alongside turnstile 16. Several hundred

people entered the ground and I was amazed that the rush stopped and
there was only a few people outside. As the gates were being closed,
                                                                   PAGE    5
                                                                   S1357

I looked outside and saw that the Mounted Section were holding a large

crowd back in Leppings Lane.

A large number of those admitted through Gate 'B' were hanging around

the turnstile area.     I saw people attempting to throw unused tickets

over the gates, pass than under the gates or through the gap in

between the gates.    It became obvious to me at this stage that

ticket control had got out of hand, and this seemed to be reflected by

the turnstile operators who seemed to be allowing anybody in, with or

without tickets.     I had no idea of the time but some time after the

gates had been opened, several minutes, I heard a cheer within the

ground, and I assumed this to be the kick-off.     I continued to watch

people enter through the turnstiles when I saw the gate open again and

a number of Police Officers rushed into the ground, saying that there

was trouble on the terracing.

A faw moments later Police Sergeant BURNS ordered us as a serial to

enter the terraced area at the Leppings Lane end.     I entered through

the centre tunnel under the West Stand. As I passed down the tunnel,
I was met by various groups of people rushing up the tunnel carrying

injured persons to the rear of the stand.    Some of the spectators were

very angry and began screaming at Police Officers saying, there's

people dead down there, it's your fault. As I was making my way

forward to assist in the rescue and removal of the injured, I was
confronted by angry fans waving tickets, and saying, "We've never
been checked, these tickets are unused, you've let too many in here,

you're responsible."     I assisted to the best of my ability in the

removing of some dead and numerous slightly injured persons to the

rear of the main stand.     I then went through the crowd and on to the

pitch in order to find other members of my serial.
Whilst making my way through the crowd, I was confronted by a range of

emotion from, "You're responsible - it's all your fault" to "It's not
                                                                PAGE     6
                                                                S1357

your fault personally". Many spectators remained in position and were

asking, "What time will kick-off be."

Whilst at the entrance to the tunnel, I saw fans in the West Stand

begin to rip hoardings from above the terraced area. The fans on the

terrace below complained that they were being showered with debris,

but I heard someone say, "Tell the press we're not all hooligans,

these are for stretchers."

From this point I coaxed people to leave the ground, but many were

refusing to leave without refunds for unused tickets.

I later reformed with my serial and attended a debrief in the North

Stand.   It was at this point I made my point to a Senior Officer that

Gate 'B' had been opened, apparently without Police instruction.    I
then accompanied Inspectors WHITE and CALVERT to the area of the

turnstiles.

Whilst walking through the North Stand I was sickened by the number of

empty beer cans and spirit bottles that had been apparently smuggled

into the ground.

In the period that I was engaged on searching persons, I found no

alcohol at all but as the time approached 3.OOpn (1500), then cans and

bottles began to appear on the floor of the turnstile. When I

returned to the scene later I was confronted with quite a quantity of

empty and part empty cans in and around the turnstile.
Prior to attending the debrief we were standing as a serial alongside

the turnstile when I saw a small group of people, very upset, walking

towards the exit. A woman said, "Get rid of him, please, I'm trying to

find my husband." I saw a youngish person carrying a notebook. I said

to him, "Who are you?" He said, "I'm from the Star, I'm only after a

story. ” I told him to leave the woman alone as she was obviously

distressed.   He went towards Police Sergeant BURNS, who also told him

to go away.


                                                                             3166
                                PAGE
                                S1357


                                SIGNED

^^ATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:
          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
    Incident 102      260390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER S850

                                                                            Station
*    umame            PEARSON
    Forenames         HELEN KAY
    Age                                      Date of birth
    Address           S YORKSHIRE POL, PENISTONE, BARNSLEY,

    Occupation        POL FC3107

    Telephone

    IC                Height                 Build
    Hair colour

    Hair type

%s                                           Complexion

    Facial hair

    Glasses           Use                    Accent

    Number of Pages

    Dated             270489                                  K PEARSON FC3107 Signed


              HELEN KAY PEARSON PC3107 PENISTONE

              On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I came on duty at Wombwell Police

              Station at 9am (0900), to be transported to the Sheffield

              Wednesday Football Stadium at Hillsborough for the match between
              Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. At 9.50am (0950) I paraded with

              other members of my serial in the North Stand of the Hillsborough

              Stadium. I was with serial 15, responsible to Sergeant 1757 BURNS. At

              10.15am (1015) we ate our packed meals then I was given a more

              detailed briefing with serial 15 and serial 14 on the terraces of the

              Wtest Stand at the Leppings Lane end, by Inspector WHITE. My serial,

              serial 15, was deployed to turnstiles 9 to 16 behind the West Stand

              inside the ground to search incoming fans for prohibited articles.

              Once the match began we were to be deployed in the North tunnel to

              observe public order.   I was not deviated to any other location.
                                                                 PAGE      2
                                                                 S850

At 11am (1100) I began my duties inside the turnstiles at the

Leppings Lane end.    The turnstiles opened to the public at 12 o'clock

(1200) although very few people came through at this time.

Gradually, the Liverpool fans began to trickle through, mostly

families at this time.    The atmosphere was good natured and

friendly.     I was engaged in searching the incoming fans as they came

through the turnstiles and directing them to their places. At 1.10

pm (1310) I confiscated a Swiss pen knife from a male fan which

was put in the property store to be collected by the gentleman after

the match. At this time there was still only a slow trickle of

supporters entering the ground.
At 2.20pm (1420) I remember noting the time and commenting to a

colleague that it did not seem very busy and that it seemed that many

fans were "cutting it a bit fine" to get into the ground for the kick-
off. Very shortly after this, large numbers of Liverpool fans began
to congregate outside the turnstiles, pushing and shoving to get

through the turnstiles. Most of the fans I searched at this

time smelled of alcohol.    Through the turnstiles I could see

people pushing and shoving and being crushed up against the
turnstiles.     People ccming through were pale faced, sweating and
complaining about the crush outside.     I could hear people banging on

the concertina gate next to the turnstiles (Gate B) to be let in.

Several fans climbed up the wall above the turnstiles and refused to

get back down when we shouted at them, saying they were being crushed

against the wall outside. A few fans clambered through the turnstiles

without tickets, these were apprehended and ejected from the ground.
As kick-off approached the mood of the crowd worsened, there was an

air of apprehension inside the turnstiles as those outside became

more desperate to get in the ground.     It became obvious that the

situation outside was becoming chaotic.     I spoke to a Policewoman who


                                                                               3169
                                                                  PAGE    3
                                                                  S850

cane through the turnstiles.     She said she had been outside the

turnstiles and had been pinned against the wall by the crush of

people and that she had been frightened. More and more fans were

clambering up on top of the wall above the turnstiles now,

complaining of the situation outside and trying to jump down inside

the ground. An Inspector from another serial climbed on to the roof

of the turnstiles himself to view the situation on the other side.

He began to help the fans who were sitting on the wall to get down on

to the roof of the turnstiles and into the ground. Many of the fans

were injuring themselves as they jumped off the turnstile roof.      By

now lots of fans were on the wall and as they jumped from the top of

the wall or off the roof of the turnstiles they were running into the

ground, it was impossible to check to see if they all had tickets.
As they jumped off the turnstile roof they brought down the

guttering.   One such fan almost landed on top of me.   I helped him to

his feet and asked to see his ticket, he said he had given it in at

the turnstile.   I told him that if he could not produce his ticket he
would be ejected from the ground. At this he became very abusive and

started to struggle violently.    PC 78 BOOTH came to my assistance and
he and PC 253 BURKE marched the fan away to be ejected.     I then

resumed my duties at the turnstiles.

By now it was inpossible to search everyone, as they came over the

wall or through the turnstiles, they were charging into the West

Stand, shoving past anyone in their way.     Suddenly, I became aware

of a surge of fans and saw that the concertina gate (Gate B) had been
opened.   I had to jump to the side to avoid being knocked over as

fans ran into the ground.   I would estimate that approximately three

hundred people came through the gate and then it was closed. When the

area inside the turnstiles had cleared of people I made my way to the

tunnel in the centre of the Wtest Stand, noticing a number of empty,


                                                                              3170
                                                                 PAGE    4
                                                                 S850

crushed beer cans which must have been kicked through the

turnstiles. A few fans were coming out of this tunnel and shouting

abuse at me, saying that they were being crushed in the pens and that

I should do something about it. One man came up to me in a

distressed state and said that there were some children at the front

of the pen being squashed.   I spoke to PC 3023 MARTIN and together we

made our way down the tunnel. I did not note the time but it was only

a faw minutes after the gate had been opened. When we got to the end

of the tunnel, which was empty at this stage except for a couple of

fans making their way out, I saw that the pens on either side of the

central dividing fence were packed.   Fans were climbing up on to this

fence and being hauled up into the seating area above. Other people

were pushing each other up to be caught by people leaning down frcm

the seats.   I shouted at the fans on the fence to get down, partly

because I feared they would fall and injure themselves and partly

because I feared the overhanging seating area might collapse.    I

triad to push my way into the left hand pen (Pen 4) by pushing fans

back underneath the retaining barriers and up into the tunnel.    As I
shoved further down the pen I saw that several fans had spilled onto

the pitch and that there were Policemen standing on the fence at the

front of the pen signalling to me to get people out to the rear.

At this stage I realised the seriousness of the situation and began

shoving the fans under the barriers and shouting at them to get out.

It was almost impossible for me to make myself heard above the noise

of the crowd.   Myself and PC MARTIN tried to clear a passage to the

front but most of the fans we tried to move wouldn't get out, stating

that they had paid to see the match and weren't leaving. As I

managed to get nearer the front of the pen the crowd was hysterical,

screaming abuse at me as I tried to get them under the barriers, seme

because they didn't want to move and otters because I think they were


                                                                             3171
                                                                   PAGE   5
                                                                   S850

frightened.   I could hear someone screaming "She's fucking dead, do

something", over and over again and when I made my way to him I saw a

heap of about six male bodies with a female body on the top.   This

pila of bodies was being trampled on by other fans. The woman on top

had obviously been dead for some time, her face was purple and her

lips and eyes were black.    I couldn't get down to them for the

crush of people around me who were trying to get out and I had got

separated from PC MARTIN.    Eventually I managed to organise the fans

to carry out these bodies and helped carry the last man from the pile

out myself.   By now there were more Police in the tunnel as it became

obvious that a disastrous situation was occurring. We had to step

over many bodies which had been put down in the tunnel until we got
to a clear space in the enclosed area, imrtediately behind the West

Stand.   I made sure that the unconscious man I had helped carry out

was breathing, put him in the recovery position and left him in the

care of another fan while I went to help with the many bodies which

were now laid out in the area behind the West Stand.

It is my opinion that from the sheer number of injured and dead

people and the condition of some of the bodies, the crushing must

have started some time before the gate was opened.

Next I helped a colleague who was trying to revive a dead man, I gave

mouth to mouth resuscitation whilst she worked on his chest.   The man

smelled strongly of alcohol. Although we worked for a long time we

were unable to revive him.    I covered his face with something and

moved on to help scmeone else.    I saw a man laying on the ground whose

face was blue                                               he was

dead so I removed his outer coat and covered his face. There were

fans wandering amongst the dead and injured bodies, frantically

searching for friends or relatives who were missing. Most of the
fans were in an extreme state of shock.    I tried to comfort and


                                                                              3172
                                                                  PAGE   6
                                                                  S850

reassure several of these people but there was little I could do for

them, one man clung to me and cried hysterically.   I had to sit him

facing a wall so he couldn't see the dead bodies lying all around.

It seemed to be quite a while before the ambulances arrived, during

this time I administered First Aid to several people as best I
could. When the ambulances arrived I tried to organise those who I

knew were seriously injured to have priority in the ambulances. The

ambulances queued up in the lane behind the walled area behind the

West Stand.   Dead bodies were laid along one side of the lane,

injured bodies along the other side. When all the dead bodies had

been removed from the area behind the West Stand an announcement was

broadcast, asking the fans to leave.   I stood with a line of other
Policemen in front of the gate leading out to where the dead and

injured people were lying to prevent them from using this gate. As

the fans made their way out from the seating area of the West Stand

many of them were abusive to the Police, saying such things as "This

is all your fault" and "Murdering Bastards". When all these people

had made their way out I went back into the pens to clear the
remaining fans from there. There were several people looking for
missing friends and relatives, I advised these people to go to the

Police room by the North Stand although at this time I wasn't aware

that any arrangements had been made to deal with these people.

Eventually I was reunited with other members of serial 15 and we made

our way to the North Stand where we were told that 96 people had

died. When we were stood down from the North Stand I returned to

Wombwell Police Station and went off duty at 7.30pm (1930).




                                                                             3173
                                                  PAGE     7
                                                  S850


                                K. PEARSON PC3107 SIGNED

;5aTEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                               31 74
Incident 102      260390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER S840

                                                                          Station
Surname           FORD

Forenames         BARRY GEORGE
Age                                      Date of birth
Address           S YORKS POL, ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION BRANCH, WOMBWELL,
                  BARNSLEY
Occupation        POL PC2364

Telephone

IC                Height                 Build

Hair colour

Hair type

fL                                       Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                    Accent

Number of Pages
Dated             260489                                                    Signed


          BARRY GEORGE FORD PC2364   I.A.B WOMBWELL
          On Saturday, 15 April, 1989, (150489) I came on duty at 9 am (0900) at

          Womfcwell Police Station to travel to Sheffield Wednesday ground at

          Hillsborough.
          Along with B2 officers travelled to Hillsborough in the B2 transit

          for the briefing at the ground at 10am, (1000).
          At 10am (1000) the briefing was commenced in the North Stand after

          which a second briefing took place on Leppings Lane terraces by

          Inspector WHITE, with regards B1 and B2 serials working with the

          Turnstiles 11-16 next to Gate 'B', Inspector WHITE mentioned that if he

          had two more serials he would have used them to pack people in the

          terraces when it started to get full.
          Under the supervision of PS1757 BURNS our serial took up position along

          turnstiles 11 to 16 at about 11 am, (1100).    I was alongside Gate 'B'

                                                                                     3175
                                                                 PAGE    2
                                                                 S840

at Turnstile 15 and 16 with PC 1543 AITKIN.

At 12 (1200) the turnstiles were opened and persons started to enter

mainly families, carried out duties of searching them for cans of pop

or beer, as a lot were carrying their packed meal     ie sandwiches.

At 1pm (1300) the flow through the turnstiles was     still quiet,no

smell of drink on the fans at this stage.

About 1.45pm (1345) to 2pm (1400) spectators increased outside

turnstiles with a greater flow through of people.

Sometime after 2 pm (1400) I was aware that there was a mass of people
outside the turnstiles, and through a glass-perspex viewing window in

Gate 'B' I saw people packed and crushed on to the outer side of Gate

'B'.
Also people began to get pushed through turnstiles 15 and 16 by the

mass behind them and people were getting their legs and lower

stomach area crushed against the bars of the turnstiles.
Sanetime later youths started to climb on top of the wall and roof

area of Turnstiles 15 and 16 and to my right the same over Turnstiles

13 and 14. They were told to get down but would not due to the crush

outside the ground, and showed tickets to prove they had them. At

one stage I saw the coping stone off the wall top becctne loose.     I
shouted to two fans to pass it down to me as I was fearful it might

fall on to myself or fans outside, they did so and it was laid down

alongside the wall next to Gate 'B'.
Eventually a Police Inspector climbed on to the inner roof of our

turnstile, fans were helped down into the ground that way.   Frcxn

outside Gate 'B' fans I heard shouting and screaming from the fans to
the effect "Seme fuckers going to get killed". I noted that there

was a strong smell of alcohol from outside of Gate 'B'. The gate was

moving in its tracks (it is a sliding concertina gate), due to

pressure on it. There were people still getting pushed into the


                                                                             3176
                                                                  PAGE   :
                                                                  S840

turnstiles and hurting their bodies. Looking through Turnstile 16

there were fans climbing on the steel wall to the left side of No 16,
I could see a mounted officer (with a white shirt not an Inspector)

trying to get to the front of No 15 and 16 with great difficulty.

I was wary of Gate 'B' collapsing inwards so I kept to the side of it

next to turnstile 16. PC AITKIN suddenly said to me "Watch out there

opening the gate" which I had my back to, I turned round and saw a PC

not from our serial open Gate 'Br with a yellow coated steward.     I
did not know the PC.

A rush of fans came through the gate into the turnstile area, sane 5

to 6 hundred roughly, I then saw fans throwing full tickets up to

fans on the roof and over the fence to those outside.    There was a lot

of commotion in the general area, inside the turnstiles and still a

lot of shoving still in the turnstile crowd trying to push people
through.

A matter of minutes later there was a loud banging on Gate 'B' from

outside, (I had closed the gate after it went quiet after the fans

came through). On looking through the window in the gate I saw a

group of Police Officers wanting to get in.    I opened the gate and

about 15 to 20 PC's rushed in saying they were wanted on the track
(pitch perimeter). I closed the gate and carried on with turnstile

duty.

My attention was drawn to a lot of noise around the central tunnel

area under the stand (West). I went into that area which is behind a

wall fron Turnstiles 11 to 16, at the mouth of the centre tunnel I
saw people coming out.    I went into the tunnel and saw people coming
out carrying others.     I took hold of a male being carried - dragged

by other young males and realised he was unconscious, he was laid at

the back of the stand and left in care of youth, I went back into

the terrace area via the tunnel and assisted in carrying about 10


                                                                             3177
                                                                         PAGE    4
                                                                         S840

       plus persons out, all obviously injured and it was obvious some were

       dead.

       Eventually, the terrace cleared a lot and through a space in the

       crowd I could see a pile - mass of bodies at the bottom of Terrace

        (no 3) to the right of centre, some 5 to 6 deep below the broken

       rail.     I continued assisting to get people out through tom fence on

       to pitch area, male and females, some dead, some unconscious.
       Eventually the area cleared, went on to pitch area, during lifting

       bodies I was verbally abused but not attacked.     Fans in seated area

       above were directing verbal abuse at Police in terrace area.

       There was a lot of clothing and shoes and glasses and coins in

       terrace area, did not see anyone actually stealing, but rummaging

       through, they were cleared back and I looked after the property until

       it was transferred on to pitch and tagged.
       The match was finally abandoned and people started to leave the

       ground.     Eventually I went to sit in the North Stand for debriefing.

       At 6.30 pm (1830) I drove B2 van and serial back to Wcmbwell going off

       duty at 7 pm (1900) that day.
       When I entered the tunnel there was no crushing in the tunnel, those

       being carried out had been passed over fence frcm the front of
       Terrace No 3.     I did not see Terrace No 4 until after it had cleared

       but something must have taken place in that terrace due to a lot of

       clothing, shoes and property left trampled on in there. After I had

       met up with my serial when the ground was cleared I noted at the

       turnstile area empty beer cans KESTREL, empty bottles of 'PILS' strong

       lager in and around turnstiles.
                                                          Barry G FORD


                                                           Barry G FORD SIOJED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:


                                                                                     3178
Incident 102        260390 CIP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                                STATEMENT NUMBER S843
                                                                                    Station

It
s a m lame
      e              RICHARDSON

Forenames            STEVEN

Age                                         Date of birth
Address             S. YORKS. POLICE,
                    DOEWORTH, BARNSLEY
Occupation          POL PC2654

Telephone

IC                  Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type

ft.                                         C a n p le x io n

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                     Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                260489                                                           Signed


             STEVEN RICHARDSON

             POLICE CONSTABLE 2654

             B2 DOEWORTH
             On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I commenced duty at Dodworth at

             8.30am (0830), frcm there I travelled to Wcmfcwell and met up with the

             rest of Serial 15 before travelling to Hillsborough, arriving in the

             North Stand at about 9.40am (0940) that day.         Serial 15 was made up
             entirely of officers frcm B2 Sub Division and was commanded by

             PS1757 BURNS. We were deployed to the inside of the Leppings Lane

             turnstiles and were detailed to search persons entering the ground

             for missiles, alcohol and other prohibited items.         Our initial order

             was to cover turnstiles 9 to 16 which afforded entry into the

             Leppings Lane terrace and the West Stand.          Shortly after the
             turnstiles were opened it was noticed that the wrong sign was over

                                                                                               3179
                                                                 PAGE    2
                                                                 S843

turnstiles 9 and 10, and these were partitioned off frcm us by means

of a metal barrier inside the ground, so that people entering through

these turnstiles were afforded access into the North Stand.     I was

not deviated frcm this location.

From the time the turnstiles opened there was a steady flow of
persons into the ground, and on the whole they were good natured with

few objecting to being searched and some even enjoying the search.

Two males who entered the ground during the early stages announced

that they were Police Officers frcm Merseyside, although they did not

show any identification nor were they required to. They did express

the opinion that the number of searches seemed to be excessive until

the reasons were explained to them and then they accepted it.
I was aware that the number of people entering the ground seemed to

be very slow, and then when I could see that the outside of the

turnstile seemed to be filling up I remanber looking at the time, it

was 2.15pm (1415). Large crowds were massing outside the turnstiles

and people began to scale the perimeter wall.   These that had scaled
the wall did not come down into my area but climbed along the top of

door 'B' and onto the roof of turnstiles A/G.   Some sat it out on the

roof of turnstiles 11 to 16. By now the flow of people into the

ground had increased immensely, and the actual job of searching

became more difficult.   There were people entering the ground who

were obviously very agitated by what was happening outside, and were

pleading to help with a situation that apparently was becoming out of

control, and that people were being hurt in the crush outside

the ground, of people trying to get into the ground. As they got

through the turnstiles some were sweating profusely and were screaming

that friends and members of their families were still outside the
ground, and that if something was not done then someone was likely

to die.   I explained that I was able to do anything about it and


                                                                             3180
                                                                 pact:
                                                                 S843

that there were officers outside who would deal with it, but

obviously this didn't appease the people and they went to other

officers screaming the same to them.    Inspector BENNETT, I believe it

was, arrived on the scene and climbed onto the roof of turnstiles 9

to 16 and began to get people down into the ground. One such person
was a youth who was wearing a turquoise T shirt, who I had kept

watch on because he was one of the first to climb onto the roof.       I

had told him earlier that if he had a ticket he could get down and

he would be allowed into the ground, but he refused my offer.    I saw

a man approach and hand to the youth, who was still on the roof, a

ticket.    This obviously caused him to get down and on doing so I told

him that he was being ejected frcm the ground.    There were large

numbers of people milling around the turnstiles and I had to stand

abuse frcm them as I led the youth away, they obviously wanted him to

remain in the ground.    I was already aware that any ejections had to

be made through Gate 'C' and I moved towards them with the youth. As

I passed behind turnstiles A/G there were a similar number of people
milling around the turnstiles, and because of these people whilst I

could see Gate 'C', I could not see who was operating it. As I got

approximately five yards (5 yds) away frcm the door I saw that it had
been opened and then a flood of people began to enter the ground.

Such were the numbers of people entering that I feared for my own

safety and I released my hold on the youth I was escorting and took
refuge in a turnstile until the flood had subsided. As these people

had entered the ground there was obvious panic and they were

literally climbing over each other in an attempt to get to the

terraces. After they had passed I gave what assistance I could to

those injured and trampled and when the situation appeared calm I

returned to my position. At this time I believe the doors were still

open.     I would estimate that there would have well in excess of a


                                                                           3181
                                                                 pact:   4
                                                                 S843

thousand people having entered through Gate 'C'. When I returned to

ray position I saw that people were handing tickets to people in the

turnstiles. They were obviously people who had entered illegally and
wera trying to get others into the ground, two of these I managed to

retain. As well as full tickets they were also trying to hand back

parts of tickets and these I also managed to retain.   The problem

with climbing the perimeter wall ceased when a mounted officer took up

a position outside turnstile 16.

Some time after this two uniformed officers came to the doors within

my section, Gate 'B', and took hold of the handles as if to open

them. A steward remonstrated with them not to open the gates and a

discussion took place between them which unfortunately I did not
hear. A few seconds later that gate was opened by the two officers

and once more I had to seek refuge as the crowds roared into the

ground. After the rush into the ground the doors were closed and the

two officers went away.   They were not officers frcm Serial 15 or

Serial 14.
Shortly after this a number of officers entered the ground and raced

towards the terraces but at this stage I was unaware of what had

happened, as there was only the one radio issued to the serial

sergeant, and at that time the serial sergeant was busy elsewhere.
Shortly after this Sergeant BURNS returned and ordered the turnstiles

to be closed.
At about this time a man emerged from the area at the rear of the

terraces in a very distraught condition and was only wearing the one

shoe. He was sweating and told us that someone was likely to get
hurt on the terrace if somebody didn't do anything. When the crowd

had surged through Gate 'B' a number of shoes had been left behind

and these had been placed at the side of the programme sellers Porta

cabin.   I showed the shoes to the man and then made my way, with the


                                                                             3182
                                                                        PAGE      5
                                                                        S843

        rest of the serial towards the tunnel beneath the West Stand.

        As I entered the tunnel I could see people coming towards me, some

        injured and other helping them, some making their way on their own.

        It was obvious that people needed to be moved out of the terracing

        and I attempted to do this, but this was met with a torrent of abuse,

        and the only people willing to move away were those who were injured or

        in need of space because they had been caught up in the incident.

        Eventually people did begin to move back down the tunnel, but they

        did so reluctantly, and I could see that the main activity was taking
        place on the touch line.    I made my way down to the touchline through

        the Centre North section of the terracing, because I could see the

        incident was taking place in the Centre South section which I couldn't

        reach. As I neared the touch line I saw a Police Officer attempting

        to kick away the wire mesh of the fence at the track side.    People

        were still trying to force a way through, in the Centre South

        section.   Once onto the trackside I gave what assistance I could to

        the dead and injured.
        I can only describe what happened on the terraces on my arrival as a

        form of mass hysteria and possibly frustration at being told to move

        when they wanted to watch the game.
        I was not aware until later that the game had been started.



                                                          S RICHARDSON SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME:             DATE:    260489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE

END OF REPORT




                                                                                      3183
Incident 102          260390 OP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                            STATEMENT NUMBER S2223

                                                                            Station

      lame            WHITE

Forenames             HARRY

Age                                            Date of birth

Address               HAMMERTON RD POLICE STATION


Occupation            POL INS

Telephone

IC                    Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

  es                                           Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses               Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                 100689                                         H. WHITE Signed


             9.00am    (0900) On Duty at Hammerton Rd Police Station. Full group

                                present.

             To ground in Police Transit D634
             9.30am    (0930) Gymnasium/Police Rocm.    Report presence draw radio.

             9.45am    (0945) North stand for briefing by Chief Superintendent

                                Duckenfield.

             10.00am (1000)     Briefing

             10.15am (1015)     Packed meal.
             10.45am (1045)     Alone to Leppings Lane terraces and West Stand,

             because I have been Inspector in charge of this end on a fairly

             regular basis since 1985.      I hold a set of    keys to thepadlocks on

             inner gates and the main exit/ingress gates A, B and C.    Information

             of capacity crowd, therefore padlocked six pen gates (one upstairs,

             five in terrace pens) to wall in the open position.    Checked that two
                                                                PAGE     2
                                                                S2223

West Stand 'wing' emergency exit gates had bolts 'shot' with gate in

closed position but gates NOT padlocked.   Checked storerooms and

tunnel gates beneath West Stand (including switch gear room). Quick

physical check of terraces and elevated section for unwanted

articles.   Area secure all okay.

11.10am (1110) Briefed serials 14 and 15 (from Barnsley) on terraces

in front of central tunnel and in two areas at rear West Stand behind
turnstiles A-G and 11-16.    (Note 9 and 10 turnstiles to be used for

North Stand.   Blue gate left open and C.C. barrier hung on hasp).

Brief per own notes of 14.4.89 (140489) scribbled on my briefing notes

and covering mainly -

1. SAFETY
Evacuation procedures and messages and identify Police Constables with
specific gate responsibilities in emergency evacuation.   Other E/E

responsibilities.    Searching drink/weapons.

2. TV
Individual behaviour on National TV and our own to monitor.    Here to

Police, not watch match.

3. PROPERTY CABIN
Provision new porta-cabin for retaining seized items and procedure

dealing property.

4. CASH SNATCH
Last year's cash snatch at snack bar West Stand.   Showed physically

location snacks bars and included programme sellers and one thousand

pound they would take and hold in cloth bags.

5. FIN 15's

Special Events

6. TICKET COLOURS

Brovvn to North Stand.

Red to West Stand.
                                                                  PAGE     3
                                                                  S2223

Purple to Lepping Lane Terraces.

7. OFF DUTY

No one to go off duty without permission.

11.25am (1125) Called all stewards to West Stand whether deployed on

stand or terraces.   Identified two stewards responsible for West Stand

wing E/E gates.   Ensure all aware E/E procedure and repeated tannoy
messages for alert and stand down.   Stewards would have to ensure

ticket in right place and steward crowd.

No ticket - no entry.

All aware their positions allocated by club.

All wearing proper identification.

12 noon   (1200) Turnstiles open. Officers and stewards in position.
Build up gradual and friendly. Well behaved. Made constant checks

of snack bars, programme sellers re security.    Supervision of pen

filling unnecessary officers, stewards and turnstile progress okay.

Between 1.30pm (1330) and 2.00pm (1400) Approximately six men with

Liverpool accents at Gate 'C'. Steward on gate called men.      Produced

small wallets with dynatape claiming 'Official Liverpool stewards'.

No tickets attempt to 'yank' gate open but I anticipate and held firm.

I slanmed it shut.   Repeat performance ten minutes later. No entry.

About 2.30pm (1430) 'Last minute' build up started.    Press on

turnstiles.   Boy fainted to property cabin.    Deploy Police Constable

to snack bar and then two Police Constables to programme sellers not

in porta-cabins. Check pens and elevated section.     No problems.
Approximately 2.40pm (1440). Young Police Constable with 'stupid and

legless' drunk wandering about in concourse at rear A-G turnstiles.
Did not know where to go. Took him to Police Rocm. Had to support

drunk all way.    (Police Constable 1719 or 1715 or similar).

2.45pm (1445) Checked watch leaving police room, radio message, 'Get

seme more horses up here", (or similar). Auto - assumed leppings Lane
                                                                     PAGE    4
                                                                     S2223

end. Unknown officer said, "Sounds like its getting busy at your end

Harry".     Returned to Leppings Lane end via route under North Stand.

Getting busy.     Concourse rear 11-16.    Climbing over wall above gate

'B'. Joined Police Constables at 'B' gate entice down.        Fans

distrustful. Waving their tickets.         Inspector John Bennett had
climbed onto turnstiles roof to deal.

Aware of the crush outside 11-16 turnstiles.       Coming through very

slowly.     Stepped away from turnstiles to watch Inspetor Bennett but

two or three times I was pulled by Liverpool people who had got inside

who were complaining about the crush outside. "You should be out

there.     People are gonna get killed".
Through the gate in the wall between the two concourses at the rear of

twD sets of turnstiles.     I became aware of a movement of people.      From
previous experience I knew it was too much for turnstile flow and

there were too many for waiting friends responding to a kick off or

crowd cheer or similar.     I stepped through into the concourse behind

A-G.     (Not sure whether pulled again by fans).
TWice called on radio using allocated call sign 'India 7'.

I seemed to recall that all the turnstiles had stopped.       Men were
screaming trapped in them. Gate "C was open and people were coming

through.    The terror in the turnstiles communicated itself to me

and brought the seriousness of the situation to mind.

I want out through gate 'C'
I remember standing alongside Inspectors Graham Delaney and Bob Purdy

and Sergeant John Morgan pulling people out of the crush on
turnstiles A-G.     I feared some would be killed.     Some were reluctant

to come.     I think they had got so close to the turnstiles they had the

single intention of passing through.        I shouted at seme, and as many

as possible I pulled under the iron bar that is a continuation of the

wall housing gate 'C'. The crush quite suddenly eased.         I saw gate
                                                                     PAGE        5
                                                                     S2223

'B' had been opened.    The queues became controllable and containable

again.    The two turnstiles nearest gate 'C' appeared to function

again.    Sergeant Barry Sorsby on his police horse came up to the

railing and using the horse as a barrier we were able to filter out of

this agitated crowd fans who produced tickets.     I told the stewards on

gate 'C' to take the stubs.

By now I have no idea of time or what is happening outside.

By word of mouth information passed, "Inside - Pitchinvasion".        Went

to the pitch via rear of police control box and downthe first steps

in the South Stand.     I saw no players or officials on the pitch.

The invasion appeared to have spread as far as the penalty spot.        I

got on to the pitch and had got near to the goal post when I noticed

those on the pitch were not running towards opponents end or away

from Police Officers.    Some were holding themselves, others lying

down.    I looked towards the fence holding back fans in the lappings

Lane terraces.    Police Officers were standing on the fence and leaning

over.    Through the gaps in the legs I could see the faces of fans
pressed against the fence.     I realised they were stood up dead.     The

gate to this pen was opened.     I think it was number 3 gate.

Automatically (or it seemed) Police Officers formed a double line up

to the gate and formed a chain gang to pass out casualties. When

there was no one at your end of the line to pass on the casualty, you

carried it on to the pitch.     Police Constable 2417 Pete Rotchel and I
carried the unconscious body of a 14 years old boy, dressed in a blue

tee-shirt and blue jeans, on to the pitch.     I felt his heart beat but

his breathing was so extrarely shallow that I thought he was dead. We

prepared to do mouth-to-mouth when I realised he as in fact breathing

himself.    We did not interrupt his natural breathing and monitored
his condition very closely, keeping him warm and protected.      I
rarcanber as I was kneeling over him that I was kicked in the back.          I
                                                                  PAGE     6
                                                                  S2223

seemed surrounded by the click-whizz, click-whizz of cameramen.

People came with a board and this boy was carried away. More came

with another board to carry away the young woman being attended to

next to us.   I remember intervening as they were going to place her on

the board nails up.   I turned and saw behind me a fireman apply

cardiac message to a male in early thirties. He then gave oral

resuscitation and I knelt beside the casualty to do cardiac message.

As the fireman sat back he signalled me not to continue.    We checked

for vital life signs, there were none.     I covered the casualty's face

with the front of his sweater.
I heard soneone say, "They're charging".     I looked towards the Spion

Kop and saw people on the field moving towards it. They were not

running.   It looted as though a confrontation was imminent.   I went

beyond the half way line and made uniformed officers form up in a

line. There was a line across the width of the pitch. This halted

the progress of the Liverpool fans. Seme of them were crying.      Seme

were frustrated.   Some were angry.   It did not help to hear the mass
of Notts fans behind chanting and goading.    They seemed unaware of the

tragedy.
4.20pm (1620) This was the first lull in the sequence of events since

I left the police room.   I looked at my watch, it was 4.20pm (1620). I
became aware that my radio was still working.     There were public

address announcanents and the ground slowly emptied.
5.00pm (1700) Given hot drinks.   Mustered serials in North Stand and

spoke to officers distressed by experiences.

About 5.30pm (1730) I went to gymnasium which was being used as a
temporary mortuary and I assisted in the collation of details of the

dead.
11.00pm (2300) Went off duty frcm the gymnasium.
                                         PAGE     7
                                         S2223


                                H. WHITE SIGNED

srni
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                      3190
Incident 102       260390 QP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                       STATEMENT NUMBER S1354

                                                                        Station
 lum aroe           CRAWFORD
Forenames          WILLIAM CAMERON
Age                 21   -   100          Date of birth

Address             BARNSLEY DIVISIONAL HEADQUARTERS


Occupation          POL PS1341
Telephone

IC                  Height                Build

Hair colour
Hair type

                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                    Accent
Number of Pages 6

Dated               250589                                     W CRAWFORD Signed


            At 9.00am (0900) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I reported at

            Barnsley Divisional Headquarters together with a number of Police

            Constables also from the same rota. Our scale of duty was weekly

            leave but we had volunteered to work the match.
            I was in charge of serial 14 which was made up frcm the following

            Officers

            PS 1341 CRAWFORD

            PC 136 SMALLMAN

            PC 1278 LANG
            PC 1002 WILD

            PC 2819 MCMANUS
            PC 2887 GRANT

            PC 1777 BRANSTON

            PC 2806 BUTLER
                                                                  PAGE    2
                                                                  S1354

PC 975 WASHINGTON

PC 3232 BURTON
PC 3347 THOMAS

Police Constable 1278 LANG and Police Constable 3347 THOMAS replaced

Police Constable             and Police Constable         who were sick

and annual leave respectively.

We left Barnsley Divisional Headquarters at 9.15am (0915) and arrived

at Hillsborough Football Ground at approximately 9.40am (0940).
At 10.00am (1000) this date, I attended the main briefing in the North

Stand with my serial where we were briefed by Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and Inspector SEWELL.    I also met Inspector

WHITE, 'F' Division, who was in command of serials 13 and 14 at the

Leppings Lane end.
After a refreshments break, I reported to Leppings Lane end with my

serial at 11.00am (1100) where we were briefed again by Inspector

WHITE who also covered the emergency procedure. In the event of an

emergency, Police Constable 975 WASHINGTON was to be deployed in the

central tunnel.
Our terms of reference was the searching of fans ccming through

turnstiles A-G at the rear of the West Stand, Leppings Lane end inside

the ground, for alcohol, weapons, etc.
We were in position at 11.15am (1115).
Several fans had started drifting into the ground by this time and I

noticed that there was about six fans in the centre North Pen.

From then on until approximately 2.00pm (1400), there was a gradual

increase of fans ccming into the ground.   The majority were good
humoured and friendly.   There was no problems at this stage, but I did

notice a number of supporters outside the turnstiles attempting to

enter the ground without a ticket.   I saw money offered to several

turnstile operators when I was present. When that happened, the fans
                                                                 PAGE    3
                                                                 S1354

did an about turn and mingled with the other supporters who were

queueing in an orderly manner outside. A few supporters without

tickets jumped the turnstiles and were ejected .Approximately at

2.00pm (1400), I deployed Police Constable 3232 BURTON to supervise

the programme sellers behind us because of the hassle from the

supporters. Police Constable 1002 WILD was deployed at the snack bar

at the rear of the West Stand also to supervise a number of fans.

Between 2.00-2.30pm (1400)-(1430), it was obvious there was a fairly

large number of fans outside the turnstiles without tickets. Daring

this I was playing particular attention to the turnstiles, when it

became apparent that a number of operators were taking payment.     I

therefore flitted between A-G turnstiles, with a view to catching

them out. There were no real problems at this time.
About 2.30pm (1430) there was a large number of fans ccming through

the turnstiles, many of whcm had been drinking but were not drunk.

Several cans of beer and lager had been 'binned' in the litter

basket on entry.   The mood of the majority of fans had changed and

they were becoming more aggressive.   The smell of drink was
becoming more apparent. At this time, I noticed radio reception was
'poor' and virtually non-existent.    I was not in a position to receive

any messages because of interference on the radio and also crowd noise,

which by this time had been increased tremendously.

Our serial Inspector, Inspector WHITE, was not present

from 2.30pm (1430) and I did not see him until about 3.30pm (1530).
I was unable to estimate the number of fans on entering the ground who

came to me and said, "Someone is going to get killed out there." A lot

more were abusive and threatening.    The mood worsened between 2.30-

2.45pm (1430)-(1435).   There appeared to be a number of fans having

difficulty getting through the turnstiles because of the sheer weight
of the supporters.   I did not consider the seven turnstiles adequate
                                                                PAGE     4
                                                                S1354

for the volume and I did notice turnstile 'G' which was the one

closest to Gate 'C', had difficulty in operating.   On closer

examination, I saw that it was a double turnstile which was seperated

by a dividing wooden partition.   Bolted on to the partition was large

wooden blocks directly facing the turnstiles to prevent illegal entry.

The sheer weight on this partition had distorted it and the blocks had

jammed against the turnstiles making them inoperative. A number of

fans had climbed over or under the turnstiles at the point.

There also appeared to be some difficulty with turnstile 'A'. A

Police Officer who was on duty outside turnstile 'G' was in danger of

getting crushed and I pulled him over the turnstile into the ground.

I was subjected to threats and obscenities from a number of Liverpool
fans who were shouting, "Get fucking out there and get something done

before someone gets killed." Their mood was aggressive and it was

obvious they had been drinking.

A large number of approximately twenty fans had climbed over the

perimeter wall onto the turnstile roof.   Several were caught and
ejected. Whilst ejecting one of these fans I saw a fattish Liverpool

supporter hand a bundle of ticket stubs to one of the fans on the

turnstile roof, who in turn threw them down to the crowd at the other

side of the perimeter wall.

About 2.45pm (1445), Gate 'C' opened and about fifty fans burst

through the gate.   I ran to the gate with Police Constable 1278 LANG

and managed to secure the gate, together with the stewards.
Despite losing radio contact, I was aware that the situation was being

monitored by the CCTV camera positioned in the South side of the West

Stand.
The noise was tremendous, the mood of the fans near kick off time was

getting worse as they came through the turnstiles, many of whom would

have been ejected normally for their attitude caused through drink,
                                                                PAGE     5
                                                                S1354

but the situation at this stage was not practicable.

Suddenly, Gate 'C' appeared to burst open again, approximately 2.50pm-

2.55pm (1450)-(1455), a large number of fans ran through into the

centre tunnel of the Leppings Lane end.

It was noticeable at this time that the situation had quietened down

considerably.
Shortly after 3.00pm (1500), there was a radio/tannoy message that all

Officers were required on the perimeter track.

I took my serial onto the perimeter track via the rear of the Police

Control into the South Stand and over the wall. I instructed them to

stay together as a serial because of the number of Police Officers who

were on the field at that time and I went straight to perimeter fence
at Pen 3.   I saw a large bunch of people piled on top of each other

against the wall and up against the security fencing.   The number 3

gate was partially open and had been wedged by a number of bodies.      It

was apparent that the situation was serious at this stage and speed

was essential.   I was unable to get through the gate because of the
bodies, therefore, I climbed onto the security fencing and pulled

several fans from the mass and over the fencing, together with my

serial.   The majority of these appeared in shock but were conscious.

I then went to the gate with Chief Superintendent NESBIT where, with

difficulty, managed to pull a number of bodies away frcm the gate

until it could be opened fully.
We organised a chain of Officers and dragged a great number of bodies

from this area. Where there was a sign of life by checking the

carotid artery, I attempted resuscitation and cardiac massage. My

serial was engaged in resuscitation and care of the bodies on the

field.    I organised a number of Liverpool fans as stretcher bearers

and they removed the bodies to the gymnasium.
A number of Officers on my serial, ie, Police Constable 2887 GRANT,
                                                                 PAGE    6
                                                                 S1354

Police Constable 2819 MCMANUS, Police Constable 1278 LANG, all were

instructed to remain with the bodies.

During the whole incident on the field I was not subjected to threats

or abuse, but I did see a number of flare-ups mainly by fans who had

been drinking and were wandering about aimlessly.   This was
understandable under the circumstances. I did see a number of coins

being thrown onto the field. A lot of Police Officers, St John's

Ambulancemen were engaged in resuscitation. Many were shouting for

oxygen, which was not forthcoming.   Initially, my feelings were of

frustration because I was unable to get to the people because of the
security fencing.   Perhaps if I could have, we may have been able to
sava a lot more lives.   The actual gates were wholly inadequate simply

because there was not enough and the ones which are there are too

small.

When the ground was eventually emptied, I escorted the Liverpool fans

with my serial out the Leppings Lane end to the main roundabout on
Penistone Road before returning to the gymnasium, where three Officers

on cny serial were involved in the sudden death reports.

At 7.20pm (1920), I returned to Claywheels Lane where some of the
serial had a meal as we waited transportation to Barnsley.     Police

Constable 2887 GRANT was the only Officer still engaged at that time

with his 'body'.
At 8.00pm (2000) I retired from duty.

Understandably, a number of my serial were upset by the situation but

all credit to them they did not show their emotion during the incident

and all performed creditably.
                                                  PAGE
                                                  S1354




                                W CRAWFORD PS1341 SIGNED
 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
                                                                       STATION

^pE:            GERARD MICHAEL
                MCMANUS

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION: POL PC2819


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by roe, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 180589                                           G. M. MCMANUS (SIGNED)



       At 9 am (0900 hrs) Saturdady 15th April, 1989 (150489) I paraded for

       duty at Barnsley Divisional Headquarters and subsequently travelled
           to Hillsborough Football Ground for the F.A. Cup Semi-Final between

       Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, arriving at the ground at 9.30 am

           (0930).



           I then attended a briefing held in the main North Stand by Chief
           Superintendent DUCKENFIELD. The main emphasis of this briefing seemed
           to be that on no account would anyone be allowed into the ground

       without a ticket.



       After a brief meal break I then attended together with the rest of my

           serial (14) under the supervision of PS1341 CRAWFORD on the lappings
                           ✓
           Lane terrace for a further briefing held by Inspector WHITE. This

           briefing was concerned with the searching of persons entering the

           ground. We were instructed to give them a good search.   I was also

           instructed that in the event of the emergency evacuation precedure

           being implemented ie the message "The attendance of Mr MEADOWS is
MCMANUS               GERARD MICHAEL                                       2


urgently required at Police Control", was passed over the loudspeaker,
that I was to go to the tunnel at the Leppings Lane terrace and assist

with the evacuation of the ground.     I am unsure how I was supposed to

do this and indeed, if the situation of an evacuation had arisen, I

think that it would have been impossible even to get into the tunnel.



At around 1.30 pm (1330) together with the rest of serial 14 I

took up a position at the inside of the Leppings Lane turnstiles.    By

this time two turnstiles were already open and the rest were opened

over the next 15 to 20 minutes.



Together with Police Constable 2887 GRANT I took responsibility for
turnstiles F and G. We arranged with the turnstile operators that if

they were in difficulty they would bang on a small window situated at

the rear of each turnstile in order to attract our attention.



At around 12 noon (1200) the first Liverpool fans began arriving at
the ground. They were few in number and were in good humour.    I could

see that they were being searched outside the ground and let them

straight through.   We were then told by Inspector WHITE to search

everyone even if we could see that they had been searched before.    By

about 1.30 pm (1330) the flow of fans was increasing, however, it was

still only a steady flow and most were searched. A few did object to
being searched but agreed after the situation had been explained to

them. The view through the turnstiles was still clear and it was not

crowded outside the ground. At about 2 pm (1400) the turnstile

operator knocked on the window stating that a fan was trying to get in

without a ticket. He came through the turnstiles and was then

ejected through Gate C whilst doing this we were surrounded by his
MCMANUS                 GERARD MICHAEL                                    3


friands who abused us, claiming he had got a ticket. This happened

about a dozen times in the next 20 minutes.    I also saw two or three

people offer money to the operators which was refused and the fans who

did this then went away.



At about 2.30 pm (1430) large numbers of supporters arrived and began

to crowd around the turnstiles.    It quickly became apparent that it

was impossible to   carry on searching and this was abandoned in favour

of getting people   into the ground as quickly    as possible andejecting

those without tickets. Whilst attempting to eject one man through

Gata C the steward refused to open the gate because he feared that
suppporters would rush in. He was instructed to open the gate and

then the man was ejected without significant problems.



It was apparent that large numbers of people caning through the

turnstiles were under the influence of alcohol but it was impractical

to eject them due   to their huge numbers.


By about 2.45 pm    (1445) it was apparent that   there were semeproblems
outside the ground. Many people coming through the turnstiles were

obviously distressed.    Seme collapsed, others were holding their ribs

and were obviously in pain.


The turnstiles, particularly G, kept jarrming under the weight of

people, this resulted in the person at the front being crushed on the

turnsile by those behind.     One man was cut free using a knife after

his clothing became caught trapping him in the turnstile.



Officers, myself included, were being jostled, abused and threatened
MCMANUS              GERARD MICHAEL                                       4


by Liverpool fans, blaming us for the crush outside the ground and

demanding that we do something about it.     I did not have a radio and

was not in sight of a supervisory officer.     As far as I could see

there were only officers from serial 14 and that section of the ground

who were all receiving similar treatment from the Liverpool fans. We
were obviously very heavily outnumbered and in my opinion on the point

of coming under physical attack.   I would say that it is one of the

most intimidating and frightening situations that I have faced.



A number of fans were scaling the outer walls and climbing into the

ground.   I was unable to do anything to stop this.


After a time a senior officer who I do not know but I believe to be an

Inspector, came and instructed that Gate C was to be opened.     The gate

was opened and this was followed by a mad rush.     I can only

describe what happened as like a cattle stampede.     Several people at

the front fell over and were trampled upon by the rest of the crowd
who ran in. After the main body of the crowd had passed the gate was

forced shut.   I would estimate that by this time about 2,000 people

had run through.   The gate was opened again and about 200 - 300

people ran in. This accounted for the majority of fans but people

kept coming through the turnstiles for several minutes     In addition

Gate C was left partially open to act as an extra turnstile.



Shortly after 3 pm (1500), the flow of fans had stopped.     I then

became aware of a tannoy message to the effect, 'Liveprool supporters

get off the pitch.' An officer, I can't remember who, told us that

there was a pitch invasion and as a serial we went to the pitch via
the South Stand. On reaching the pitch it became apparent immediately
MCMANUS              GERARD MICHAEL                                     5


that there was not a pitch invasion but that people were scaling the

security fence in order to escape overcrowding.



I made my way over to the fencing and could see that people were being

crushed against the wall and security fence by the crowd behind them.



Other officers were at the gates in the fence trying to pull people

out of the crowd, but were having difficulty, due to the number

involved and the sheer weight of people behind them. The effect of

this was to cause a 'log jam' at the gates.


At this stage there was no room around the gates in order to get to

people who were trapped and give assistance.   I stood on an

advertising board adjacent to the fence and shouted in a loud voice

for people further back to move back, this was met with a hail of

abuse from elements in the crowd, a number of small items which I

believe to be coins, were thrown but none of these hit me.



I then began to assist people over the fence on to the pitch however,

this was hampered by their clothing and in one case flesh being caught

on the spikes at the top of the fence. After helping 3 or 4 people
over, the advertising hoarding on which I was standing gave way and I

was no longer able to do this.



This took place directly behind the goal and just to my right an

attempt was being made to tear down the fencing.   I joined in this

attempt and a gap was made in the fencing through which several

people were unable to escape.
MCMANUS              GERARD MICHAEL                                       6


I would say that upon my arrival at the pitch I could see that people

were being crushed but I could not see anyone dead.     I could see

people gradually having more difficulty breathing and eventually

passing out. After some time when the more badly injured and dead

were being brought out of pen 3 via the gate, I went to assist in

clearing them away from the gate to the pitch.



With reference of a St Johns ambulanceman, I dragged one man to the

pitch and began to resuscitate him. After a few minutes the man came

round and began breathing on his own.   I then left him.   I cannot

describe this man.



I then saw Police Sergeant 690 HALL who was attempting

resuscitation on a youth. I assisted him in an attempt to
resuscitate the youth. The youth              breathed on his own but

then stopped breathing again. We continued with mouth to mouth
resuscitation                         I then felt his mouth go very

stiff and I knew he was dead.   I left him and saw another officer who

I do not know attempting to resuscitate a man.    I assisted him and we

continued for several mintues without response.   I was then approached

by a man who was a doctor who asked if he could help. He looked at

the man and told us there was no point in continuing.



On looking around I could see that most casualties were being seen to,

with help from Liverpool fans the man was placed on to a piece of
advertising hoarding and taken to the gym underneath the North Stand.

On arrival I was told by a CID officer to stay with the body.     I

argued against this because I wanted to go back to see if I could

offer further asstance. As a result of this my collar number was
        MCKANUS               GERARD MICHAEL                                   7


       written on the hand of the body and I went back outside.



        By this time it appeared that the dead and seriously injured were

       being taken care of.    I then went to where a number of people were
        sitting and laying at the edge of the pitch and checked that they were

       not in immediate need of assistance.



                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE




                                                                                   3204
Incident 102      260390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                       STATEMENT NUMBER S1078

                                                                       Station
^(^name           SMALLMAN
Forenames         KEVIN ANTHONY
Age               21 100                 Date of birth
Address


Occupation        POL PC136

Telephone

IC                Height                 Build
Hair colour

Hair type

^^s                                      Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                   Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                        K A SMALLMAN Signed


          9am (0900) Saturday 15th April 1989, (150489) paraded at B1 DHQ for

          FA Cup Semi-Final - Liverpool v Notts Forest.

          In transit to Hillsborough for 9.30am (0930) and paraded for briefing

          in North Stand - after briefing had first meal.
          11am (1100) in Leppings Lane terracing with rest of serial 14 for

          specific duty briefing by Inspector White.
          About 11.15am (1115) took up position with rest of serial just inside

          of Gate C at turnstiles A - G. PS1341 Crawford was serial sergeant.

          At this time only turnstiles A and B were opien. There was hardly

          anybody using the turnstiles at this stage. Our serial duty was to
          search Liverpool fans entering through these turnstiles prior to going

          into Leppings Lane terraces or to the seats of the West Stand.   From

          about 11.15am (1115) up to 2pm/2.30pm (1400/1430) the flow of
          supporters using these turnstiles, which had opened up sporadically,

                                                                                   3205
                                                                  PAGE    2
                                                                  S1078

was slow to steady and roost if not all were able to be searched. All

the supporters at this stage were of a pleasant and co-operative

nature despite having been searched previously outside the ground.

From about 2.15pm (1415) to 2.30pm (1430) the build up of supporters

outside of turnstiles A - G at Leppings Lane began to grow.     I could

see through the gap of the tursntiles that there was a large amont of

people who had massed outside rather than forming orderly queues.

Initially I did see foot officers immediately outside of these
turnstiles but by now I can only recall seeing one or two mounted

officers.   By now Liverpool supporters were coning through the

turnstiles thick and fast. All possibility of searching people had to

be abandoned as people were jumping the turnstiles without tickets or

coming through with tickets for the wrong end of the ground.    These

were dealt with by either ejecting them through a large metal

concertina type gate next to trunstile G or redirecting them to the

correct part of the ground.   Several fans were seen to climb over the

wall above the turnstiles to gain access this way and they were

subsequently ejected where possible.   The concertina gates were opened

on several occasions as officers had cause to eject numerous people.

Searching fans by now was impracticable.
On looking through the turnstiles out on to Leppings Lane I could see

a crush occurring - the small entrance gaps to the turnstiles were

'bottlenecking' with people as they shoved from the rear.     I saw two

young children being passed along the crowds above peoples heads.

Once the supporters had entered the ground I along with almost every
other officer on our serial were inundated by gangs of people shouting
and complaining about the situation outside.   They said that people

were being crushed and injured and people would die.   Several fans

did ccme in with obvious rib injuries.

I've seen a lot of angry people in my 10 years Police service but non
                                                                 PAGE        3
                                                                 S1078

as angry as these people.    The situation was totally out of Police

control. The atmosphere had changed from being pleasant to tense

and that of anger. There was also a stench of beer in the air.     I

had to leave the turnstile area on several occasions after being

summoned by stewards to try and sort our disorderly queues at the

gata entrance of the steps to the seated part of the West Stand.

The procedure here was to tear off a comer of the ticket once they
hava entered and on two occasions people tried to enter with tom

tickets which had obviously been thrown from the seats down to the

floor.   The only officers present in the whole area from Gate C was

our serial of a sergeant at 10 PCs.

About 2.40pm (1440) I recall the concertina gate being opened again

- i believe in order to eject someone but at this point a large
amount of fans surged through. We struggled to close them again.       By

now it was organised chaos. Hundreds of fans were milling around not

knowing where to go. A lot headed for the central tunnel to the

Leppings Lane terraces. A lot of these fans were alcohol effected.

There was nothing I could do without causing a violent public disorder

situation.     I was still being bombarded with complaints about the
outside situation.    By this time I had lost track of time. There was

one man who came in with a group of people. He had a can of beer in

his hand.    It was open and he was shaking it causing the contents to

spray about.     I took it off him and binned it. He then started to

insult and abuse me and relate circumstances to the miners strike.       I

remonstrated with him and he was taken away by his fellow supporters.
The next thing I knew - I can only guess that it was about 3pm (1500)

 - the concertina gates opened again.     I don't know why. A whole mass

of supporters in their hundreds or thousands just ran past us. The

majority headed for the central tunnel. We were powerless to stop

them.    I had no radio communication but from past experience a radio


                                                                                 3207
                                                                       PAGE      4
                                                                       S1078

would have been useless due to the amount of noise and general

atmosphere.

After the gate had been opened on this occasion it seemed to clear the

fans fron outside.     I was left stood with ray serial.    It seemed eerie

and I was left a bit bewildered. The situation went        fro m   one extreme

to the other in a matter of seconds.     I noticed about 30 Police

Officers run through the area where our serial was. There were things
mentioned through the grape vine that there had been a pitch invasion.

Our serial tagged on and we made our way on to the pitch via the rear

of the South section of the terracing and a small seated section of

the South stand.

Once on the pitch I saw a large amount of people on the pitch.          They
were obviously shocked, numb and dazed.     Seme were injured and others

were just wandering about.     It was obvious that it wasn't a pitch

invasion.   I saw a lot of activity at the riot fencing behind the goal

of the West Stand side.    Fans were climbing up the fencing and being

helped over by Police Officers. With the general noise and atmosphere

around the ground at this stage I still couldn't see or comprehend

what was happening as the front of this section of crowd was masked
by other bodies.     I noticed a lot of fans scrambling their way up

from the terracing on to the West Stand.     I made ray way further

forward to the fencing and at this I saw that the central terracing

pen between gates 3 and 4 in the fencing was jammed packed with

spectators. The front of the crowd were pressed up against the riot
fencing and the back end seemed to be pushed forward. The pen was so

full of people it looked impossible to get anything else in.

Police continued to pull persons over the riot fencing as fans made

their way up.   But this was slow and sporadic. When not helping

people over the officers seemed to be trying to tell the back section

of the crowd to get back.     Scores of other fans continued to climb up
                                                                PAGE         5
                                                                S1078

the hoardings into the West Stand. As people battled to get free from

the crush at the front I could see that some others were not moving.

Their eyes were shut and faces seemed pale.   Bodies were so

intermingled that it was impossible to me at this stage to determine

their sex, age or appearance.    I then saw an arm pressed up against
the fence and as I followed it down there didn't seem to be a body

attached to it - in that the rest of it appeared on the floor under

other people but obscured by advertising boards.

I remember looking at either gate 3 or 4 in the fencing.   It was open

and other police were trying to pull people through the gateway but

this was just 'bottlenecking.'
After appreciating the severity of the incident I then made ray way along

the track and entered the crowd via gate 1. I made ray way through the

crowd towards the centre south section of the terracing. As I did so

I was jostled, harrassed,insulted and abused by some fans. The south

section towards the South Stand end didn't seem to realise what was

happening but fans became more hostile as I reached the dividing metal
fence between the south and centre south section.   Fran here I could

see a heap of bodies on top of each other in the well of the terraces I

think near to gate 3.   Initially, I helped fans over the metal dividing

fence from the centre stand into the less crowded south section.   At

one point I noticed a crash barrier that had collapsed.    It was twisted

and buckled. A long section of this was then hurled towards the front

riot fencing.   It hit the top and landed pitch side.   I can't say if

this was done in anger or whether or not it was thrown out of the way.

Once there was sufficient roan in the centre south section after fans

had been removed I climbed over the fence and started to pull bodies

away from the mass who had fallen and ended up in a heap at the front.

The first one I pulled away was a heavy/fat youth in his twenties.       I

don't recall what he was wearing but his face was purple. He wasn't


                                                                                 3209
                                                                 PAGE      6
                                                                 S1078

moving or breathing.    He was apparently dead. I laid him on the

terracing a few feet back and tried mouth to mouth resuscitation but

this failed to revive him.    I was being encored by certain fans

towards the front of the terracing who were wanting to help in any way

they could.    But a large section at the rear and the one in the
West Stand seat were hurling a barrage of abuse and hostilities.    Seme

fans at the front were trying to calm them down.    I then pulled

another body off the pile. This was a teenage male but again I don't

recall the clothing. His face was purple and he seemed dead.    I tried

mouth to mouth resuscitation on him too.    I don't know whether or not

it was just a reaction of blowing air into him or whether or not he

was still alive but there seemed to be a faint cough response to

this.
              Thinking he may be alive I looked up for a way to get him

out of the pen.    By now Police and fans were managing to rip a section

of the riot fencing away and people dead and injured were being
passed through there and also exit gates to Police, fans and medical
staff. At this I carried this second youth with the help of a fan to

the fencing and then just passed him through.    By now it was just a

matter of pulling bodies off the heap and getting them pitch side to

ambulance and St Johns msnbers for medical attention.

Other Police and fans were just pulling dead body after dead body away
from the pile and getting them out.    It was like trying to dig a hole

in dry sand.    It seemed endless. Advertising hoardings were being

ripped down and passed to the front so that they could be used as make

shift stretchers.    I don't know how long it took but once everyone had

been cleared from the terraces and injured or dead I felt exhausted.

I didn't know what to do next.    I noticed the fans near to the front

along with Police Officers looked shocked and numb. Others were
openly crying or just wandering about.     Other fans near the back were
                                                                         PAGE      7
                                                                         S1078

        angry.     Items of clothing and other property was collected that was

        strewn across the terracing and placed in a pile.     I then made my way

        out of the terracing and onto the pitch again and relocated colleagues

        from my serial.    By now it was all over.

        Announcements were made over the tannoy and eventually the ground was

        cleared.    For a long time we were just on standby but eventually

        released and finished duty at 8 pn (2000).

         (Signed) K A Smallman




                                                     K A SMALLMAN PC136 SIGNED

          TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME               DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE

END OF REPORT
Incident 102        260390 QP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT
                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER S845

                                                                            Station
      lame           BRANSTON

Forenames            PAUL
Age                                          Date of birth
Address              S YORKS POLICE,   CHURCHFIELDS
                     BARNSLEY
Occupation           POL PC1777

Telephone

IC                  Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type
f!s                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                030589                                                    Signed


             I was on duty as part of serial 14 under the direction of PS
             CRAi^FORD. We commenced duty at Barnsley at 9.00am (0900) and

             travelled to the ground for a briefing at 10.00am (1000). Our role

             was to police the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the ground

             and the serial was deployed at turnstiles A to G, the turnstiles

             nearest the river.
             We were in position from about 10.45am (1045), some turnstiles

             although not all, were open from about 11.00am (1100), and fans

             started arriving in dribs and drabs from that time.   There was

             another serial outside the ground searching fans before they reached

             the turnstiles and we were searching them as they came through the

             turnstiles.    The Inspector in charge of our area, Inspector WHITE,

             directed us to search them again even if we could see that they had

             been searched outside, some of the fans were searched two or three

                                                                                        3212
                                                                 PAGE      2
                                                                 S845

times at the early part of the day.   I had been on duty last year,

9th April 1988 (090488), on the Leppings Lane turnstiles when the same

two teams met at the same ground in the FA Cup Send. Final and knew

that things would get more hectic as the kick off approached.    I knew

that as the day wore on we should have to be more selective in whom

we searched.   However, last year the Liverpool fans who were in that

part of the ground arrived more spaced out in the hours leading up to

the match and we had no problems of the crush outside the gates.       I

do not think that more came this year but that they came in a shorter

space of time, due to different travel arrangements perhaps.

The fans were very good natured in the whole and there was much good

humoured banter about the searching, etc.     In this early phase none
of the fans could be described as drunk.     The day was bright and

pleasant and the duty was quite enjoyable.

The influx of fans remained fairly steady until about 2.30pm (1430).

I had been busy searching a steady stream of fans who were now

arriving and had had little time to look through the turnstiles to
see what was happening outside. The fans had obviously been queueing

for a while but now the mood of them changed dramatically.    Some had

clearly arrived without tickets and had tried various ruses with the

turnstile operators.   Some tried protesting that the man who had

entered before them had given the operator two tickets, one of which
had been for them and others tried more straightforward bribery.

The operators were offered ten pound notes to admit fans and I dealt

with four or five who had tried this and the operator had been honest

enough to alert us to what had happened.     It was by this time too

crowded outside the turnstiles for persons without tickets to reverse

and so they were admitted into the ground once one of us was present
and then ejected.   The temptation on the turnstile operator must have

been great to accept at least some of this bribery and it may be that


                                                                               3213
                                                                  PAGE
                                                                  S845

sane were admitted without tickets by this means. We had already

decided that if it was busy when we had to eject persons they would

not be taken to the police room but ejected via the nearest gate. To

adhere to formal procedures would have greatly depleted the numbers

of police at the turnstiles whilst two escorted each ejectee to the
far comer of the ground along with the possibility of the ejectee

being freed fran ones grasp en route.   This has the unfortunate

effect of reducing the statistics available on such measures but is

the only way to act expeditiously when things are busy.    The

Inspector was aware and in approval of this.

At the match last year some fans rushed the turnstiles and came over

the heads of their fellow supporters and over the turnstile since

there are no bars above waist height.   I did not see this happen at

all this year.   The crush outside probably prevented them getting

enough of a run at the turnstiles to do this.    The supporter's mood

last year, on the whole, remained pleasant till the end and did not

exhibit the same dramatic change as this year.
It became obvious to me some time past 2.30pm (1430) that there was a

great crush outside.   Our searching had dropped to about one in three

and we were having to become more selective.     The police outside,

when I could see them through the turnstiles, had abandoned any

searching and were pressed up against the turnstiles. At times I

could see a mounted officer in a white shirt in the throng trying to

break up the crowd.    I did not recognise him as a South Yorkshire

mounted and took him to be a foreign force Inspector.

The mood of the fans had continued to deteriorate.     They were now

very aggressive, no doubt due to having been pushed towards the

turnstiles by the force of the crowd. Many fans were demanding that

we did something about the situation outside and hurling a lot of
abuse at us as they came through.   Some fans even got hold of some of


                                                                         3214
                                                                  PAGE     4
                                                                  S845

us and manhandled us as they made their point.    It almost got to the

point of scuffles breaking out in our area with enraged fans blaming

us for the crush.    People with young children were carrying them on

their shoulders to avoid the crush and several children were passed

through the turnstiles ahead of their fathers in order to avoid
injury. There was then the added problem of some families being

split up in the crowd and getting panicky.

The turnstiles themselves are rather antiquated and are arranged in

pairs with a wooden partition between the two turnstiles.    This

partition has large blocks of wood on it in order to prevent more

than one person squeezing through when the turnstile is in the open

position.   The rotating part of the turnstile only extends fran about

the height of an adults knees to a few inches below his waist thus

enabling people to climb over the top very easily.    In fact on this
day a Police Officer from outside climbed over the turnstile where I

was to escape the crush.
There is a small block of metal fastened to the outer edge of the

rotating part on many of the turnstiles.     I cannot say why this is

there but it is about the size and shape of a brake block frcm a pedal

cycle.   Several times I saw this getting stuck in the trousers
fly opening of fans who were pressed by the crowd up against the

turnstile. All those I saw stuck in this manner were wearing denim

jeans and were in a turnstile which rotated clockwise when viewed

from above.    The force of the crowd from behind prevented them moving

backwards the fraction of an inch necessary to free the material of

their trousers and although the turnstile operator released the
turnstile pedal it would not rotate due to being held on the person's

trousers.     The turnstile was thus blocked and this enraged the people

trying to get in even more. A couple of times I was able to force

the person back enough to free his trousers but on one occasion it


                                                                               3215
                                                                PAGE     5
                                                                S845

was inpossible and the man was stuck for several minutes.   PC GRANT,

from our serial, offered to cut the material holding this man with
his pocket knife in order to free him, a suggestion that was not
well received.

The ratchet mechanism at times became jammed due to the force of the

crowd on the turnstile and the operator appeared unable to depress

the foot pedal to allow the turnstile to rotate.

The pair of turnstiles next to the single one at the end nearest the
river, I believe this is E and F, was under so much pressure that

several times the central partition was pushed out of line. This had

the effect of blocking one or the other of the turnstiles and not

allowing it to rotate.   It was then necessary to go into the

turnstile and force the outer end of the partition back into

alignment.   I did this a number of times and it required considerable
force to move the stout timbers, an example of the immense pressure

exerted by the crowd which was pushing on the partition in a

haphazard manner when I was pushing on it directly and in the

particular direction needed to reposition it.

By this time we had been forced to abandon all searching and
concentrate on keeping the turnstiles working and eject persons who

had entered without tickets. They then started to climb over the

wall in which the turnstiles are built and as they climbed down we

ejected them.
They were no doubt climbing either to enter without a ticket or if

they had tickets to escape the crush outside.   The tempers of the
fans had deteriorated further and I am certain from then on seme fans
came in the worse for drink. These escaped being arrested since we

were more concerned with the safety of the majority and keeping

things moving.   I was not in a position to refer to my watch and

became unaware of the exact time but about ten minutes before kick off


                                                                             3216
                                                                PAGE     6
                                                                S845

tine the gate nearest to the river, gate C, was opened and fans

allowed to pour in. This appeared to have been organised from

outside, when the gates opened I was a few feet away and I saw the

Inspector who had been with the outside serials at the gate. The

horses and officers outside had formed a cordon across the lane to

funnel the fans into the ground.

I was caught in a surge of fans who rushed through pushing with no

concern for safety as soon as the gates were opened. About a dozen

people were pushed to the ground by impatient marauding fans and

police and fans and myself pulled these to their feet and tried to

slow down the sudden influx.   I saw one or two fans, who had, like

us, sensed the danger of this headlong charge, hand out some summary

justice to their fellow supporters in a creditable attempt to stem

the tide.
As soon as the pressure eased on the outside the gates were again

closed and the fans entered in the normal manner.   The crush

obviously built up again because a few minutes later the same gate

was opened again to let in another batch of supporters.   These came in

a little better ordered than the first rush
but were still inpatient and annoyed at having had to wait. In both

the influxes of fans through the gates there were some who wanted to

shelter away fran the general rush. They were clearly terrified by

what they had already experienced outside and what they were seeing.

The fans seemed to be streaming down the tunnel under the stand which

leads into the central section of the terracing.    This tunnel is
marked with sector letters painted on the wall and there are other

markings directing fans around either end of the stand into the other

areas of the terrace.   The general flow was down this tunnel and it

does seem more obvious and logical to head in this direction rather

than round the ends of the stand.   However, if the fans had been less


                                                                             3217
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S845
hasty and those with tickets had taken the time to consult the

markings on them and followed the directions there would have been a

better distribution of fans.

The crowd was so large and its rush so mindless with the only

intention of getting into the ground that there was no possibility of

a few stewards or police being able to divert them to other areas of
the ground.   Even if the danger had been perceived in advance at

ground level it would have been inpossible to divert this sudden

influx whatever the manpower available.

I have seen more manpower deployed in that area before, but however,

many serials there were inside would not have prevented the problems

outside which were the cause of the gates being opened.    If more
manpower was needed anywhere it was outside the turnstiles to break

up the body of the supporters into smaller more manageable groups

whilst they waited for the turnstiles.

Our second briefing had taken place on the terrace and we were aware

that there were railings from the front of the stand down to the

perimeter fence at the rear of the goal. There was only one transfer

gats in each of these railings, a narrow gate at the rear of the
terrace in each case.   PC WASHINGTON and PC MACMANUS were deputed to

make their way to these gates in the case of an evacuation to try and

assist people through them.     From the tone of the Inspector at the

briefing he appreciated that in the event of this being necessary it

would be a very "tall order".
Although I could see that the majority of fans were making their way
into the central section and I knew that sideways movement would be

very slow due to the small transfer gates I never made the connection

between the two facts. I did, not envisage problems on the scale that

were to follow.
Where I was inside the turnstiles I was completely unaware of the



                                                                        3218
                                                                 PAGE     8
                                                                 S845

start of the match. We were fairly confident that the start would be

delayed in order to allow the latecoming fans extra time to find

their way into the ground. This I found out later was not the case.

I heard two announcements on the ground's public address system

whilst I was still at the turnstiles. The first I believe was asking

fans coming into the ground to slow down and not push, the second I

heard was asking Liverpool fans to leave the playing area.    I assumed

that there had been a pitch invasion from the latter.

Supporters were still arriving and making their way into the ground

when I was told that we were needed on the pitch. Although I did not

have a personal radio I assumed that this message had come to our

serial sergeant who did have one and then was spread to us all by

word of mouth.
As a serial we made our way around the end of the stand and behind

the police control room through a transfer gate and down a passage in

the stand occupied by Nottingham fans. We turned left down another

passage in this stand and made our way out onto the pitch.
On arriving onto the pitch I still did not appreciate that there had

been any play.   I was under the impression that I was going to stem a
pitch invasion at the Leppings Lane end and my attention was focussed

there, I did not see any players leaving the pitch.     There was a

growing group of people behind the goal and we made straight across

the pitch towards them. As I ran over to the perimeter fence the
fans were pouring over the top and one of the gates into the central

south section had been opened.
It was immediately obvious that this was not a straightforward pitch

invasion caused by hooliganism because those that were on the pitch

were standing in a group and not running across the pitch as would be

expected.
As soon as I arrived at the fence I could see the real reason for the


                                                                              3219
                                                                   PAGE   9
                                                                   S845

fans climbing out.   The fans at the front were pushed up against the

railings with incredible force.   The stout mesh between the posts was

bowed out behind the goal and the blue paint was being rubbed off

onto people's clothing.   I saw a few people who were being held on the

fence with such force that the mesh was leaving its pattern on their

facas.   I am of the opinion that several were already dead at that

stage, they had a characteristic grey mottled appearance to their

skin that to me suggested more than mere unconsciousness.    I saw a

young girl unconscious with her head pushed back at such an unnatural

angle that I thought it probable that her neck was broken. Many

obviously were unconscious and the whole mass of people at the front

of the terrace were completely inmobile.     I had the sickening
realisation at that point that people were dying merely inches away

from me and the feeling of overwhelming helplessness when I realised

how powerless in real terms we were to quickly get to them or take

the pressure off them.
Pulling at the fences was futile since with the immense pressure
being applied from the other side they were not about to give way

with the meagre force we could muster.     For a few moments I stood on
top of the low wall in front of the fence of the central section and

shouted to the fans to move back.   I soon realised that with the

noise that they were making themselves shouting in terror and some in
agony any volume I could make was lost. We were powerless to

communicate with those at the back, who I think were still pushing

forward, to make them move fast enough.     The ones further back did

not appreciate the problem in front of them and did not realise the

reason for the police action.
Whilst I was doing this I made eye contact with a man who was about

a third of the way back up the terrace.     In front of him was a small

area where the pressure of people seemed slacker, he was shouting to


                                                                              3220
                                                                 PAGE    10
                                                                 S845

me that there was a man dead in front of him on the floor.   He was

obviously beside himself and was totally exasperated with me for

being unable to get up to him to help or to remove the crowd.     I

wanted to tell him that there were more people dead or dying at the

front and that I couldn't free them but there wasn't the time.    I
later realised that he must have been near where the crush barrier

had collapsed.

From shouting and signalling to move back I turned my efforts to what

I hoped would yield better results.   I went to the gate which was

open and tried to help get people out. There were already about six

officers there at this gate, one of which I recognised as Sergeant
SWIFT, who were pulling at people to get them through the gate.       Some

of these people were already unconscious and some were not but the

pressure on this narrow gate was such that it was like a log jam.       So

many people were pressed into the area around the gate that it took

herculean efforts to get just one out.   One man we tried to pull out
was unconscious and was wearing a maroon jumper. About six men were
pulling on him to pull him through the gate, out of the mass inside.

We must have injured people in our haste to get them out and relieve

the pressure on the rest.
Progress at that gate was so painfully slow and there were many other

police around it so I turned my attentions to a gate into the south

enclosure.   The people here had room to move around and I reasoned
that if we removed plenty of people from here through the gate and

moved the rest over to the edge then those from the central south

section where all the casualties lay, could climb over the dividing

fence and ease the pressure in the central south area. This had
already started to happen naturally and I tried to speed up this

process and once the crush subsided went into the enclosure to move

the people about.


                                                                              3221
                                                                  PAGE   11
                                                                  S845

There was every emotion present in those people. A lot of anger and

abuse was directed towards us as we fought to help their fellow

supporters, we were, I suppose the nearest target for their

understandable anger. Many were so shocked as to be almost inmobile

and some were just standing weeping. As the pressure eased near me a

large number of people climbed over the dividing fence, where I now

was, and as they did we could see more and more bodies lying on the

concrete where all these people had been standing.

The mass of bodies was near the front fence and appeared to be three
or four deep all along the front of the central south section. There

were more bodies further back up the terrace but more spaced out and

not in such great concentration.

I was working with a number of fans and a few people in this area

ferrying the injured from this section, lifting them over the

dividing fence and passing them one by one to people on the pitch via

one of the gates.   The injured seemed endless, most were unconscious

the others had injuries to limbs and difficulty breathing. We
concentrated our initial efforts on removing those with most chance

of survival.   Those obviously dead were left in situ until later to

hasten those alive to ambulances and the doctors, I hoped, were now

on hand.   I have no possible way of remembering the descriptions of

any of those I removed.

During this time I was totally preoccupied with what I was doing, I

have no recollection of what was going on in the immediate distance

from me or indeed who I was working with.   I had felt so helpless

before and now I was at last in a position to do something positive.
I just had a feeling that it had been too slow to save so many.
There was still a lot of abuse and aggression directed towards us but

I totally disregarded this and I am sure I pushed aside, rather

roughly, anyone who impeded me.


                                                                              3222
                                                                  PAGE      12
                                                                  S845

I stayed on the terrace and continued removing people. When the live

had been carried out we moved the dead and only when they were all

moved out onto the pitch did I want to pause and look around.      It was

then that I saw the crush barrier that had given way bent out of all

shape.   These barriers appeared so stout and solid it was incredible
that the pressure of people had bent it and forced it over.      It was

then that I made the connection between the man who had been shouting

to me at the beginning and the collapse of the barrier.   I feel
certain that the deaths he had been trying to tell me about had been

caused by the pressure prior to the collapse.

I left the terrace and went onto the pitch to see if I could help

carry any casualties over to the ambulances.    I picked up an

advertising hoarding to use as a stretcher but most of the people had

already been moved.   I felt suddenly surplus to requirements. All
the casualties had been moved but we were now surrounded by a lot of

angry and aggressive fans.   I sensed that if their anger and grief
turned towards the Nottingham supporters we would have some serious

problems on our hands.
It was then that I noticed that police had already set up a cordon

across the pitch and since there was little else for me to do I went
and joined that at the end where it met the stand close to the

directors box.
I stayed there in the cordon watching the fans until I noticed a

scuffle breaking out nearer the goal line. A photographer with dark

hair and beard wearing a black leather jacket was trying to take

pictures.   It may have been insensitive to do so but he no doubt
thought he had good reasons.   I went with several other police to

his aid as I thought that this might be the spark of a major problem

that wanted nipping in the bud.   Two police escorted him frcm the

pitch or at least behind the cordon and the rest of us stayed to try


                                                                                 3223
                                                                 PAGE   13
                                                                 S845

and defuse the situation.

I then saw the rest of ray serial standing in a group near the goal

mouth and made ray way over to them. We stood for some time until the

announcement came that the match had been abandoned. As the fans

started leaving the ground we went as a serial out into Leppings Lane

and escorted the fans up towards their transport. The aggressions

seemed to be draining out of them leaving those we were walking with

very quiet and subdued.
Outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles I noticed a galvanised corrugated

metal partition between the turnstiles 1 to 16 and A to G. This was

distorted and showed much evidence of the pressure which must have

been exerted on it by the crowd.

We halted at the roundabout at the junction with Leppings Lane and
Penistone Road until we received a call that there was fighting in

the park. We made our way back down Penistone Road towards the
ground and shortly after arriving there were instructed to sit in the

stand nearest to the gym to await further deployment. After we had

been addressed I went with another officer to fetch some "max pax"

drinks for our serial since none   of us had eaten since about10.30am

(1030) and were at least in need of a drink.
We hung around drinking "max pax" and talking. There were several

officers young in service on our serial, in particular two young

women, one just out of her probation and the other with about one

year's experience. They had only worked so far on town centre foot

patrols and as far as I know had   not been to a serious road
accident.   They were both very quiet and withdrawn and lookedashen.
I have more experience and have spent the last three years in an area

with many miles of trunk roads notorious for serious accidents. I

have been to many fatals but there was nothing that could have

prepared me for death and tragedy on such a scale.   I knew how bad I


                                                                             3224
                                                                    PAGE   14
                                                                    S845

felt and thought they must be feeling an awful lot worse.
Inspector BARKER came out of the gym which was being used as the

mortuary and took about four of our serial to move boards with

exclusion orders on before relatives were allowed in to the gym.

We thankfully were told that we could stand down and went to try and

locate our van which we had travelled in but which was being used for

other things.    We were unable to find it and walked up to Claywheels

Lana hoping to arrange some transport from there.
At Claywheels Lane we spoke to some Barnsley division motorcyclists

who had been involved in ambulance escorts. They pointed us in the

direction of the mobile canteen and a few of us were hungry enough to

eat.     I went looking for somewhere to wash since I had been in

contact with more vomit, spit, blood and urine that I wanted to think
about.    I failed to find a free sink and had to be content with a

wipe down before having something to eat.
Eventually we were allocated transport back to Barnsley and arrived

there at about 8pm (2000). Once there we made it a priority to check

with our families that they had been informed that we were all safe

only to find that they were completely in the dark. My wife had
repeatedly rung the police station and the emergency number given out

on the television without any success.
The whole serial then adjourned to the bar to take some solace in

alcohol and I must thank Superintendent SIMPSON for his offer of

support and for quietly listening to some officers who were
emotionally drained and rapidly and determinedly getting drunk.

In conclusion I must say that the fans arrived in great numbers in a

short space of time.     I did not see such pressure on the turnstiles

last year when the same match was played and I was on the same duty.

However, if the fans had been better behaved and exercised more

patience the ticket holders would have all got in safely.     Even if


                                                                                3225
                                                                         PAGE   15
                                                                         S845

        they had missed some of the start of the game they should resolve
        that next match and they should aim to be there in good time. As it

        was they pushed with such force and without thinking of their fellow

        men until the gates had to be opened to avoid danger outside.

        Instead of then being satisfied that they were in the ground and

        finding a place to stand, they then demonstrated the same mindless
        inpatience without any thought for their fellows and they caused the

        deaths of many people who had planned ahead and arrived in good

        time.   They may have been given insufficient tickets but many had

        travelled without tickets hoping somehow to get in and if the pushing

        outside the turnstiles was a ploy to secure their admission it

        certainly worked.   There may be fewer turnstiles at Hillsborough than
        other grounds but its position heirmed in by houses on one side and a

        river on the other does not help in the provision of more unless the

        layout of the ground is re-arranged.




                                                            P BRANSTON SIGNED

 1TATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:
          TIME:             DATE:   030589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                     3226
Incident 102    260390 QP8064            DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT
                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER S1928

                                                                            Station

^m am e             BUTLER

Forenames           DAVID

Age                                           Date of birth

Address             S YORKS POLICE,
                    CHURCHFIELDS, BARNSLEY.

Occupation          POL PC2806
Telephone

IC                  Height                    Build

Hair colour

Hair type

t s                                           Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                       Accent

Number of Pages

Dated               280489                                           D BUTLER Signed


          On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I came on duty at 'Bl' at 9.00am

          (0900).    From that location I travelled to Hillsborough Football

          Ground to Police the F.A. Cup Semi-Final between Liverpool and Notts

          Forest.     I was on Serial 14 which was supervised by Police Sergeant
          CRAWFORD.       Upon arrival at Hillsborough we were seated in the North

          Stand whilst the briefing was given by the Senior Officer at 9.45 a.m.

          (0945).     Following the briefing we were given a packed meal.

          At about 11.00 a.m. (1100) our Serial joined with a 'B2' Serial and

          attended in the West Stand where we had a second briefing from an

          Inspector White who was in command of both Serials. My Serial was
          deputed to the Leppings Lane turnstiles to supervise the entry of
          supporters and to conduct searches. We were covering turnstiles A—G

          of the area marked 'C' on the plan. We were deputed in pairs, each

          pair to cover one turnstile.        I was paired up with WPC 3347 THOMAS.

                                                                                       3227
                                                                 PAGE     2
                                                                 S1928

We took up a position at approximately 11.15 a.m. (1115) and at that

point I believe that two of the turnstiles were open.   Spectators

began to arrive in dribs and drabs and were on the whole good

humoured. There were officers outside the turnstiles and they were

also searching people before they entered and we were instructed by

the Inspector to duplicate the search. Although these early fans

were being searched they were very amicable.   However, from

approximately 2 p.m. (1400) onwards it became apparent that there was
a build-up of large numbers of late arrivals and these people were

causing public order problems on the other side of the turnstiles.

Many of these late arrivals were the worse for drink, their attitude

was aggressive and their behaviour was on the whole appalling.    I saw

several cases of people attempting to enter the ground without tickets.

People were attempting to bribe the gate man and I saw one man attempt
to enter at no less than three different turnstiles by pushing a ten

pound note to the gate man.   Others were climbing over the turnstile.

I chased one youth who did this but lost him in the West Stand to the

cheers of other fans.   I witnessed several cases of fans entering the

ground and then passing their ticket back into the crowd for someone

else to use. Many others were just waiting until they got to the
turnstiles without a ticket leaving the gate man no alternative but to

let them through because of the pressure of the crowd behind.    I

myself ejected at least four people who had entered the ground without

tickets and saw other officers eject many more. We were passing them

out through the large metal sliding gates to our left. There were

officers standing immediately on the other side of these gates outside
the ground, including an Inspector and there was an officer on the

inside, together with a steward.
At about 2.15 p.m. (1415) the officers who had been standing outside

the turnstiles searching were forced to leave their position due to
                                                                   PAGE
                                                                   S1928

the pressure of the crowd.    From approximately 2.30pm (1430) it was

obvious to me that there was a serious problem outside.    I could see

people being crushed against the turnstiles and many were entering
in a very distressed state, having difficulty in breathing etc.

Large numbers were climbing over the roof of the turnstiles. We

were encouraging than to come down and if they had tickets they were

allowed into the ground.    These latecomers who were entering the

ground frcm 2.45 p.m. (1445) onwards were very agitated and groups of
them were making threats towards myself and other officers pleading

with us to do something about the situation outside.   One of these

people lashed out at me with his feet kicking me on the shin and was

then protected by others.    Entry to the ground was now becoming a

'free for all' and we were losing a degree of control. As I had not

been issued with a personal radio I had no knowledge frcm any police

source what was happening outside.

The noise had become tremendous and upon entering the ground many of

these supporters were loitering in the entrance area. At that point I

anticipated there would be an en mass attack on Police Officers.

After several minutes of this I became aware of a surge of people

entering frcm my left and I saw that the sliding gates had been

opened.    This gate was forced closed and I assumed that the gate had

been forced open by fans probably after it had been opened to eject

sopeone.    By this time a large percentage of the people in the

enclosure were the worse for drink.    The gates opened a second time,

again I was not aware why or by whom, but it was futile to attempt to

close them again and I could not even manage to get over to the gate

because of the pressure of people surging in the opposite direction.
The job of searching and checking if people had tickets was then made

impossible and again there was no appraisal of the situation or

instruction frcm any supervisory officer and Inspector White was out
                                                                  PAGE     4
                                                                  S1928

of my view.    I then made my way over to the programme seller nearest
to the section marked 'B' on the plan in order to check on their

safety and to supervise a large group which had gathered around them.

In my opinion we had lost control of the area completely and did not

hava sufficient officers at that stage to police it. The earlier good

humour of the crowd had long since disappeared. There were large

groups of men urinating in the open and general aggressive behaviour.
The bulk of the fans were heading straight towards the tunnel in the

centre of the West Stand.

Presently a large number of officers were running from the area of 'B'

towards the 'S' comer of the West Stand. One of them beckoned to me

and I joined them as did all the other officers in my serial. We made

our way single file along a tunnel in front of the South Stand.    No
one seemed to know what was happening but there was speculation that

there had been a pitch invasion. We made our way onto the pitch at

the first entrance, climbing over a low wall.    Once on the pitch I

could see several people sitting on the turf in a serious distressed

state. By this time there were several other officers on the pitch.

The people on the pitch were short of breath and were saying that
their friends were being crushed in the West Stand.

I then made my way over towards the West Stand.    I could see that the

areas 'S' and 'N' were nowhere near capacity and there was room for

more spectators and therefore I did not think at first that anyone was

suffering from anything more than the usual symptoms experienced by

people in large crowds on hot days. Again, carmunication was non­

existent.     I could see several officers at the fences but had no idea
at that stage exactly what was happening. As I moved nearer and

approached gate four I could see that it was open and that people were

clawing to get out.     I could see persons forced against the fencing

and some being pulled over to top by officers and I then began to
                                                                 PAGE     5
                                                                 S1928

realise what was happening.    I then assisted with getting people out

onto the pitch as quickly as possible.    The people who were standing

and able to walk were sorted out first.    I then saw that there were a

a number of people lying on the the ground beneath the gate who were

being trampled.   I had to physically pull a large male supporter back

into the stand as he was treading on the head of one of the persons on

the ground.   This man was the worse for drink and was extremely

abusive.   I then lifted a small male from the ground and carried him

onto the pitch.   I would describe him as follows; Male, white, 5'5",

slim build, 25-30 years, with dark hair and prominent front teeth, he

was unshaven and wearing a 'T' shirt and jeans.    I then proceeded to

clear the man's airway and gave him mouth to mouth resuscitation.
Another person assisted me by giving chest compression. We
continued this for several minutes until a doctor arrived and upon

checking his pulse, declared life extinct and covered the man's face.

I then left the body with a female officer and made my way back to the

gate where I assisted with the removal of several more persons, many

of them obviously dead.    Every person I saw that was removed from the

stand was given first aid until, as the case may be, death was
declared by a doctor.     I assisted with first aid treatment to at least
seven or eight persons but I cannot remember their description apart

from the only one that recovered.    He was a heavily built white male,

about 25 years of age, with dark hair.    He was wearing jeans and a

light coloured 'T' shirt.     Imnediately on his breathing starting we

carried him to an ambulance which was on the pitch.    The ambulance

already contained several people and was beginning to drive away

before he was placed inside.     I also assisted by carrying one dead

body on hoardings to the gymnasium.    There were other officers with

me. The body was heavy and as we reached outside the gym the hoarding
began to snap. We therefore left it outside and one of the other
                                                                 PAGE    6
                                                                 S1928

officers remained with it.   I then returned to the West Stand. Whilst

trying to pull people frcm the stand other fans were being abusive

towards us and missiles were thrown at us.   One of the missiles missed

us by inches and I saw that it was a large metal angle plate which

had embedded in the turf. One middle aged man came running down the

steps at 'CN' making a Nazi style salute and shouting, 'THATCHER,

THATCHER, PRAISE THATCHER YOU BASTARDS'. This was typical of much of

the behaviour towards us while these terrible events were taking

place. While some fans were removing hoardings and piling them up on

the pitch to use as stretchers, others were climbing on to them

singing and jeering and pulling them to pieces.   One of the bodies on

the pitch was a young girl whose clothing had become dishevelled and

soma fans were shouting out obscene conments towards the body.
At one point some of the fans ran across the pitch towards the North

Stand end shouting and chanting. While I was giving mouth to mouth to

one of the bodies a press man shoved a camera in my face and when I

objected he retorted, 'IT'S FUCKING NEWS'. During this period I'm
afraid I lost all track of time.   Once the ground had emptied and
there was nothing further we could do on the pitch, we returned to the
North Stand for a de-briefing, however, the tannoy system was

inoperative.   I later joined the remainder of my serial outside the

gymnasium.
During the early part of the searching at Leppings Lane I had
confiscated two small penknives from the fans.    I had attached a label

to these items with their respective names and address and my number

on.   I had also written my number on their handle. At about 7.15 p.m.

(1915) I handed this property in at the gymnasium.    I went off duty at

the ground at approximately 8.00 p.m. (2000).
I have been on duty on countless football matches and have worked this

same Semi-Final on three previous occasions. Although I have not
                                                                        PAGE     7
                                                                        S1928

         carried out the turnstile duty on these occasions.   Compared to last

        year I noticed a marked difference in the attitude of the Liverpool

         fans for the worse on this occasion.   Upon leaving the ground I

         returned to the turnstiles at Leppings Lane.   I noticed that the

        corrugated iron wall at 'B' on the outside of the turnstiles was badly

        dented and damaged as an obvious result of the pressure caused by the

        Liverpool fans trying to force their way into the ground.   I then took

        no further part in events.




                                                              D BUTLER SIGNED


•
    TEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                     3233
Incident 102      260390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER S846

                                                                        Station
^fename           WILD

Forenames         KEITH
Age                                        Date of birth
Address           S YORKS POL
                  CHURCHFIELDS, BARNSLEY
Occupation        POL PC1002

Telephone

IC                Height                   Build
Hair colour
Hair type

ft.                                        Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated             280489                                                   Signed


          On Saturday, 15th April 1989 (150489), I performed duty in connection

          with the F.A. Cup Semi Final tie between Liverpool and Notts. Forest

          played at Hillsborough.
          I commenced duty at Barnsley at 9 am (0900) and drove a Police

          personnel carrier full of officers from Barnsley to the ground,

          arriving at 9.30 am (0930). We all attended at the briefing in the

          North Stand before taking up our points in the ground.   I, together

          with other offices from Bl sub division was on Serial 14 under the

          direct supervision of PS1341 CRAWFORD, our duty before the game being

          to search persons entering the ground via turnstiles A to G which are

          situated at the rear of Leppings Lane.    Our brief was to search
          persons for things such as weapons, bottles, cans and large flags and

          banners etc. Following the main briefing we were briefed in detail by

          our Sector Inspector, Inspector WHITE.    This briefing took place just
                                                                  PAGE   2
                                                                  S846

before 11 am (1100) on the terracing at the Leppings Lane end of the

ground. Following this we took up our positions at the turnstiles at

around 11.15 am (1115). Two turnstiles were open early, these two
being the two to the extreme right when looking towards Leppings

Lana.

As well as my duties at the turnstiles I was also deputed to

pay visits to the refreshment bar area which is situated at the South

end of the rear of the Leppings Lane terrace.   This was to ensure the

safaty and security of the persons working there and was deemed
necassary because at the corresponding match in 1988 (000088) a

robbery had taken place. My attention to the refreshment bar area at

first took the form of frequent checks with the staff, then returning

to my search duties, as trade at the refreshment bar was slow.

Persons began entering the ground via the two available turnstiles

mora or less as soon as they opened.    These persons were searched as
they entered in spite of the fact that they had already been searched

by other officers outside the ground.    The mood of the people who
arrived early was friendly and none, to my knowledge, objected to being

searched.   I had occasion to remove property from persons on

entering, but the objects taken were made up only of one large

banner, two cans of pop and a small miniature bottle of 'Bells'
whisky in the shape of a bell.   These items were appropriately marked

with a label and placed in the property store - no one objected to

their property being taken from them.
From the time when the turnstiles opened persons entered the ground

at such a rate that it was possible to carry out a good search of
each.   There was no rush to get in and the mood and atmosphere
remained friendly, assisted perhaps by the fact that it was a fine day.

At approximately 1.50 pm (1350), I cannot be sure of the time, I was

instructed by the Inspector to remain at the refreshment bar to


                                                                             3235
                                                                    PAGE   3
                                                                    S846

ensure safety and security as outlined above.    I took up a position

in the centre of the bar, on the outside, effectively causing persons

to form two queues, one on either side of me. Trade had picked up
considerably but still no crowd developed waiting to be served.

Although not many people actually spoke to me the mood remained

friendly.    No one was abusive to the staff and no one tried to obtain

goods without paying.    From my position I could see across the

enclosure to where my colleagues were engaged on searching duties and

as time passed, as is always the case, persons began arriving and

entering at a faster rate, but initially the crowd did not seem to be

anything out of the ordinary for such a match.

At approximately 2.30 pm (1430) it began to get busy and I saw

through the turnstiles which were approx 30-40 yards (yds) away

that a crowd was building up outside.    Persons outside the ground

wera being forced to wait and it did not appear to me that they were

waiting in set queues.     It seemed more like a large crowd which had

devaloped as opposed to large numbers of people queuing in an orderly

manner.     There was a great deal of shouting and chanting and a kind

of 'hum' that one sometimes gets in a large crowd.     I left the

refreshment bar area to return to the turnstiles to assist my

colleagues. It continued to become more and more busy and the
searching of persons entering ceased in order to allow persons to

entar the ground without causing further delay or inconvenience or

causing a crowd to build up in the enclosure inside the turnstiles.

The crowd outside had now become a crush, a sea of people which

stratched as far as Leppings Lane itself.     Persons who were entering
wera becoming more and more aggressive in their attitude towards us.

They were complaining that the crush outside was not only unbearable

but dangerous.     There were persons of both sexes and all ages who were

in danger of being crushed.     Their mood was such that I feared that


                                                                               3236
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S846

one of us may be assaulted.     It is quite possible that this feeling

amongst the fans was brought about by the conditions outside the
ground and brought on by genuine fear of being crushed.    Several

persons told us this and they were assured that Police Officers,

including mounted officers were on duty outside the ground deputed to

control the crowd.    I saw several people climb into the ground over

the wall above turnstiles A - G. They were leaning over the fencing

on top of the wall and seemed to be passing their tickets down to

persons in the crowd outside, who presumably could not have had

tickets of their own but had come to the match anyway and were intent

on getting in somehow.    Several persons who were entering were saying

that someone would be seriously injured or crushed to death unless

something was done to relieve the pressure outside.    The turnstiles

could not cope with such a crush.    The area between the turnstiles

and the rear of the stand filled with persons who made their way
towards the Leppings Lane terrace and stand.    It was not possible for

me to do anything about the persons who entered over the wall due to

the numbers who were present, they simply jumped down and disappeared

into the crowd.
Many of the people who entered at this time had been drinking. This

in my opinion tended to inflame their anger and made them more

aggresive and I genuinely feared that sooner or later one of us would

be assaulted.     The sheer number of persons made it inpossible to

consider arresting or ejecting the persons who were drunk. My
impression was that these persons had in the main arrived late at the

ground, having been in local licensed premises drinking but this by

no nneans applied to all. The mood had changed from being good

natured earlier to one of hostility, perhaps anger brought on by fear

in the crowd outside.     The situation continued and suddenly the large

metal concertina gate C which was beside us opened. A large,


                                                                           3237
                                                                 PAGE        5
                                                                 S846

chanting crowd of people surged in through this gate and made their

way towards the terracing.   There was noise coining from inside the
ground as the match apparently kicked off, followed shortly afterwards

by a loud roar as, I presumed one of the teams had threatened the

other teams goal. The area outside the ground cleared of people with

the exception of the odd one or two who were left outside.

Throughout the time when the crowd was crushed outside the ground I

heard messages passed over the tannoy asking persons waiting outside

to be patient and that there was room inside the ground. These had

little effect, if any at all.   Persons entering the ground were, on

occasions struggling for breath, particularly the older ones

amongst them.
Shortly after kick off time I went with other officers into the

ground where we were told to attend on the track in front of the

Leppings Lane terrace. We entered via the first gangway of the South

Stand.   On emerging I saw a large number of persons on the pitch.      It

was obvious that something had occurred.    The chants that greeted us

on entering were critical of the condition of the ground.    It seemed
that the whole of the Liverpool end was chanting "shitty ground,
shitty ground, shitty ground" to the tune of "here we go, here we go,

here we go" as is chanted by most football crowds. My first
                                                   v
impression was that the supporters entering late had beccme so

agitated that they had invaded the pitch.    I was soon to learn that

was not the case.   I was greeted by a scene that I can only describe
as one of horror . I went imnediately with my colleagues to the

track at the Leppings Lane end of the ground where we tried to assist

persons out of the terrace area via the gates in the perimeter

fencing. I was principally engaged in the two southern most pens,

marked 'S' and 'CS' on the ground plan. Many people were crushed up
against the fencing and I could see that a great many were struggling


                                                                                 3238
                                                                PAGE       6
                                                                S846

for their very lives. More officers arrived and we all tried

desperately to rescue these people. Many were shouting for help.

Other people who managed to get through the fencing were wandering

about on the pitch in a state of shock, many in tears, many were very

angry and agitated perhaps in the circumstances understandably so.

To their credit others were helping evacuate the pens. We were all
hampered by the fact that the gates were narrow, so much so that
there is only width for one person to get through at a time.

Pressure continued to come from behind. All I can imagine is that

people at the back were so concerned at being able to see that no-one

realised what was happening at the front.

Officers were making frantic signals for persons to stop pushing and

to move back.   Several persons were helped out of gate no. 2 onto the
track.   Seine were injured but none seriously. The greatest problem

was around gate no. 3 and along the length of the perimeter fence.     I

saw one youth who for some inexplicable reason was swinging from a

girder under the roof of the West Stand.     Sane of the persons on

the pitch were aggressive towards us, we became the butt of their

anger.   Persons of allages and both sexes were brought from the pens
and laid on the pitch.   I could see that in the 'CS' pen persons in

front of the fence on the terrace were piled on top of one another,

crushing the unfortunate ones who had fallen or been forced to the

ground by sheer weight of pressure from behind. Others were squashed

up against the fence. As persons were freed from the pen it became

clear that there had been a great loss of life although at this stage

I thought it would be in the region of 20.
Many officers were trying to rescue persons trapped and my personal

feelings were of helplessness as I saw persons crushed up against the

fence or under persons who were trying to get out. Helplessness

because in spite of being so close, close enough to touch it was


                                                                               3239
                                                                  PAGE
                                                                  S846

impossible to help them out because of the narrow gates.    Persons who

were only a matter of feet from the gates were unable to get out.

The casualties were being treated by St. Johns ambulance staff and

many persons came and identified themselves as doctors and nurses.

These persons undertook a lot of first aid treatment.    I brought 3
persons from the terrace who were unconscious amongst others who were

able to walk, although injured. All 3 who required emergency

treatment were dealt with by persons who told me that they were

trained medical staff and I returned to see if I could help the

trapped persons still in the terracing.   Recovery of the victims was

now so slow, or rather it seemed slow because it was hampered by the

narrow exit gates.   The pressure on the fence began to ease and it
became easier to recover casualties and it must be said, also recover

the dead.   The rescue effort was helped by a senior officer,   I

believe Chief Supt. NESBIT who tried to co-ordinate Police efforts by

using a megaphone to get us to work as a team as opposed to a group

of individuals.   I saw, initially, only one ambulance and I believe
that was one operated by St. John's although ambulances did attend,

as did the Fire Brigade to assist in the operation.     The need was for

oxygen to revive persons and to help those who were unconscious.

Oxygen was in short supply and really only arrived when fire service

personnel attended with rescue equipment. Advertising boards were

used as stretchers for the dead and injured.   Bodies lay on the turf
with clothing covering their faces. The whole scene was one of

absolute horror, one which no-one whatever their professional

training or background could possibly be trained to deal with.

As the terracing began to clear I saw one of the barriers in 'CS' pen

had been bent completely over and broken.   The pressure on the
persons at the front must have been tremendous and I experienced

great sorrow for the victims. All the victims were finally removed


                                                                           3240
                                                                  PAGE       8
                                                                  S846

from 'CS' pen but a great marry persons remained on the pitch, trying

to find friends and relatives, many, in fact nearly all seemed

unable to believe what had happened. Many blamed the police, many

blamed the ground and the manner of ticket allocation, many blamed

both. Many were angry and were abusive towards me and my

colleagues.   To some extent I understand the reason for this.    By

that I do not mean that I feel the Police were to blame but I do

understand what the persons must have felt and understand that they

had to take it out on someone.   Eventually the announcement was made

that the match itself had been abandoned. The ground began to clear

and we went with the supporters into Leppings Lane towards their

transport before returning to the North Stand.   It was while speaking

to a colleague there that I realised the enormity of the tragedy.        I

learned that there were 74 bodies laid in the gymnasium.

Whilst in the North Stand I was able to reflect on what had

occurred. What I have written before was my account of the incident
as it developed. To sum up I feel, without wanting to lay blame at
anyone's door, that I should make my own personal feelings known.

I, like many others, have been a football supporter all my life.       I

have been watching football at Hillsborough since before 1960

(000060) - in fact my mother informs me that I went to my first match

at 3 years of age - some 33 years ago now.   I am a Police Officer of
15 1/2 years service and I have worked many football matches, four or

five of which have been semi finals, including the corresponding

match between the same teams last year - although on that occasion I

was on duty in the refreshment concourse in the West Stand.      I have

also attended many matches, mainly at Hillsborough, marry with large

gates and I have always felt safe there - indeed my wife, 12 year old

daughter and 9 year old son regularly attend with me. None of us

have ever had cause to feel unsafe at the ground.   In view of the


                                                                                 3241
                                                                  PAGE     !
                                                                  S846

foregoing paragraph I feel in some ways qualified to pass an

'informed' opinion.   I keep abreast of football matters and am

conscious of the safety aspect from both sides of the fence, as it
were.

I know that the capacity for this match was 54,000 I also know that

Steffield Wednesday F.C. is a club which has staged important matches

for a number of years, including semi finals and staged last year's

sesni final between Liverpool and Notts Forest. These matches are all

ticket affairs with one ticket being sold for each seat or
corresponding place on a terrace. The capacity is governed by local

authority, fire regulations and police and I am sure that the ground

can hold more than this figure, but it is kept at the figure for
safety reasons.   I do not wish to enter into the argument over ticket

allocations but I am convinced that if only these persons with

tickets had gone to the game then this tragedy would not have
occurred.   I cannot put a figure on how many attended without tickets

but it was a large number, it must have been for such a crowd to form

outside the ground.   The crush outside was such that persons who were

entering were injured and in genuine fear of their lives.     I feel

that if the pressure had not been released then someone would have

been seriously injured or indeed killed outside the ground.
Unfortunately the effect of opening Gate C allowed persons to enter
at a fast rate, as opposed to a steady flow through the turnstiles.

The crowd flooded across the enclosure towards the tunnel in the

centre of the stand - it is traditional that the crowd is at its most

dense in the area behind the goal.   I can recall, when first making

my way towards the track that when I passed the entrance to the 'S'

pen it looked full and people were craning their necks to see when I

got onto the track that pen, although crowded, was not full to

capacity.   The 'CS' pen on the contrary was jammed full.    It is quite


                                                                               3242
                                                                 PAGE    10
                                                                 S846

possible that the surge of people into the terrace via the tunnel

put pressure on the people already inside, who were forced to sway

forward putting pressure on the barrier and the persons at the
front.   Perhaps if the terracing had not been divided into pens then

the crowd could have spread out more laterally, filling spaces in

pens 'S' and 'N' which although crowded were not full.    Unfortunately

the pen fencing prevents lateral movement.

I also feel that drink had a large part to play.   It is traditional

to "have a couple of drinks" before a game but some persons attended
at the game, obviously the worse for drink, making it a day out and

an excuse for a "booze up". These persons seemed intent on getting

in, whatever the cost.   They were not prepared to wait and seamed to

have no regard for the safety of their fellow supporters.    Drinks

affect people in different ways but people tend to become more

aggressive, particularly when in large groups or gangs, more excited
and agitated and less tolerant and more prepared to exercise their

animal instincts to get what they want - in this case entry to the

match regardless of the safety of themselves or others.

As for the police side, I feel that we were confronted by a situation
which got out of hand and we found ourselves unable to cope with the

change in conditions although perhaps no contingency plans could have
allowed for what happened. It would seem that more people attended

by private transport, coach or by mini bus so that they would have

more freedom than they would if they had travelled by train when they

would have been escorted to the ground by police officers.

From the grounds point of view it is assumed that all arrangements
for the match met with the approval of the local authority.    From my

own experience I know that the club is conscious of the needs of

safety and public order and would presume that the ground complies

with safety regulations - otherwise it would not have been chosen as


                                                                              3243
                                                                       PAGE     11
                                                                       S846

        a vanue.   It certainly seemed to cope with the corresponding match



        Having reflected on the whole incident there is not one sole factor

        which can be blamed.   Perhaps it happened as a result of several

        ingredients for disaster all coming together at once. One thing that

        I do know is that the seeds for the tragedy were sown outside the

        turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end. The deaths occurred inside the

        ground but these came about as a direct result of what went off in
        the 20 or 30 minutes prior to kick off.   If that conclusion lays the

        blame at the feet of some of the supporters who attended on that day

        then so be it.




                                                          KEITH WHILD SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                     3244
Incident 102            260390 OP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT
                                                               STATEMENT NUMBER S2220

                                                                               Station

f e r r i lame
          c             WASHINGTON

 Forenames

 Age                                            Date of birth

 Address

 Occupation             POL PC975
 Telephone

 IC                     Height                  Build

 Hair colour


•
 Hair type
                                                Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses                Use                     Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated                   110589                                     R WASHINGTON Signed


                 At 9.00am (0900) Saturday, 15 April, 1989 (150489) I paraded for duty

                 at Barnsley Police Station for the FA Cup Semi Final, together with PS
                 1341 CRAWFORD and other officers from Bl, I travelled to Hillsborough

                 Football Ground.   On arrival we were briefed by Senior Officers.

                 At 10.50am (1050) together with PS 1341 and officers of serial 14 we

                 attended at the West stand for a further briefing by Inspector White,

                 who went into detail as to the duties of serial 14.
                 BEFORE KICK OFF serial 14 was deployed on the inside of the turnstiles

                 A-G to search all fans entering the ground.
                 KICK OFF When all fans had entered the ground all of serial 14 was to

                 stand by in the tunnel of the West stand which leads to the centre

                 enclosures.
                 In the event of the emergency evacuation procedure being effected my

                 duty was to attend at the gate in the fence between the Centre South
                                                                PAGE    2
                                                                S2220

and South enclosures.

For the duration of the match I was to work in company with PC 1002

Wild and we both were instructed by PS 1341 Crawford to pay attention

to the snack bar which was situated at the rear of the West stand on

the South end.
After briefing by Inspector WHITE all officers of serial 14 took up

positions at turnstiles A to G, PC 1002 Wild and myself and PC 1278

LANG and PC 3232 BURTON took up positions at turnstiles A and B. When

the turnstiles opened there were not many fans outside the ground and

prior to entering the ground were subject to a search and were then

subject to a further search once inside the ground.   Due to this

double searching of fans I anticipated that there would be seme

objections or adverse comment regarding this but neither were

forthcoming at this time.
As the morning progressed and the number of fans increased I saw

several fans attempt to gain entry to the ground via turnstiles A

and B, only to be told by the turnstile operator that they were at

the wrong turnstile.    They then had to force their way back towards

the other turnstiles on Leppings Lane end. Around 1.00pm (1300) the

number of fans outside the ground had greatly increased and we then

had to be more selective in our searching. Around 2.30pm (1430) a

few fans climbed the perimeter wall and were stood on the roof of the
turnstiles A to G; they were instructed to get down and were ejected

from the ground by other officers.
At this time there were several hundred people hanging around the area

of the turnstiles and due to the amount of fans now entering the

ground were asked to move from that area to allow fans in.
Several people who had entered the ground complained that people at

the back of the crowd were pushing towards the front, and that the

Police should be aware of this.


                                                                            3246
                                                                 PAGE    3
                                                                 S2220

At this I looked through the turnstiles towards Leppings Lane,

although ray view was restricted I could see officers on foot and on

horseback who appeared to be attempting to control the surge towards

the turnstiles.

People were now struggling to enter the ground and in fact were being

pushed into the wall and turnstile entrance itself. Many fans were

now complaining that someone would be injured, and all officers at the

turnstiles should go outside. All fans were informed that officers

inside had a task to perform and that officers outside would be doing
                                                s.~



everything possible to alleviate the problem.

Around 2.40 pm (1440) pm I saw that several fans had again climbed the
outer wall and were on top of the turnstile entrance roof, they were

instructed to get down. This they flatly refused to do.    I saw two

youths on the roof showing their tickets to Police officers they were

again instructed to get off the roof, but again refused.
By now many fans had congregated around the turnstiles and several

officers including myself were being surrounded by fans who were being

abusive towards us because they had been subjected to the crush

outside the turnstiles.   Fans were now being allowed into the ground

without the ticket stubs being tom off (this I presumed was to allow

quicker entry) and these were being passed to fans on the roof who in
turn began to throw them over the wall to fans awaiting entry.
It had now got to the stage where searching was impossible due to the

amount of fans congregating inside the turnstile area and together

with several other officers we attempted to clear the area. This was

met with verbal hositility towards the Police and many fans appeared

to be losing their tempers.
I formed the opinion that before too long a Police officer would be

physically assaulted, and due to the fact that only serial 14 was

deployed in that area, had an officer been assaulted then assistance
                                                                  PAGE    4
                                                                  S2220

would have been very limited and the situation got out of hand.

Thankfully this did not occur.
Whilst speaking with several fans I was approached by a man who stated

that he was a Merseyside Police officer, he said that sanething had

to be done outside or people would be injured. He appreciated the

pressure we were under but sartething had to be done and fast.

I informed him that the officers outside the ground would be doing

everything possible. At this he left and went into the ground without

formally identifying himself to me.
Fans were still congregating round the area inside the turnstiles and

I made several request for them to move away to allow people to get

through the turnstiles as this in itself was creating a problem for

fans entering the ground.   I saw fans climbing over the turnstile and

entering 2 at a time but was unable to prevent this due to the number

of fans around the turnstiles.   These people just disappeared into the

crowd.
Shortly before 3.00 pm (1500) the main exit gate situated near to

turnstile G suddenly opened and fans began to surge into the ground.

Several officers from the serial ran towards the gate and I joined
them in an effort to close the gate (I was of the opinion that the

gate had been forced open by fans) but this was impossible.

As the fans surged into the ground, many chanting as they ran, I

turned and saw a gap in the centre of the fans and people moving to

the left and right.   People were screaming and shouting, I went to

that area with other officers and found that people were on the floor

having tripped or been pushed over in the rush to get into the ground.
These people were quickly put on their feet and moved away to the side

walls away from the rush. Not one person complained to me about being

injured.
The majority of the fans went towards the tunnel leading to the
                                                                 PAGE    5
                                                                 S2220

central enclosure but same did go to the South side of the West stand.

Eventually the gates were closed, seme fans were still coming through

the turnstiles but the numbers outside were greatly reduced.
Most of the fans had gone into the stand and the rear was almost

clear with just a few fans milling around.

Serial 14 was then deployed onto the pitch after a report of a pitch

invasion. Access to the pitch was gained via the gate leading from

the South side of the West stand into the South stand and walking down

through the seated area. Whilst walking down the South stand I could

see several fans climbing over the perimeter fence onto the track area

and there were a large number of fans already on the pitch.    There

were a large number of Police Officers and stewards in the area of the

centre enclosures assisting fans to get out via the emergency exit

gates or over the perimeter fence.
Seme officers had climbed the perimeter fence in an effort to assist

people over the fence.   I went over to the perimeter fence covering

the central south enclosure and saw that people had been crushed

against the perimeter wall and fence, I would estimate that about 40

to 50 bodies were laid up against the wall on top of one another.
Seme who were in a standing position up against the fence were unable

to move, being trapped by the lower half of their body.    Some were

still breathing but it was apparent that many were dead.

The area around the emergency exit gate of the centre south enclosure

was congested with people trying to get out and Police Officers

attempting to get inside to rescue the injured.
I looked towards the centre north enclosure and saw that part of the

perimeter fence had been pulled away, allowing fans greater egress

onto the pitch.   I then climbed the fence of the centre south

enclosure and began to sway on the fence hoping that this would give

way and afford greater entry into the enclosure. The fence did not
                                                                PAGE      6
                                                                S2220

give way and I climbed down onto the track.   I could see PS 1341

CRAtfFORD was still on the fence assisting a youth over, who had caught

his clothing on the top of the fence and was in a precarious position.

I moved over to assist PS CRAWFORD and as I did so the youth became

free and dropped onto the track. At that point the top part of one of

a crush barrier was thrown from the centre south enclosure towards the

pitch, it was about 5 inch in diameter, 7 feet (7') long and was bent.
It hit the top of the perimeter fence, at the side of PS CRAWFORD, and

began to fall towards the track I ducked to avoid it hitting me and

caught it with ray left hand.   I managed to keep hold of it and it did

not strike any persons.   I then removed the item onto the pitch to

avoid any person falling over it. By now many injured and dead had

been removed from the enclosure and were being attended to by St. John
Ambulance brigade, seme fans had tom down advertising boardings and

were using these as make shift stretchers to remove people from the

pitch.

I then saw Chief Superintendent NESBIT near the emergency exit gate,

he was instructing officers to form a line either side of the gate to

allow for quicker evacuation of the injured and dead.
I formed one of the lines and assisted in the evacuation, handling

many bodies none of which I can describe.
After all the injured and dead had been removed from the enclosures

and pitch I remained in the area and joined several other officers

from our serial, we were instructed by PS CRAWFORD to remain at that

location until he had established the whereabouts of all officers frcm

the serial.
Several fans were going round and shaking officers hands, thanking

them for what they had done.
A message was then passed over the public address system by police

control stating that the match had been abandoned, and that fans would
                                                                        PAGE    7
                                                                        S2220

        be allowed to leave once emergency services had cleared away from the

        ground. When the fans were allowed to leave serial 14 was deployed as

        escort for Liverpool fans, and they were escorted along Leppings Lane

        to Penistone Road.    Once the fans had cleared we returned to the

        ground for de-briefing.

        Eventually the majority of the serial were released from the ground

        and returned to Barnsley, going off duty at 8.00 pm (2000).




                                                                       SIGNED

          TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE

END OF REPORT




                                                                                    3251
Incident 102    260390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT
                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER S839

                                                                         Station

surname           BURTON

Forenames         JACQUELINE

Age                                         Date of birth

Address           S YORKS POLICE
                  CHURCHFIELDS, BARNSLEY.

Occupation        POL PC3232

Telephone

IC                Height                    Build

Hair colour



«
     r type

     s                                      Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                       Accent

Number of Pages
Dated             290489                                          J BURTON Signed


          On Saturday, 15 April (150489), I commenced duties at Barnsley
          Divisional Headquarters.   This date I was on serial 14 with Police

          Sergeant 1341 CRAWFORD.    Duties at Hillsborough football ground

          included searching Liverpool fans as they entered the ground at

          turnstiles A-G.
          At 11 a.m. (1100) after a short briefing, I attended at the above
          mentioned turnstiles, several of which opened at 11.30 a.m. (1130)

          the remainder following suit a short time later.
          At this time I could see several officers outside the ground

          searching the fans prior to them entering the ground. We were then

          instructed by the serial inspector to search the same individuals a

          second time, once they were through the turnstiles.
          As the crowd increased in numbers officers outside were unable to

          search all fans hence, I concentrated on those I could see had not
                                                                     PAGE     2
                                                                     S839

    been stopped prior to entering. At this time all the fans appeared

    quite amicable. The atmosphere was such that jokes were passed

    between Police and supporters in lighthearted banter.

    Towards 3 p.m. (1500) the atmosphere of the Liverpool supporters

    tended to change.     Some began to climb over the walls above the
    turnstiles. The first of these were ejected from the ground.    However

    so many began to use this method of entry there were insufficient

    officers to deal with them all. The officers outside the ground were

    no longer in sight.

    As the crowd outside the ground grew, those inside became abusive.

    I was aware that a large crowd was gathered waiting to enter the

t   ground and that this was causing a problem with many fans being
    crushed.    To reinforce this I saw several youths came through the

    turnstiles, breathless, perhaps with only one shoe and limping.

    As this situation gradually worsened I was personally approached by

    several youths who were extremely angry that such a situation had
    been allowed to develop, claiming it was likely a serious injury or

    even death would be forthcoming.
    This anger led to disgusting language and corments about the Police

    in general. When I attempted to explain the situation many refused

    to listen, simply shouting above my own voice.    Many were becoming

    agitated.    It was at this point I realised that unless a solution to
    the problem was found it could well end in violence, specifically

    directed towards Police Officers.
    I could see many of my colleagues having similar problems.

    Many of these people smelled strongly of intoxicants.

    As kick off time neared the large gate (C) to my left was opened.

    Several hundred supporters ran into the ground, all making towards

    the tunnel leading to the West Stand.     I was pushed back against the

    wall of the turnstiles and unable to move until the rush had

9
                                                                                  3253
                                                                       PAGE   3
                                                                       S839

    subsided.   I noticed a number of females entering the ground in this

    manner, many of whom were crying.   There was a great deal of pushing

    and jostling. Many fans threw tickets to youths sat on top of the

    walls above the turnstiles.    I noticed that those who appeared to have

    tickets had than in their hands. A large number of those entering
    were cheering and clapping. In my opinion a great many of these did

    not possess a ticket at all.

    As the gates closed those entering the turnstiles became angry that

    they had waited whilst seme had simply barged through. Again, I was

    approached by many claiming the majority of those admitted did not
    have tickets.   Still they were demanding action to ease the situation

*   on the other side of the turnstiles, again, not accepting any

    explanation given to them. There was a good deal of abuse and bad

    language.
    The only supervision at this time was Police Sergeant CRAWFORD.      I

    had not seen the Inspector for seme fifteen minutes.
    There were so few police Officers at the turnstiles it was impossible

    to maintain any form of order.    It became a case of 'safety in

    numbers' and to this end I managed to find and remain with several

    officers in my serial.

9   The gate opened for a second time with much the same results as the

    first.   The second, rather large crowd of people made their way

    towards the tunnel of the West Stand at a rapid pace.

    I believe the second gate may have been opened after kick off as

    there appeared seme urgency in their manner.    I was unable to hear

    little else due to the large amount of noise these fans made.

    A matter of seconds later I saw several officers run past the

    entrance to the West Stand claiming the pitch had been invaded.      I
    followed these officers around the back of the West Stand, entering

    the pitch frcm the front of the South Stand.

9
                                                                                  3254
                                                                      PAGE    4
                                                                      S839

    When on the pitch I saw numerous fans wandering around.    They

    appeared to be dazed, many rubbing their middle.

    I looked to the stands, noticing that the majority were shouting for

    the football to continue and jeering at our presence.
    It was then my attention was drawn towards the stand behind the

    goal.    There seemed to be far too many people in this centre section

    although I cannot recall how many were in each of the sections at this

    point.

    Those towards the back of this section were clapping and singing.

    They appeared to be pushing forward. Although I could not see
    anything amiss.    I could feel that something was not quite right I

    neared the fencing when my attenton was drawn towards a youth stood

    approximately 2 yards (yds) from the fencing.    He showed all possible

    signs of death.   The pressure of the crowd was holding him up.
    I moved nearer to the fence unable to believe that the youth was in all

    probability dead. However, as I approached I could see many faces

    pushed against the fencing. Those immediately behind were trying to

    reach over the top to grab at the fence.

    I stood on the wall to assist the officers trying to reach over the

    top of the fencing to pull people out.     Only those helped were those

t   that had enough room to climb up a little way and help themselves to

    be hoisted over the top. Those at the front of the fencing were

    inpossible to reach.
    Soma time later several bodies appeared on the pitch.     I left the

    wall to assist with first aid.    Those alive were placed on pieces of

    advertising boards and carried across by myself and Liverpool
    supporters to the exit between the Spion Kop and North Stand where an

    ambulance was waiting.    I cannot recall how many times I made this

    journey or who with. Apart from the one or two bodies I helped take

    across the remainder were dead.


                                                                                  3255
                                                                      PAGE
                                                                      S839

    I returned to the goal mouth in front of the West Stand to offer ray

    assistance with first aid.

    Onea the initial shock had subsided and many of those alive had been

    helped, I saw numerous Liverpool fans approach Police Officers,

    blaming them for what had happened, shouting and facing up to them

    aggressively.    As I was approached by such a youth I walked away. He

    did not follow me but continued to shout after me.

    Whilst helping with first aid many supporters were willing to do what
    they could to assist, although it was clear many did not know what

    to do.
    I looked into the upper stands to see many still shouting for the

    football to begin.
    As the dead and injured had been taken care of I stood on the pitch

    waiting for further instructions.   I noticed there were no senior

    officers on the pitch and cannot recall seeing any above the rank of

    Police Sergeant throughout this time.     I looked at the clock on the

    North Stand to see it was 4.15 p.m. (1615).
    Whilst stood at the fencing helping to reach out seme supporters, a

    blue pole was clearly thrown over the larger fencing.    It flew past
    ray head, missing me by a hair's width.    I believe other officers were

    hit by this missile.
#
    Some time later serial 14 was directed to sit in the North Stand
    until further instructions.   By this time the ground had been cleared

    of many of the supporters.
    From the North Stand we were stood down, making our way to Claywheels

    Lana for transport.
    I returned to DHQ with other members of my serial at approximately

    8 p.m. (2000).



                                                            J BURTON SIGNED

                                                                               3256
Incident 102      260390 OP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER S1074
                                                                            Station

  lumamj
 Su                LANG
 Forenames         ANTHONY GORDON
 Age                                       Date of birth

 Address


 Occupation        POL PC1278
 Telephone

 IC                Height                  Build

 Hair colour

 Hair type

^^es                                       Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses           Use                     Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated             180589                                          A G LANG Signed


           Police Constable 1278 - Bl

           0900     On duty Barnsley
           1000     Parade Hillsborough Serial 14     i/c PS1341 CRAWFORD
           1100     To Phase 1 Duty Leppings Lane Turnstiles A-G

                     in company with other officers instructed to search

                     incoming fans re offences.
           During this time there was a steady influx of fans, slowly at first

           and as 2.30 (1430) approached, looking through the turnstiles I could

           see a build up of people on the outside.     These persons all appeared

           to have arrived at the same time.
           As the crowd outside built up and the turnstiles were getting busy I

           had occasion to eject four people for climbing over the revolving

           barrier, having no tickets.    These were ejected via Gate C as to take
           them to the Police Room would have resulted in a shortage of manpower

                                                                                      3257
                                                                PAGE    2
                                                                S1074

at the turnstiles. I could only see one serial in the area covering

A - G and Gate C. As the crowd outside got bigger a number of fans

were coming through the turnstiles and making complaints about the

crowd outside.
All the fans who entered appeared very agitated and some very
frightened by what was happening outside. Women and children appeared

to be suffering the most and were in various states of shock.   I

received a substantial amount of abuse from some fans at this time,

demanding we sort out the crush outside.   Seme fans were in possession

of tickets purchased from Notts and when they were unable to gain

entry into the turnstiles they were having to turn around thereby

blocking the turnstiles even more.   During this time I could see
outside and could see people being pushed towards the turnstiles and

some getting stuck on the revolving barrier which because of the

amount of people couldn't be generated properly. At this point Gate C

was opened, I did not see by who but in company with PS CRAWFORD I

shut the left side of the gate and locked it but not before quite a
number of fans had run in. The gate was shut before the majority

realised it was a way in.
I then returned to the turnstiles and could see people climbing the

walls and fences from the outside, youths were also climbing on to the

turnstile roof from the inside and were throwing tickets down to

those waiting outside.   I suggest these were the youths who had

entered Gate C when it was briefly opened.
I could also see fans entering the turnstiles without tickets and

passing back pound notes of various denominations to the stewards.

These I saw were ejected.   I have no knowledge of any successfully

paying to get in.
By this time I was again near to Gate C and looking outside through
the turnstiles, it was obvious that there was no control over the mass
                                                                 PAGE     3
                                                                 S1074

of people I could see.

A Man and young woman entered through Turnstile A and this woman was

in a state of shock and received first aid, allegedly as a result of

being crushed against the wall outside.

I was assisting them near to the wall between Gate C and Turnstile A

when the gate was opened fully again.     I could see a mass of people

outside who all surged forward towards this gate. The majority I

would describe as young men and youths between 17 - 25 years.    I

braced myself against the wall to prevent the young woman getting

carried along by the crowd who by this time were rushing, heading
through the gate in what seemed like a never ending torrent of people.

This mass of people had one aim and that was to enter the ground.

They were unstoppable and certainly undirectable. In my opinion

should a PC or PC's have attempted to direct these fans they would

have been swept along with them. It was obvious the situation was out

of control both outside and inside the ground.
After a time the gates were closed and the area between the turnstiles

and the terraces emptied quickly.   I did not see where those fans

went.   I then resumed my duties at the turnstiles. I did not hear the

match kick-off because of the sheer volume of noise around my

location. A short time later I heard a shout that there was a pitch

invasion and as a result of this, in company with other officers ran
around to the rear of the South Stand, through the stand and over the

wall on to the circular track.   I could see people climbing over the

fences between the track and the terrace and also people being lifted

from the terrace up to the seating area above. As I got nearer to

the fence I could see the reason for this and that was the excessively

large number of people in the central pen.     I do not recall how many

other officers were present at this time but I could see a number on

the fence attempting to pill people over on to the track.     This was
                                                                 PAGE      4
                                                                 S1074

hampered by the forward facing spikes at the top of the fence.    I

could see people massed against the fence with their bodies and some

faces with a crush of people at the rear of them, this was

approximately 20 or 30 deep in the centre and they were obviously
unable to move or break but just appeared to be watching us with

terrified looks on their faces.

I could see individuals were obviously dead and dying with their

colouration and looks.

There did not appear to be too many casualties at first glance but I
could then see a lot of those people were laying at the bottom of the
wall under the fence, I can only describe it as a large mound of

people, most were obviously dead.
I approached a gate to the rear of the goal and saw two officers on

the fence to the left of the gate trying to reach a young boy who was

at the front, he was alive but obviously shocked.    I entered the gate

by climbing around it using the fence and standing on the fence swung
through to the interior of the terrace.    I was then able to get an arm

around this boy and lift him enough for the officers reaching over to

pull him up.

By this time the crush seemed to be easing slightly frcm the rear.

The only way to assist the injured due to the entanglement of limbs

was to get to the rear of them and start from the back towards the

fence, in order to do this I was obliged to crawl over some bodies.

I could then see that a crash barrier had given way just above the

area containing the people who had fallen over and down towards the

wall.   A Path was then cleared from the gate towards the tunnel at

the rear.
This enabled bodies to be passed along this path and out of the gate
to waiting officers.     There was no room inside the terrace to attempt

first aid.
                                                                        PAGE      5
                                                                        S1074

        I could see that same of the trapped people were obviously alive and

       as a result these were given priority when released. The noise was

       very loud during all this with some fans still shouting and chanting.
       A number of fans assisted us removing people frcm the terrace and on

       to the pitch. Without these I have no doubt that more would have

       died as in the most they assisted speedily. Seme fans, mainly young

       men, were obviously drunk, they had all the signs and smelled of

       intoxicants.     These fans were not assisting but were abusing and

       pishing myself and others.     I was threatened on a number of occasions

       by these men, and although not directly assaulted was poked or pushed

       repeatedly, with ccmnents like 'you bastards, it's all your fault"

       I have no recollection of the number of people I removed but they were

       pilled frcm the pile and carried to the gate. I only recollect one

       young girl about 17/20 years with black hair wearing what appeared to

       be a brown leather jacket, she was immediately to the right of the

       gate when looking up towards the stands. When the last body was

       cleared I returned to the pitch area and joined other officers giving

       first aid to those still on the pitch.

       As a result of climbing through the gate I trapped the sole of my left

       boot and suffered a minor ankle strain which has now cleared up.
       From what I could see throughout the incident the problem seemed to

       stem frcm the large number of people attending outside the ground at

       the same time.



                                                               A G LANG SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:
         TIME:               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
Incident 102     260390 QP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                       STATEMENT NUMBER S1147

                                                                         Station
Surname           THOMAS

Forenames         BEVERLEY
Age                                      Date of birth

Address           B SUB-DIV


Occupation        POL PC3347

Telephone

IC                Height                 Build

Hair colour

Hair type

fL                                       Complexion

Facial hair
Glasses           Use                    Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                             B THOMAS Signed


          BEVERLEY THOMAS

          POLICE CONSTABLE 3347
          'B' SUB-DIVTSION
          At 9.00 am (0900) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I came on duty

          at Barnsley Police Station, where together with a number of other

          officers, were transported to Hillsborough Football Ground for a

          briefing at 10.00 am (1000). I was on serial No 14, the Inspector in

          charge of this serial was Inspector White.     The other officers on this

          serial were as follows:-

                  PS 1341 CRAWFORD

                  PC 1002 WILD

                  PC 1278 LANG

                  PC 975 WASHINGTON
                  PC 3232 BURTON

                                                                                      3262
                                                                PAGE
                                                                S1147

       PC 2806 BUTLER
       PC 136 SMALLMAN

       PC 1777 BRANSTON

       PC 2819 MCMANUS

       PC 2887 GRANT
At 11.00 am (1100), or possibly a little before that time, Serial 14,

together with another serial consisting of 'B2' Sub-Division officers,

attended at the rear of the terraces on the West Stand, where

Inspector White explained what we were required to do that day.

Serial 14 was deployed inside the ground at the Leppings Lane end of

the ground. We were to search supporters entering the ground at

turnstiles A-G.
I was working in the company of Police Constable 2806 BUTLER and our

attention was mainly focused on turnstile C.
Shortly after 11.00 am (1100), Serial 14 took up positions at the

turnstiles and at about 11.15 am (1115), turnstiles A-B were open.

Through the turnstiles you could see that there was another serial

deployed outside the ground who were also there to search supporters.
By 12 noon, all the turnstiles (A-G) were open, but supporters were

only coming through in dribs and drabs and the serial outside the

ground were able to search those persons. However, Inspector White

insisted that such persons be searched a second time by Serial 14.

The supporters' feelings about this were mixed, sane did not mind,

others found this offensive.
By approximately 2.20 pm (1420), supporters were coming through the

turnstiles quickly and there were not enough officers present to

search evey person entering the ground.
Through the turnstile you could see that people were being pushed

right up to them, but I could not see past the first three or four

people outside the ground to see how big the crowd was.   People were
                                                                PAGE      3
                                                                S1147

catling through and we were still trying to search them. However, sane

people were saying that we would be better off dealing with the crowd

outside rather than searching them.

By about 2.30 pm (1430), supporters were beginning to climb over the

top of the turnstiles, these persons apparently had tickets and were

throwing them into the crowd outside the ground.

A short time after this I noticed that Gate C was open and a large

number of supporters came flooding into the ground.    I do not know

how the gates had become opened.

I cannot give a number of how many persons came into the ground but

it was a terrific amount.

The mood of these persons was that they were either angry or
triumphant.   I will explain this as follows.   Sane people entering by
Gate C had tickets and sane had not.   Due to the enormity of the

crowd, it was impossible for any of us to control them, to check to

see if they had tickets or to search them as we had been deployed to

do.
After a short time, a matter of about one minute, Police Officers, I

recall Police Sergeant CRAWFORD, Police Constable MCMANUS and Police

Constable GRANT, were able to close Gate C.
The crowd that had rushed through the gate seemed to congregate

around the area between Gate C and the West Stand congesting the area

totally.   I was continually asking people to move back or to go to

the area they were supposed to be in and this was replied by

them either saying they were waiting for friends or abuse or people

being both abusive and angry.
The supporters were angry because there was apparently an enormous

crowd outside the ground and they were insisting that we do something

about it. Unfortunately, we could not do anything, we had no radios
for communication and I had to see Inspector WHITE since about 1.00
                                                                    PAGE     4
                                                                    S1147

pm (1300). As a matter of fact, I never saw him again that day.

Supporters were saying get out there do something, there's

people being crushed to death out there.       I noticed that there was was

soma sort of message being passed over the ground's tannoy but the

noise of the crowd was so loud that no-one was able to hear.
As all this had been happening, people had still been coming through the

turnstiles.       However, the condition of some of these was very bad,

expacially the women and children. The people were p>ale and you could

see that they were sweating and having difficulty breathing.       I tried

to help those people as best I could.
The next thing I remember was another crowd of supporters flooding in

through Gate C.        I looked over in the direction of the gate and saw

that it was open again and officers were attempting to close it.

The state of the crowd was the same as I had described before.

It was also obvious that many of the persons had been drinking,

however, it was impossible to do anything about these people.

Needless to say, at this stage it had already become impossible to
continue searching people.       There was nothing whatsoever that we could

do to make the situations any better.
I remember hearing a loud cheer from the area inside the stand and the

crowd that had gathered between the West Stand and Gate C suddenly all

ran towards the central tunnel which leads onto the terraces in front

of the West Stand and the area behind the stand became virtually

empty.        However, people were still coming through the turnstiles.

The time was about 3.00 pm(1500).        I must admit it, the last 30

minutes I was the most worried I had been in my entire life because

there were only 11 Police Officers and god knows how many fans and we

wera powerless to do anything.
I remembered next an Inspector, whose name I do not know, come
ru n n in g   from behind the West Stand to us and telling us to go onto
                                                                 PAGE      5
                                                                 S1147

the pitch. The whole of Serial 14 followed the Inspector round

behind the Police Control and onto the pitch from the South Stand.

At this stage we did not know why we were going onto the pitch. As

we reached the pitch I could not see any players. I could see fans
running out on the pitch and it appeared at that stage that they were

invading the pitch.    There were also other officers coming onto the

pitch and they appeared to be forming a cordon along the 18 yard (yd)

lina in front of the West Stand.

I was facing the West Stand and saw fans pushing towards the front,

seme being lifted into the stand from the terraces. As I looked at

the terraces I can only remember looking at parts CS and CN marked on

the plan.    However, I remember seeing a fan at the top of the West
Stand swinging along the rafters by his arms.    I remember also seeing

one fan being lifted from the terraces into the West Stand.    He was

almost in the West Stand but fell to the floor. At this point it

still appeared as though what I could see were just acts of

hooliganism.
The next thing was that Police Officers ran from the 18 yard (yd) line

to the wire fence at the Centre South and Centre North areas.    I

followed suit but did not realise that it was anything more than bad

behaviour from the crowd.    I can recall Police Sergeant CRAWFORD

telling our serial to try and stay together.
When I reached the fencing I could see that persons were being
crushed against the fencing. However, it still did not seem as

serious as it apparently was.    I could not understand from being

stood further back on the pitch why persons did not move further back

as there appeared to have been room.
Other officers had begun opening gates and lifting people over the

fences.     I stood to the left of gate 3 as you look from the pitch and

remember part of a blue barrier being thrown at us Police Officers.
                                                                 PAGE     6
                                                                 S1147

A Policewoman who I do not know came to me and said,   "There's little

kids dying".   I looked at the fence again and saw that people were

pushed up to the fence with so much pressure that their faces were

being pushed almost through the fence and seme people were turning

blue, others were being sick and it was instantly obvious that seme

were already dead.

I remember speaking to one woman and trying to encourage her to

attempt to climb up, but the pressure was so great behind her that she

was unable to. I then tried to help people climb over the fence to

get onto the pitch.
When a few people had got out, I went to check that they were okay.

After I had done that with two people, I returned to the fence but was

unable to get near enough to help and realised I would be better

helping the ones as other officers were getting them out.

Together with Police Constable 3232 BURTON, I went to one Liverpool
fan and saw that his friends had brought an advertising boarding to

put him on. This man was alive, however, he was far from well. We

helped the fans place him on the board then we placed him in the

recovery position and I placed something soft under his head. Then,

together with Police Constable BURTON and his friends, we carried the

man to the area between the North Stand and the Spion Kop. When we

reached this part of the pitch I returned to the Leppings Lane

terrace.   There was what appeared to be a pile of dead bodies of

people who had evidently been crushed or trampled upon. There were

approximately 15 to 20 bodies of people who had obviously been dead

for a long time. On the top of the pile I remember seeing a young

woman only a little younger than myself.


I realised there was nothing I could do for the people remaining on the

terrace, so I returned to the pitch where I saw a mass of people.     I
                                                                        PAGE
                                                                        S1147

       was able to assist some people by putting them in the recovery

       position and regaining with them for a little while to ensure their

       full recovery.
       While officers were trying to help people, abuse was being received
       from fans, some of the fans, although I believe the majority of them

       genuinely wanted to help.   Others were trying to help their friends

       and would not allow officers to show them the correct ways.

       I do not recall while I was on the pitch seeing anyone above the rank

       of Sergeant.
       Eventually, everyone began leaving the ground. All bodies were
       removed and our serial was then instructed to escort Liverpool fans

       from Leppings Lane to Penistone Road roundabout. At this stage, our

       serial had the addition of Police Constable 2083 PARKER, but was

       minus Police Constable 2819 MCMANUS and Police Constable 2887 GRANT,

       who were still dealing with bodies. At this time we did not know how

       many people had died.
       We returned to the ground where we sat in the North Stand awaiting

       any jobs that may need doing.
       Further to this I have only worked one previous semi-final match at

       Hillsborough and that was last year when Liverpool were playing Notts
       Forest, as this year.   However, I was deployed at the rear of the

       North Stand and did not encounter any problems.




                                                             B THOMAS SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:
          TIME:           DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
Incident 102    260390 QP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT
                                                     STATEMENT NUMBER S1265
                                                                      Station

Surname           BULLAS

Forenames         DAVID

Age                                     Date of birth

Address


Occupation        POL INS

Telephone

IC                Height                Build

Hair colour

Hair type

4L                                      Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                   Accent

Number of Pages

Dated             260489                                      D BULLAS Signed


          DAVID BULLAS, INSPECTOR

          HQ OPERATIONS DEPT.

          26 APRIL 1989 (260489)
          On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I commenced duty at 9 am (0900) at
          Force Headquarters. I then attended at Hillsborough Football ground

          at 9.45 am (0945) for the general briefing - at this time I took

          charge of serial no 13 consisting of 1 Sergeant and 9 Constables.

          The duties of the officers on the serial and myself was to Police the
          West End Stand at Leppings Lane - we were directly responsible to
          Superintendent GREENWOOD who was in overall command within the ground.

          After briefing my serial took up position at the West Stand at

          approximately 10.45 am (1045) - policing the all covered seating area

          of the stand, the refreshment bars at the rear and the two sets of

          steps that lead into the stand from the concourse area at the back of
                                                                PAGE     2
                                                                S1265

the Leppings Lane Terracing. My serial was not deviated from the

stand - all officers remaining at that location until the events that

occurred later on at approximately 3 pm (1500) on the Leppings Lane

Terracing.   From my position in the stand I had a clear 'aerial view'

of the terracing below me. At approximatley 2.30 pm (1430) I took up

a position to the front of the stand seating looking directly down on

the terracing and the crowd that was gathering.   The terracing at

that time was reasonably full, but there appeared to be sufficient

room at the rear of the two sections directly situated behind the

goal area. The two outer sections of the terracing, on the left and

right of the goal had plenty of standing room also. On looking down

at the terracing I remember on thinking to myself that the crowd

apjpeared to be in good humour - at one stage I saw a large 'beach-
type ball' being thrown about above the heads of the spectators on

the terracing - thus illustrating that there was still sufficient

room on the areas behind the goal.
At this time I saw several 'swaying movements' down the terracing-

these were the 'typical swaying movements' that are experienced at

most football matches - the crowd would sway forward but would then
immediately sway backwards to the original position.   These movements

in the crowd did not cause any injury or 'crushing effects' within the

crowd - and all of the people concerned appeared 'to be taking it in

good humour'.    As these pushing and swaying movements took place I

could see a space open up to the rear of the sway within the crowd on

the terrace.    On several occasions I had to shout down to people who

were standing on the shoulders of other members of the crowd and were

obviously 'chant leading' in cheering for the Liverpool Football

Club.    These people were causing a sway within the crowd towards the
 4

front.
Up to the 3 pm (1500) kick off time I did not see anything within the
                                                                 PAGE    3
                                                                 S1265

Leppings Lane terracing crowd that was unusual, or caused me concern

as to the safety of the members of the crowd. The crowd build up on

the terracing appeared to be normal and did not seem over-crowded to

an extent that people were being crushed or that people were

attampting to climb out or leave the area.
On looking down at the crowd I could see that the gates that allowed

the people to move from pen/sector to sector at the rear of the goal

were open all the time and in fact that members of the crowd were

using these constantly.   These gates are located at the rear of the

sector railings which extend from the top to the bottom of the

terracing.

At approximately 3 pm (1500) I cannot recall the exact time, but the
two football teams had been out on the field for several minutes
before the kick off - that I was looking down at the crowd from a
position in the centre of the stand slightly to the left of the

central tunnel - when I saw what I describe as a 'River of People'

suddenly enter the terracing from the central tunnel.   This 'wedge of
people' seemed to push forward down the terracing - pushing the

people that were already standing there forward. The scene reminded
me of the type of pictures that are seen on television - in the nature

programmes - when 'molten lava' is shown flowing down a hillside from

an active volcano.   This wedge of people seemed to go forward down

the terracing but unlike the swaying motions that had taken place
earlier on did not sway backwards but remained where it was.

At this stage I could see the people towards the front of the

terracing were being 'crushed forward' - I attempted to contact the

Police incident room by personal radio but I could not get through

due to the amount of 'traffic' that was being passed and the crowd

noise around me at that time I could not get any reply.   I then

attempted to point to the crowd below me to attract the attention of
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S1265

the officers who were standing at the rear of the Leppings Lane goal

on the playing area.   I don't know if I was successful in doing this

but shortly after this the officers at the front were obviously aware

that something was wrong within the crowd.

At this stage I went to the rear of the West Stand in order to go to

the terracing below me - as I got to the rear of the stand I turned

and looked back towards the playing area and I could see that the

officers at the rear of the goal had opened the gates within the

perimeter retaining fence - I also saw that there were several people

from the crowd climbing the perimeter fence from the Leppings Lane

terracing.
Prior to this incident I vaguely remember hearing some traffic on the

radio with regard to the crowd situation outside the ground and

something about the gates being opened - but I would describe the

messages as being unclear as far as I was concerned - I was not aware

at that time of the extreme difficulties that officers outside the

ground at the Leppings Lane turnstiles were experiencing.

When I left the stand area via the steps that lead into the concourse

at the rear of the terracing I immediately saw that there was a large

number of peole around the mouth of the central tunnel.     I went into

the tunnel and there was a mass of people in front of me leading into

the terracing - I remember pulling several people backwards and

shouting to them to move back but they didn't seem to take any notice

at that time.   One of the first things that struck me as I entered

the tunnel - was the strong smell of intoxicants.   I hadn't really

noticed this before with me being out in the open - but on entering

the confined area of the tunnel it was immediatley apparent.     It was

also apparent to me that the people that were in front of me had

consumed intoxicants to varying degrees.
I cannot truely estimate the time lapse but it only seemed a short
                                                                PAGE      5
                                                                S1265

time afterwards, that an injured man was passed back from the crowd

towards me and other officers who were present.   This man was taken

out into the open space at the rear of the tunnel and two female and

one male officer attempted to give this person resuscitation. At
this time a young teenage boy of about fourteen years was brought out

of the tunnel and I could see that he was having trouble breathing.
I knelt beside him and gave him the 'kiss of life resuscitation' -

after sometime I was joined by an ambulanceman who gave him oxygen -

but it was apparent that the youth had stopped breathing and had
died - this was confirmed by the ambulance officer who was unable to

find a pulse or any signs of life. We then place the youth on a

stretcher and took him to nearby exit gate.
I would estimate that there appeared to be somewhere in the region of

twenty-plus people at this location - who appeared to be either

injured or dead.    In order to create a central locating area they

were carried to the main exit gate and placed together. After seme

time several ambulances arrived at the scene and the injured people

were taken away.
One incident that sticks in my mind - is that whilst I was kneeling

beside the youth - a man who I presume was a Liverpool supporter -

cane up to me and shouted at me - "You fucking bastard - this is your

fucking fault".    This remark was said in a violent drunken fashion.

I then walked through the crowd towards the playing area and as I did

so numerous obscene and violent expressions were directed at me and

other officers in the vicinity. A large number of people I saw

appreared to be under the influence of intoxicants.

After the field and ground had been cleared of the public - I went
into the North Stand with the majority of other officers.    I finished

duty that day at 7.30 pm (1930).
                                         PAGE     6
                                         S1265


                                D BULLAS SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                      3274
Incident 102      260390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER S860

                                                                        Station
Surname           BURMAN
Forenames         PAUL
Age               21    -   100            Date of birth
Address           S YORKSHIRE POLICE,
                  HACKENTHORPE

Occupation        POL PS2001

Telephone

IC                Height                   Build
Hair colour
Hair type

^^Ls                                       Complexion
Facial hair

Glasses           Use                      Accent
Number of Pages

Dated             280489                                   P Burman PS2001 Signed


          PAUL BURMAN - POLICE SERGEANT 2001 - 'E'l

          On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I was employed as the Sergeant on

          Serial 13 performing duties in the West Stand in connection with the

          F.A. Cup Semi Final at Hillsborough Football Stadium Sheffield,
          between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest Football Clubs.

          Inspector BULLAS was the officer in overall charge of this serial.

          My serial consisted of that as shown on the attached Serial order

          with the exception of Police Constable                 who had gone

                                    that date.

          I canmenced duty at Hackenthorpe Police Station at 8.30 am (0830) on
          15 April 1989 (150489), when 'El' officers were transported by Police

          vans and a double decker P.S.V. to Hillsborough Stadium where we were

          then seated in Serials in the North Stand for briefing.    This

          briefing was given at 10.00 am (1000) by Chief Superintendent
                                                                PAGE    2
                                                                S860

DUCKENFIELD - the Officer in overall charge of the policing of this

event.

Following the briefing and light refreshment, I and my Serial took up

our duties and were in situ by 11.15 am (1115). Although I and my

Serial were directly responsible to Inspector BULLAS I and those

officers on my Serial regularly work the West Stand at Hillsborough

and I have good knowledge of working that detail.

With the consent of Inspector BULLAS I deployed officers on my Serial

as to their individual and specific duties. On normal matches it is
the accepted practice to keep the whole length of the very front row

of the West Stand that overlooks the Leppings Lane terraces sterile,

this is necessary to
(a) Prevent those in the seated area of the West Stand droppingstand

     tickets to those on the terraces below.

(b) Prevent missiles being thrown.
(c) Prevent those in the Leppings Lane terracesfrcmcliiribing   up or
     being pulled up by those in the West Stand and thereby gaining

     access to the West Stand Seats having onlypaid for entrance

     to the terraces.

(d) Generally maintain order and;
(e) To ensure that no flags/banners are drapped over the advertisement

     boardings affixed to the top wall at the front of the West Stand.

On   the occasion of thismatch, however, tickets for the front row of

the West Stand had been sold, therefore, it was not possible to keep

the front row of seats sterile.
Although we had been informed at briefing that the gates would be

opened at 12 noon (1200) there was a steady flow of Liverpool

spectators into Pen 3 of the Leppings Lane terraces and a few family

groups into the West Stand from 11.30 am (1130) onwards.

Those few fans at that time were in the main well behaved and


                                                                            3276
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S860

cheerful. Although my supervisory duties caused me to patrol the

concourse/bar area at the rear of the West Stand and the two entrance

gata areas giving access to the West Stand in the main I remained

most of this time at the front of the Central area of the West Stand

where I had a good view of those in the West Stand and was looking

directly down onto the fans in the Leppings Lane Terraces.    These

terraces and West Stand continued to fill without any problems.

About 12.45 pm (1245) a number of youths entered the West Stand and

when looking out of the back of the West Stand onto the pitch they

took up a position leaning over the small wall at the front right

hand comer of this stand, looking down onto the terraces below.       One

of the youths unravelled a large Union Jack flag and draped it over

the edge of the wall thereby obscuring a particualr advertisement
boarding.     I shouted across to Police Constable 1494 NAYLOR to tell

the youth to remove it to prevent the advertisement board from being

obscured.     This was done without any problem or ill feeling towards

the youths.     However, a middle aged women (50 ish) who was sat in the

West Stand near to where I was stood at the time and who was

obviously alone complained to me that it was not fair to ask the
youth with the flag to remove it. She went on to explain that a
similar flag was being displayed in the centre of the Spion Kop by

the Nottingham Forest fans, but they had not been instructed to

remove theirs. When I explained to her that the Nottingham Forest

one was not obscuring anything or any advertisement, but that the

Liverpool flag had been doing so she still took exception to this and

complained that our actions were provocative and unfair against

Liverpool fans.     She then went on to complain that it was ludicrous

that the Liverpool fans were in the West Stand and Leppings Lane end

when they should have had the Spion Kop end of the ground.

I received hundreds of similar complaints throughout that day both


                                                                            32 77
                                                                  PAGE     4
                                                                  S860

before, daring and after the tragic events that later ensued.     It was

quite obvious to me that there was a great deal of Liverpool 'hurt

pride' because of this even before the tragedy occurred.

The area that filled the quickest was Pen 3 of the Leppings Lane

terraces and I saw that by 2.00 pm (1400) the fans were cramped in

this section of the terraces. Around 2.00 pro (1400) I saw a youth

who I would describe as approximately 20 years with very light blond
shoulder length fair hair wearing a very vivid grey open necked shirt

and blue jeans who was stood on top of a small wall abutting against

the small wall at the front of the West Stand. This youth it

appeared to me was intent on climbing up and gaining access into the

West Stand.   I approached him from the front of the West Stand,

leaned over and told him to get down and stand back in the terraces.
At this time he would only be an arms length below me and upon him

realising that I could not reach him if he lowered himself and

knowing that I could not get to him because of the full capacity of

this section of the terraces (Pen 3) he looked up at me and said

"Fuck off" two or three times, at the same time making a two fingered
'v' sign towards me.    I again told him to get down when he again told

me to "Fuck off" and gesticulated with 'v' signs as previously.     I

could smell drink on this man's breath.
I was so incensed by this attitude and conduct that I left the West

Stand and went down through the tunnel into the lappings Lane terraces

(Pen 3).   I could not gain access into this pen because of the
crowding there.   From the rear I was able only to get a veiw of the

wall where the youth had been stood. He had disappeared from the

wall by this time.     I returned to the front of the West Stand and

eventually saw that this youth had moved towards the front of Pen 3.

I can be sp)ecific about being pretty close timewise because records

will show that after the incident with this youth I changed my radio


                                                                               3278
                                                                 PAGE      5
                                                                 S860

at the Policerocm within the ground.

Upon returning to the West Stand after the radio change, the fans

both in the West Stand and Leppings Lane terraces had continued to

swell.   It was about this time I noticed stronger traces of alcohol

on fans breath and their general manner and attitude became more

aggressive and unruly.    I had a further repetition with another youth
who had climbed onto the top of the metal railing dividing Pens 3 and

4 at a point where it abutted up against the West Stand. He was also

trying to gain access to the West Stand.    He likewise knowing that I

could not reach him gave me 'v' signs and told me to "Fuck off".

This youth refused to get down. He was wearing a dark grey jogging

top and blue jeans, medium brown, short hair, aged 25-30 years.     I do

not think I would recognise him again.
I had two similar experiences with a further two youths.
Around 2.00 (1400) - 2.15 pm (1415) I saw a youth in Pen 3 of the

Leppings Lane Terraces.    I describe this youth as follows -

approximately 20-25 years, heavy build with thick very curly dark

brown hair, wearing a dark green chequered shirt.    This youth was

stood on top of the barrier (that was to later collapse) being
supported by his friends in the crowd.     He had both his hands raised in

the air and was springing up and down with his body on top of this

barrier with his hands and arms above his head encouraging his

colleagues in their singing and chanting.
On occasions when he fell off the barrier he would climb back up on

top, having been assisted and supported by his friends and continue

as before.   This he did on the left hand side of the barrier when

facing out of the West Stand looking towards the pitch.

Around this same time I saw a further youth described as

approximately 20 years with long blond hair and wearing a dark red
jogging top and blue jeans (I would not recognise him again). This


                                                                               3279
                                                                 PAGE    6
                                                                 S860

youth kept climbing onto the right hand side of this barrier and once

on top kept launching himself bodily off the top of the barrier with

his arms and hand outstretched in front of him. His actions were

exactly as though he were diving into a pool of water.   The crowd was

so compressed in front of him that he had no likelihood of falling

and hurting himself seriously, but kept landing on the top of the

heads and shoulders of those in front of him.   I saw him dive off

this barrier at least 10-20 times. On one of the latter occasions I

saw this youth nearly get into a fight with a youth directly in front

of him.   I can only presume that this was because of the stupid

actions of the youth who had been doing the 'diving.' I can say that

I would definitely recognise the large built youth with the dark

curly hair and wearing the dark green shirt if I were to see him

again because Whilst watching accounts of the tragedy on Sunday

morning (160489) at my heme address, on the television - Yorkshire

Television (Calendar) I saw a shot of this same youth in the
Leppings Lane terraces and immediately recognised him as being the

same youth who had been dancing about on top of the collapsed
barrier. I tried to attract the attention of these two youths to stop
their stupidity, but my attempts were futile - I could neither get to

them nor attract their attention.
As kick-off time drew nearer the numbers of Liverpool fans in drink

became more and more obvious as it was so with their marked decline

of general behaviour and increased aggressiveness.
Around 2.55 pro (1455) to kick-off time, numerous youths climbed up

from out of the Leppings Lane Terraces (Pens 3 and 4) into the West

Stand and were assisted by those already in the West Stand.     I made

attempts to stop them, but every one I caused to stop another ten
must have gained access into the West Stand.    I was obstructed frcm

functioning efficiently because I had to fight my way through and


                                                                             3280
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S860

over legs of those sitting in the front row of the West Stand.

Around kick off time large numbers of persons in the West Stand

complained to me vehanently that there was trouble in the front of

Pen 3 of the Leppings Lane terraces in that someone had apparantly

gone down on the floor.   This I had not observed and could not see

when drawn to my attention because looking into Pen 3 all I could see

was a mass of heads and shoulders only.   I could not see any of the

barriers at this time because of the compressed bodies.

To my left I saw Inspector BULLAS and Police Constable 2167 FROST who

were trying to inform Police Control of an incident in Pen 3. Radio

ccmtnunications were particularly bad around this time. Mayhem then

broke out.   I saw youths frcm Pens 3 and 4 climbing up and over the
fence onto the perimeter track and more climb up frcm the terraces

below into the West Stand.   I saw a flood of Police Officers ccme to

this perimeter fence on the pitch side of the fence, fans continued

to flood onto the perimeter track and spill over onto the actual

playing surface.   I saw a Police Superintendent run onto the pitch to

the referee and stop the game.
Matters went frcm bad to worse.   I saw fans tearing and breaking the

wire mesh of the perimeter fence whilst those fans in the terraces,

particularly in Pens 3 and 4, continued to climb over the perimeter

fence spilling onto the perimeter track and playing area.
As time went by I then saw bodies being carried onto the pitch at my
end of the ground. My initial thoughts when mayhem first broke loose

was that of a pitch invasion, Which, because the game was only a few

minutes in play I could not understand. It was only when bodies
continued to be carried out of the terraces that I realised something

of a more serious nature had occurred.
The reaction of those in the terraces below and those in the West

Stand was one of pure hatred against the Police.   I was shouted at


                                                                         3281
                                                                 PAGE    8
                                                                 S860

and jostled called such names as a 'Fucking murdering bastard.' Many

fans in the West Stand shouted at me "Do something for fucks sake -

people are dying in here." I saw Police Officers enter Pens 3 and 4

from off the perimeter track by way of the small gates to assist the

injured and crushed.   The fans in these pens were counter-productive

in assisting the Police.    Instead of moving back to relieve the

pressure and give the Police Officers more room in which to work, I

saw the fans surge forward to fight, abuse, insult and spit on the

officers trying to help the injured. The fans reaction obviously

made the situation worse, thereby making the situation far more graver

for those already injured and crushed.
In general terms the behaviour of the Liverpool fans when events of

the tragedy initially became apparent was nothing less than appalling

and in my nineteen and a half years of Police Service the worst I

have personally ever experienced.    The Police were called "murdering

bastards" by thousands of fans.     Fans smelling of intoxicants was

rifa in the West Stand.    From the Liverpool fans I continued to

hear shouts and chants of "We know who will be blamed for this

fucking lot don't we - the Liverpool fans again.    Liverpool again."

Further shouts of "We should have had the other fucking end, you (the

Police) are all fucking murdering bastards." Further shouts of "The

F.A. are to blame for this fucking lot" I also heard on numerous

occasions.
I saw the Police carry more bodies onto the pitch area at my end of

the ground and more officers arrived on the scene at the Leppings Lane

end. I saw fans stood about on the pitch and perimeter track who

appeared to be in a total daze and oblivious of what to do.     I saw
the injured being treated by Police Officers, the St Johns Ambulance

and Liverpool fans alike.
I saw the injured being given mouth to mouth resuscitation and heart


                                                                             3282
                                                                   PAGE   9
                                                                   S860

massage, whilst further Police Officers arrived at the scene.      I

understand that a radio message was passed on the Police radio that

all officers were to go onto the perimeter track, but at no time did

I ever hear that message.   By this time the officers assembled,
namely those that were not directly involved in assisting the

injured - following a charge by a large number of the Liverpool fans

towards the Spion Kop and Nottingham Forest fans that appeared not to

reach fighting proportions - formed a line across the halfway line to

prevent any possibility of a clash between opposing fans.

I then saw an ambulance arrive at the Leppings Lane end of the

perimeter track. More injured were carried out and laid and treated

on the playing surface of the pitch whilst all the while the Police

were under a constant barrage of abuse and insult from the Liverpool

fans. The Liverpool fans then commenced to rip down the
advertisement hoardings from off the end of the West Stand and

dropped than down to the fans in the terraces below. The hoardings

were then passed forwards and onto the perimeter track to use as

makeshift stretchers.
By this time fully grown men were crying openly in the West Stand due

to the tragedy.   Many of those in the West Stand were wanting to

leave the stand by this time and leave the ground.   The hatred
against the Police seemed to grow and grow - the Liverpool fans were

intent on making the Police the scapegoats for the tragedy. As I was

in the close proximity of Police Constables 2498 SCHQLEY and 1494

NAYLOR, I instructed those two officers that we were all three to

remain together as I genuinely feared for our safety. We were
positioned at the right hand comer of the West Stand when looking

out of the back of the stand towards the pitch and because of the
aggresion of the Liverpool fans both in the West Stand and lappings

Lane terrace below, I decided to personally take over the


                                                                              3 Z8 3
                                                                    PAGE    10
                                                                    S860

responsibility of the emergency exit gate leading from the West Stand

to the rear of the Leppings Lane Terraces.    The young steward who was

responsible for manning this gate was useless - he was more intent on
watching the events on the pitch than manning his post.       I must have

told him at least six times to stay by the gate, but he continued to

ignore my requests and kept returning to the front of the stand to

see what was happening on the pitch.

I was of the opinion that if I were to allow this emergency gate to

be opened there would be a flood of departing fans that would only
clog up the ease of flow of the emergency services. My thoughts were

then confirmed by a Police radio message that was broadcast over the

ground public address system, requesting that fans remained where

they were so as not to impede the speed and efficiency of the

emergency services.
Whilst manning this gate I was under a constant barrage of threats,

pleas and requests to open it both from Liverpool fans in the West

Stand and those in the Leppings Lane terraces.    The fans came up with

a hundred and one excuses why this emergency gate should be opened to

them.   I remained in charge of this gate throughout.

At some point in time the Steward who had been given the task of
manning the emergency gate completely disappeared.        I would recognise

this Steward if I were to see him again - I vrould describe him as

being in his                           dark brown hair.
                                              He was of overall scruffy

appearance. It was obvious to me that this Steward had 'lost his

bottle.'
As events on the pitch became more organised and the bodies and
injured were cleared, the crowd in the ground started to dwindle and

I eventually opened this emergency gate to allow fans out of the West

Stand. Many by this time had already left the stand via the rear


                                                                                 3284
                                                                 PAGE   11
                                                                 S860

entrances. About this time one of the Chief Stewards approached me

in the West Stand. He had taken off his yellow Stewards jacket and

discretely showed it to me folded up in his inside jacket pocket. He

told me that all his Stewards in the West Stand had taken off their

Stewards jackets and abandoned their duties - this was because of the

threats and abuse they had been given by the Liverpool fans in the

West Stand.   I have seen this Chief Steward on previous matches and

would recognise him again.
My Serial had obviously got split following the tragedy. After the

West Stand was cleared, those of my serial that were left with me

made a sweep of the West Stand for any discarded property and after

finding none we went out of the rear of the Leppings Lane terraces.

We (the Police) were then all instructed to return to the North Stand

for a de'brief which we did where I was able to account for the well

being of all of my Serial.
We then walked to Claywheels Lane where we were stood down and

returned by transport to Hackenthorpe Police Station I went off duty

that date at 8.00 pm (2000).
I would like to voice my own feelings
1. This tragedy was caused by the unruly and idiotic behaviour of

     the Liverpool fans themselves.
2. Drink (intoxicants) played a large part in their disgraceful

     behaviour
3. As the tragedy unfolded the actions of the Liverpool fans,
     particularly those in Pens 3 and 4 of the lappings Lane terraces

     did more to hamper and obstruct the Police when they should have

     been directed at assisting
4.   I was disgusted at comments made late on Saturday night

     television (150489) by the Liverpool Chairman when he stated that

     hooliganism by the Liverpool fans was not so and played no p)art


                                                                             3285
                                                                             PAGE   12
                                                                             S860

              in the tragedy.    He ought to have been with me in the West

           Stand - he would have had a very different viewpoint then -

           unless of course he is a hypocrite.
       SUE SECTOR 6

       INSPECTOR BULLAS

       SERIAL 13 - WEST STAND

       PS2001 BURMAN 'E'

       PC2592 SHIMWELL

       PC3088 COUPLAND
       PC1494 NAYLOR

       PC2498 SCHOLEY

       PC2167 FROST
       PC3170 FAIRCLOUGH

       PC1618 SHEARWOOD
       PC10     MERCER

       PC2717 SAVOURY

       PC928 PARKIN

       PC1423 NEWBOLD




       END OF REPORT

                   P BURMAN 2001




                                                          P Burman PS2001 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

         TIME:                  DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:


                                                                                         3286
Incident 102     260390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER S917


•
Surname           SHEARWOOD
                                                                          Station



Forenames         STEVEN ANDREW

Age               OVER 21                 Date of birth

Address           S. YORKS POLICE
                  HACKENTHORPE

Occupation        POL PC1618
Telephone

IC                Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

t s                                        Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                      Accent

Number of Pages 6

Dated             260489                                       S.A.SHEARWOOD Signed


          My full name is STEVEN ANDREW SHEARWOOD, I am a Police

          Constable with eight years service and I am based at Hackenthope
          Police Station, Occupation Lane, Hackenthorpe. I am currently engaged

          as community constable for the Hackenthorpe area of my sub division,

          tty collar number is 1618.
          On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I commenced duty at Hackenthorpe

          Police Station at 8.30am (0830) for duties in connection with the FA

          Cup Semi Final between Liverpool Football Club and Nottingham Forest
          to be held at Hillsborough Football Stadium. With other officers I

          was transported to the football ground from my home station and

          attended a briefing in the North Stand where at 10.00am (1000) we were

          spoken to by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD who was in overall

          command of the event. My particular duties on this date were those

          employed by serial thirteen under direct supervision of PS 2001 BURMAN

                                                                                      3287
                                                                 pact:   2
                                                                 S917

in connection with the supervision of Liverpool supporters in the

West Stand of the ground situated off Leppings Lane. Inspector

BULLAS was the officer in overall charge of the stand.

At 11.15am (1115) we took up duties in the West Stand, which at this

time had no supporters inside. At 11.50am (1150) in company with

Police Constable 3170 FMRCLOUGh. I was directed by PS BURMAN to

supervise the South entrance gates to the upper level of the West

Stand. Our aim was to supervise entry by supporters and where

necessary prevent entry by unauthorised persons. This entrance

consists of two swing metal gates which lead directly into an enclosed

stairwell which affords access into the upper seated level of the

stand. Seven stewards employed by the club were also on duty at this

entrance. We were instructed by Inspector White to remain in the

enclosed part of the stairs, on the middle level and stop fans

from running up and down the stairs, hence keeping them clear and free

for access. This part of the ground is familiar to myself as my

normal duties on a Saturday match are usually employed in this part of

the ground. For a long period of time very few fans entered this

particular gate and we chatted with the stewards. However fans did

begin to arrive and people of varying ages entered the upper level. At
this point the fans were jovial and a pleasure to police with many

families entering the upper stand of our section. The fans were well

behaved and did not appear in drink. There was one attempt by a fan to

enter the seated area without a ticket but he was spotted by the

steward and ejected by Pc FAIRCLOUGH and myself.
At approximately 2.30pm (1430) as the fans entered in a steady stream

we were beckoned by the stewards to the base of the stairs who

pointed to the turnstiles off Leppings Lane. We saw a number of young

fans who were climbing over the wall into the ground above the
turnstiles. Despite requests to get down by a serial of officers on


                                                                             3288
                                                                 pact:
                                                                 S917

the inside of the turnstiles they continued to remain on top of the

wall and would not come down.

The inside of the ground at the rear of the West Stand was now

heavily congested with fans making their way onto the terraces. At

1440 my attention was drawn to a group of approximately six men who

were stood urinating against the outside walls of the the toilets at

the rear of the West Stand. Both PC FAIRCLOUGH and myself approached

the group. Several on seeing us discontinued but one remained stood

near to the wall urinating. Both Pc FAIRCLOUGH and myself took hold

of                                     of

       Liverpool and he was taken to the police detention area.

Because he began to struggle he was placed in an arm lock by myself
which caused some other fans to use and direct foul language towards

PC FAIRCLOUGH and myself.

At the police room the circumstances were outlined to the custody

sergeant and it was decided to eject          from the ground.

Details were obtained and PC FAIRCLOUGH and myself ejected him frcm

the ground.
In company with PC FAIRCLOUGH I then began to return to the West

Stand and our positions.
As we walked near to the turnstiles off Leppings Lane approximately

ten minutes later (1450hrs) there was a noticeable difference in the

atmosphere, the area inside the ground was congested and we saw

approximately thirty men standing alongside the walls urinating
against them. Because it was impracticable for the two of us to

arrest everbody we split up and approached all those urinating and

threatened them with eviction from the ground if they did not stop.

Most did stop but it was blatantly obvious that most were in drink.

As we passed the turnstiles we were approached by fans who were
demanding that something be done about the crowd directly outside who


                                                                         3289
                                                                 PAGE   4
                                                                 S917

they had just pushed their way through and into the ground. We

returned to the bottom of the steps leading into the upper level of

the West Stand. It was obvious on our return that the stewards were

struggling because of the sheer numbers of fans to monitor the people

entering the stand and rather than argue with some over the validity

of their tickets they allowed them to enter the stand. Seme fans were

obviously drunk and arguments took place between fans, stewards and

ourselves. Some shoved straight past the steward and because of the

congestion it was impossible to physically stop them from climbing

the stairs.
One of the metal swing gates had been closed and the stewards stood

on the inside of it allowing fans through the right hand one which was
open. PC FAIRCLOUGH and myself tried to install some sort of order

and insisted on checking tickets. Those with other standing tickets

were directed to the standing area.
Whilst at this entrance I noticed the opening of a set of double
sliding doors from Leppings Lane. The gates were opened for access

by fans and I saw a mounted officer giving instructions to the
crowd. Moments later a number of fans surged towards our entrance and

both PC FAIRCLOUGH and myself were pinned against the metal gates and

it became impossible to restrict access to the upper level.
As we tried to restore normality to the entrance a middle aged man

approached us shouting words to the effect, " There are people dying

in that stand, being crushed what are you going to do about it."

At this point both PC FAIRCLOUGH and myself were still pinned against

the gates and were unable to move. I indicated a group of

approximately eight officers and a supervisory officer who were

stood in a group near the turnstiles and asked that he go and

explain to them as they were in a better position to help. However

he continued to shout at me "One six one eight I want you to do


                                                                            3290
                                                                 pact:   i
                                                                 S917

something now." Again I asked him to seek help from the other

officers and he left. Several minutes later the number of fans

depleted near to our entrance and PC FAIRCLOUGH and myself were able

to move therefore I approached the man again and asked what the
specific problem was. He complained of people pushing and shoving and

I said I would help to which he apologised for shouting at the two of
us. However on looking down the tunnel at the rear of the West Stand

I saw some fans milling about but did not see any injured or indeed

anyone who looked as though they required assistance. I began to walk

further into the tunnel and was requested to return by PC FAIRCLOUGH

who was attempting to radio through to control to advise them of the
complaint. At this point a number of serials began running through

the ground and towards the pitch area near to the Police control. I

had heard nothing on my personal radio and assumed fans were

fighting. Both PC FAIRCLOUGH and myself remained near the tunnel and
were then approached by a teenage fan who complained of chest pains.
We took this fan to the first aid point near the gymnasium, left him

and then returned to the rear of the West Stand. On our return the

whole area behind the stand was littered with casualties lying on

the floor surrounded by other people and police officers.

It was obvious that some ware dead lying on the floor and many were
injured and vomiting. PC FAIRCLOUGH and myself split up and I went

to the assistance of the injured as did PC FAIRCLOUGH. Many were

placed in the recovery position and advice given to onlookers on what

to do. Some supporters were helpful, others were obviously angry with

the police directing obscene comments towards other officers and

myself and spitting on our uniforms. I saw groups of officers

carrying and running out of the tunnel with unconscious people.

With other officers most of the injured were taken out of the ground

and into an alleyway at the rear of the football ground.


                                                                             3291
                                                                       PAGE
                                                                       S917

       Outside the ground Inspector SYKES and his men were carrying the

       dead to one side, the injured were placed against the ground walls. I

       attended to these people rendering first aid.
       On arrival of the Fire Service, they instructed that the alleyway at

       the rear of the ground should be cleared and a one way system be

       operated for emergency vehicles.

       Both PC FAIRCLOUGH and myself with other officers attempted to clear

       this area of people and vehicles.

       A doctor appeared on the scene and asked me where the first aid point

       was. I told him that as far as I was aware it was next to the

       gymnasium. He then walked up and down the injured categorising them

       into priority for the ambulances.

       Once most of the casualties were cleared both PC Fairclough and

       myself closed the double sliding gates to hide the sight of the dead

       on the floor outside the ground. As first aiders and medical teams

       arrived we directed them to the gymnasium area.

       We left Hillsborough and returned to Hackenthorpe Police Station,

       going off duty at 7.15pm (1915).




       END OF REPORT




       S A SHEARWOOD

                                                         S A SHEARWOOD SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

         TIME:            DATE:   260489


                                                                                3292
Incident 102     260390 QP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT
                                                       STATEMENT NUMBER S914

                                                                       Station

Surname          COUPLAND

Forenames        LISA JANE

Age              22 YEARS                 Date of birth

Address          S.YORKS.POLICE, HACKENTHORPE

Occupation       POL PC3088

Telephone

IC               Height                   Build

Hair colour

Hair type

tu                                        Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses          Use                      Accent

Number of Pages 5

Dated             270489                                                  Signed


          8.30 a.m.(0830)    15 April 1989,(150489) duty commenced at 'El',
          arriving at Hillsborough football ground at approximately 9.30 a.m.

          (0930) for a later briefing at 10.00 a.m. (1000) Meal taken directly

          after the briefing and on conclusion, I was directed to take up my

          point. I was a member of serial 13 under the supervision of Police

          Sergeant 2001 Burman. At 11.15 a.m. (1115) I took up my point
          together with Police Constable 2592 Shiinwell. We were deployed at the

          base of the stairway leading up to the seated area in the West Stand.

          There are two such stairways and we were positioned on the one leading

          into the stand above the pens numbered four, five and six. Our duty

          was to assist the six stewards also at this location. When the fans

          entered the ground from the Leppings Lane end at 12.00 a.m. (1200)

          they were admitted to the West Stand, having first had their tickets

          checked by the stewards, each were then tom at the comer to prevent
                                                                 PAGE     2
                                                                 S914

it being used again by fans in the terraces below. A steady influx of

fans were admitted throughout the afternoon. All tickets were checked

and admission gained only by those in possession of a ticket for the

seated area.   Throughout this process many tried to come back down

the stairs for various reasons (to buy programmes etc.) but were

prevented from doing so. The volume of spectators coming into the

ground remained steady and controlled until about 2.30 p.m. (1430)

when there was an apparent increase in the number of fans entering

the stand via the stairway. Many of these fans appeared to be
intoxicated and some were rowdy, although none were particularly

troublesome. As time progressed toward kick off time, between 2.30

p.m.(1430) and 3.10 p.m. (1510) there was a surge of fans pushing
their way into the stairway.   The stewards then were overwhelmed with

the volume and had great difficulty in effectively checking tickets.

Many fans pushed and forced their way onto the stairs and when
challenged by stewards, became violent and abusive. On one occasion a

fan struck one of the stewards. Myself and Police Constable Shimwell

tried to stop a number of fans entering the stand without tickets, but

were literally propelled along with the flow of fans the sheer volume

of fans increased to such a degree that this task became impossible
and for our own safety we told the stewards to stand back and we then

stood by the wall adjacent to the base of the stairs. At this point

we watched as the surge diminished and we received a radio message,

'ALL OFFICERS ATTEND ON THE PERIMETER TRACK.' We immediately ran

round the rear of the West Stand towards the Police control box and on

route, encountered a young woman who was lying on the ground in the
area beside the Police box, between the West and South Stands.      She

was in a state of shock and was suffering with breathing problems.

She vcmitted and complained of being crushed in the crowd. We rendered

first aid and were joined by a St. John's member who then assisted


                                                                              3294
                                                                 PAGE   3
                                                                 S914

further. This then enabled Police Constable Shimwell and myself to

continue onto the perimeter track, where we joined several other

officers also attending in this area. On our arrival on the pitch we
were confronted by the sight of many Police Officers immediately in

front of the West Stand terrace.

I also saw numerous fans standing on the pitch and my immediate
                                                 i,
thoughts were that there had been an incident involving fighting. As I

approached the perimeter fencing I saw a Police Inspector assisted by

two male Police Constables pulling people through the gate of pen

number 2. This area of the terrace appeared to be well

packed although I was not aware that anyone was being crushed.     I

could see people immediately behind the fencing and they did not

appear unduly distressed although the officers pulling people free

were having difficulty because the volume of people seemed
concentrated around the gate. At this time I also saw further

officers climbing onto the advertisement boards in front of pen 3.

These officers shouted at the fans to move back away from the front.

Again I did not see anyone unduly distressed and from my position I

saw that although the pen was full of fans, there was roan toward the

back to accomodate more. A short time later I heard fans inside pen
number 3 shouting that they were being crushed and that there were

people underneath.   I then spoke briefly with Police Sergeant 1288

Payne, who averted my attention to an elderly gentleman pressed

tightly against the fence. He was purple coloured and his

mouth gaped open.    I could see he had been crushed to death and the

weight of fans behind him was holding him tightly against the fence.

Yet still there was room at the back of the pen and we continued
shouting for them to push back.    I was now fully aware of the situation

occurring before me and I looked for the exit gates frcm where these

people could be released from the pressure. I could see only one


                                                                            3295
                                                                 PAGE    4
                                                                 S914

gate providing an exit from this pen. At the gate several officers

were attempting to pull the people free. This was made very difficult
by the bodily pressure of others immediately at this point.   However,

one by one bodies were pulled out of the pen. Whilst this process

continued, other officers standing against the fencing encouraged
                                       t
people to reach for their hands and tried to pull them up and over the

perimeter fence.   For seme reason they were reluctant to do so,

perhaps because they were so tightly packed they could not get an arm

free to reach up. Many fans were successfully recovered by this

method and ushered onto the pitch to clear the immediate area.

During this process I recall looking up onto the seated area above

the terraces and saw many fans being pulled from the terraces into

the stand.
On the arrival of Chief Superintendent Nesbit, I was instructed along
with other officers to form two lines on each side of the gate to pen

3. This I did and from this point I assisted with the removal of

bodies being pulled from the pen. As each one was freed then the line

passed them along until the last two officers removed them to the

pitch and rendered first aid. As the process continued I saw many
bodies removed, all of which were purple coloured and had urinated
onto their clothing, they seemed to be dead, but even so they were

given mouth to mouth resuscitation and heart massage in an attempt to

revive them. Whilst assisting with this process many of the fans

already freed approached the area in a distressed state, concerned

for their friends and relatives.   On several occasions I advised them

to clear the area and allow the Police to continue.   On the arrival
of an ambulance onto the pitch I was aware of ambulance crews

assisting with the aid of breathing apparatus.   Those persons who

appeared to be alive were removed and others beyond help were

covered with Police uniform anoraks.   Slowly, the terraces were


                                                                             3296
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S914

cleared and in doing so I saw that there was a layer of bodies piled

on top of one another.   Police Officers entered the terrace

and continued to pull the bodies free.

Water was supplied to casualties who were conscious and many removed

from the scene on makeshift stretchers.

When the pens were completely empty a radio message was received to

the effect that the fans in the West Stand were becoming increasingly

agitated and together with other officers, I stood in the terrace

below the stand where I could hear the fans shouting abuse and

pulling the boards away from the front of the stand.    I was then

concerned for my safety and returned to the pitch where I was asked

by a Police Sergeant to remain with his serial until further

instruction. After a short while I again located Police Sergeant
1288 Payne and further 'El' officers.     Together we waited for further

instruction and when the match was officially called off, we made our

way into the North Stand.   Before doing so I located and joined

Police Sergeant 2001 Burman in the seated area of the West Stand,

where I assisted serial 13 search for property that may have been

left behind.
I have four years service in total and during this time I have worked

at all the football venues in the Force area, excluding Rotherham

Football Club.   I have worked at Hillsborough football ground on

numerous occasions.   I have undertaken several duties within the

ground, including turnstiles.   I have previous experience of duties
at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and within the West Stand.       I

have attended the vast majority of matches this season at

Hillsborough football ground.


                             L J Coupland




                                                                            3297
                                                             PAGE     6
                                                             S914


                                         L J Coupland PC3088 SIOIED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   270489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
END OF REPORT




                                                                          3298
Incident 102       260390 QP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER S857

                                                                          Station

 Surname           FAIRCLOUGH
 Forenames         SANDRA

 Age                                        Date of birth

 Address           S YORKS POLICE
                   HACKENTHORPE

 Occupation        POL PC3170

 Telephone

 IC                Height                   Build

 Hair colour

 Hair type

^yes                                        Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses           Use                      Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated             280489                                       S FAIRCLOUGH Signed


           My full name is Sandra FAIRCLOUGH, Police Constable 3170.     I am

           currently stationed at Hackenthorpe Police Station, Occupation Lam,

           Sheffield.    I am a Community Constable for the Gleadless Valley area

           of my Sub-Division.     I have seven and a half years service with South

           Yorkshire Police.
           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I ccnmenced duty at

           Hackenthorpe Police Station at 8.30 a.m. (0830) for duties in

           connection with the F.A. Cup Semi-Final between Liverpool F.C. and

           Nottingham Forrest F.C. to be held at Hillsborough Football Stadium.

           Along with other officers I was transported from Hackenthorpe to the

           football ground where, upon my arrival, I attended a briefing in the

           North Stand. At 10 a.m. (1000) that date, we were spoken to by Chief

           Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, who was in overall command of the match.

           My duties on this date were those employed by serial 13 under the
                                                               PAGE      ;
                                                               S857

direct supervision of Police Sergeant 2001 BURMAN. Our duties were

the supervision of Liverpool supporters in the West Stand, this is

situated off Leppings Lane.
Inspector BULLAS was in overall command of our section of the stand.

At 11.15 a.m. (1115) we took up duties in the upper section of the

West Stand. At this time there were no supporters present.

At 11.50 a.m. (1150), in company with Police Constable 1618 SHEARWOOD,

I was directed by Police Sergeant BURMAN to supervise the South

entrance gates to the upper level of 'Y' and 'Z', the West Stand.
Our aim was to supervise entry by the supporters and to help the club

stewards prevent entry to unauthorised persons.

The entrance to the stand consists of two swing metal gates which

lead directly to an enclosed stairwell which affords access into the

upper seated level of the West Stand.   Seven stewards employed by the

club were also present.
We were instructed by Inspector WHITE to remain in the enclosed part

of the stairwell on the middle level in order to stop fans running up

and down the stairs to enable free access.
For a long period of time very few fans entered this particular gate

and we chatted with fans and stewards. At this time the fans were
very jovial and obviously very excited about the forthcoming match.

There were a large amount of families entering.   These fans were well

behaved and were not in drink.
At one stage a fan did enter the seated area without a ticket, but

was seen by a steward and ejected by Police Constable 1618 SHEARWOOD

and myself.
At approximately 2.30 p.m. (1430), as the fans entered in a steady

stream, we were beckoned by one of the stewards at the base of the

stairs who pointed to a number of young fans climbing over the wall

of the turnstiles off Leppings Lane.


                                                                             3300
                                                                  PAGE      ;
                                                                  S857

Several officers at the turnstiles were requesting them to come down

but they wouldn't and they remained on the wall.
By this time the rear of the West Stand was heavily congested with

fans making their way to the terraces and stand.

At 2.40 p.m. (1440), my attention was drawn to a group of

approximately six men, they were stood urinating against the outside

walls of the toilets at the rear of the West Stand near to the tunnel.

Police Constable Shearwood and I approached the group, several on

seeing us, stopped urinating but one continued.     Together with Police

Constable SHEARWOOD, I took hold of
            of                                    Liverpool.   He was

taken to the Police detention room.           began to struggle en

route to the detention room and was placed in an arm lock by Police
Constable Shearwood, this caused some of the fans to use foul language

towards the officer and myself.
Once at the Police Room, the circumstances were outlined to the

Custody Officer and it was decided to eject             frctn the ground.

Together with Police Constable SHEARWOOD, I began to return to the

West Stand. As we walked near to the turnstiles off lappings Lane,
there was a noticeable difference in the atmosphere, the area inside

the ground was congested, we saw approximately 30 men standing along

the walls urinating.   Because it was impracticable for the two of us

to arrest everybody, we split up and approached all those urinating,

threatening to evict them from the ground if they didn't stop. Most

did.   It was blatantly obvious that most had been drinking.

As we passed the turnstiles we were approached by fans who were
demanding something be done about the crowd outside as they had just

pushed their way through into the ground.
We returned to the bottom of the steps leading to the upper level of

the West Stand.   It was obvious that the stewards were struggling


                                                                                3301
                                                                PAGE     4
                                                                S857

because of the sheer number of fans.   Rather than argue about the
validity of the ticket, they were allowed to enter the stand. Sane

of the fans were obviously drunk and arguments took place between

fans, stewards and ourselves.    Due to the congestion and the pushing

it was impossible to physically stop the fans from climbing the

stairs.   Due to the congestion one of the metal swing gates was shut

and stewards stood on the inside of it allowing fans through the
right hand one which was open.   Police Constable SHEARWOOD and myself

tried to install some sort of order and insisted on checking

tickets. Those with blue and white tickets were directed to the

terraces. Whilst at this entrance, I was suddenly aware of a large

amount of fans surging towards us, both Police Constable SHEARWDQD

and myself were pinned against the metal gates and it became

inpossible to restrict access to the upper level.
We then tried to restore normality to the entrance. A middle aged

man approached us shouting words to the effect, 'THERE ARE PEOPLE

DYING IN THAT STAND, BEING CRUSHED, WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO DO ABOUT

IT?' At this point both Police Constable SHEARWOOD and myself were

still pinned against the gates and were unable to move.    Police

Constable SHEARWOOD indicated to approximately eight officers and a

supervisory officer who were stood in a group near the turnstiles and

asked that he go and explain to them. He continued to shout at

Police Constable SHEARWOOD, 'ONE SIX ONE EIGHT I WANT YOU TO DO

SOMETHING.'
Several minutes later the number of fans depleted near our entrance
and, together with Police Constable SHEARWOOD, we were able to move

and we approached the man again and asked what the specific problem

was.   He complained of people pushing and shoving and I said I would

help, he apologised to us for shouting. However, on looking down the

tunnel at the rear of the West Stand, I saw some fans milling about,


                                                                             3302
                                                                 PAGE    I
                                                                 S857

but did not see anyone injured or anyone who looked as though they

needed any assistance.   Police Constable SHEARWOOD began to walk

down the tunnel.   I requested him to return and I began attempting to

radio through to the Control to advise than of the complaint. At

this point a number of serials began running through the ground and

towards the pitch area near ground control.    I was unable to get

through to ground control.
I had heard nothing on my personal radio and I assumed that fans were

fighting.   Both Police Constable SHEARWOOD and myself remained near

the tunnel and we were approached by a teenage fan who complained of

chest pains. We took the fan to the first aid room near the gym,

left him and returned to the rear of the West Stand. On our return
the whole area behind the stand was littered with casualties lying on

the floor, there was a large amount of other people and Police

Officers.
It was quite obvious that some were dead lying qn the floor.    Police

Constable SHEARWOOD and myself split up and went to render first
aid. Many of the injured were placed in the recovery position, seme

supporters were helpful but others were directing obscene language

towards other officers and myself.
I rendered first aid to the injured which were laid in the alleyway

at the rear of the West Stand.    Inspector SYKES and his men were

moving dead people and officers were stood in front of them so the

injured could not see the dead.
The Fire Brigade arrived and the alleyway at the rear of the ground

was cleared of vehicles to enable one way traffic for the flow of

ambulances required.
A doctor appeared on the scene, checking the injured and deciding who

would need to go in ambulances first, I was just assisting him to get

ambulances and placing people on stretchers.


                                                                             3303
                                                                            PAGE
                                                                            S857

        When all the casualties had gone, a doctor and a female first aider

        caire, together with Police Constable SHEARWOOD we took them to the

         gymnasium.
        On our return we went   tothe large blue gate and closed it to hide

        the sight of the dead   asthe ground was now being emptied.

        As the fans were leaving the stadium a Police cordon was set up so

        that fans didn't come   toour gate.   There was a large amount of

        obscene language and, at one time, I thought there may be trouble as

         fans were pushing to get out of the small gate at the rear of the

        West Stand.

        Several first aiders attended at the gate, they were directed to the

        gymnasium.
        Ones the fans had left the ground, we went to the North Stand for a

        de-briefing.

         I want off duty at Hackenthorpe Police Station at 7.30 p.m. (1930).

         I have worked numerous football matches at this ground, my main

        duties were working the West Stand.



                                                           S FAIRCLOUGH SIGNED

^^TEM EN T   TAKEN
             PLACE:

             TIME:          DATE:   280489
WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                   3304
Incident 102     260390 QP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT
                                                      STATEMENT NUMBER S1615

                                                             SHEFFIELD   Station

Surname           DARLING
Forenames         PETER COLIN
Age                                      Date of birth

Address           S. YORKSHIRE POLICE, HAMMERTON RD, SHEFFIELD


Occupation        POL INS

Telephone

IC                Height                 Build

Hair colour

  ir type


« as

Facial hair

Glasses           Use
                                        Complexion



                                        Accent

Number of Pages
Dated             120589                                        PC DARLING Signed


          On Saturday 15th April 1989, (150489) I was on duty at Hillsborough
          Football Ground in connection with the Semi Final Cup tie between

          Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. I was in charge of sub sector 1 which

          covered serials 1, 2 and 3. In broad terms these serials covered the

          following duties within the ground:

          Serial 1 Perimeter Track
          Serial 2 South Stand lower level

          Serial 3 South Stand upper level
          A main briefing headed by Ch. Supt. DUCKENFIELD was held in the North

          Stand at 1000 am (1000)after which officers took their meal. At 1045

          am (1045) whilst in the North Stand I spoke with Sergeant 454 CHAPMAN

          who was in charge of Serial 1. This serialconsisted ofConstables

          who were detailed to work round the perimeter track. These officers
          were all FI Ccranunity Constables who worked this particular duty
                                                              PAGE      2
                                                              S1615

for every match at Hillsborough. I went through the match order

with PS CHAPMAN and he stated there were no problems, I did not

allocate particular gates for individual officers.

This I left to PS CHAPMAN, though I understand that these officers

work in the same position each week. Sergeant CHAPMAN then took his

serial onto the perimeter track.

At 1055am (1055) I spoke to the whole of the serial 2 in the North

Stand. I went through the details of the match order, leaving the

sergeants to identify officers for particular duties. I stressed to

these officers that they needed to be fully aware of the emergency

evacuation procedures and pointed out to them the fact that the upper

sectiion of the south stand was made mainly of timber and any risk of

firs was greatest at that end.
At 1110am (1110) I spoke to the whole of serial 3 in the upper level

of the South Stand which was where that serials duties were. The

briefing was the same as for Serial 2, again the Sergeant having the
responsibility of giving individual officers their particular duties

in line with the order.
At 1120am (1120) I briefed the stewards who were working in the South

Stand both upper and lower levels. This took place in the upper level

of the South Stand. I explained to the stewards the procedures to be

followed in the event of an emergency evacuation after which I asked

if there were any queries or doubts. There were none. I reminded them

that their duties were in the South Stand which was constructed mainly

of wood and that any likelihood of a fire in the ground was greatest

at the end. I explained that a capacity crowd was expected and that

safety was of paramount importance and that it was essential that the

stewards and Police must work in close liaison. If there was any hint

of any problems they were told to contact a Police Officer of which

there were over 20 working in that stand. I asked the stewards if they
                                                                   PAGE    3
                                                                   S1615

had any questions or anticipated any problems at that stage. Two

problems were identified by stewards who had worked the Semi Final the

previous year, these were:

1.   Supporters without tickets jumping over the turnstiles

2.   Exit aisles from the stands being congested during the game by

     officers taking up positions there.

Following that briefing I spoke to the sergeants in Serials 2 and 3,

advised them of these two points and instructed them to inform

Constables under their ccrarvand accordingly. From that moment I
patrolled those areas I had responsibility for i.e. South Stand and

perimeter track. There was a slow   build up of crowd from thattime,

though it appeared that Nottingham Forrest supporters were arriving

in greater numbers than the Liverpool supporters. I made carrment on

this to several officers as I spoke to them during my patrol. I

recall sometime before 2pm (1400)   visiting the room under theSouth

Stand where the cameras and crowd   counting machinery is held.The

comment was made by someone in there that there were 12,000 in the

ground at that time, and at the same time the previous year there had

been 20, 000 in the ground.
Sometime around 2 pm (1400) I noticed problems were being experienced

with my radio. There was an intermittent buzzing type noise which made

reception very poor and difficult to understand. At this time I had an
earpiece extension in use. I took this off but it made no difference.

I made my way to the 'tunnel' and spoke with Superintendent GREENWOOD

and Sergeant CHAPMAN. They confirmed that they were experiencing

similar problems. Inspector HARVEY joined us and made similar comment.

He then stated that he would go to the Police Control Room and advise

the staff of the problem. As he was about to go I saw one of the radio

technicians walking along the perimeter track towards me. He was with

a Police Officer, I believe Ch. Insp. Beal and they stated they were
                                                                 PAGE    4
                                                                 S1615

on the way to the Control Room to sort out the problem. By 2.30pm

(1430) the size of the crowd had continued to rise and the noise they

wera creating was considerable. Reception of radio messages was poor

due to the noise created by the crowd and the interference earlier

described.
At 2.40pm (1440) I was at the players tunnel when I decided to walk

round the perimeter track for the last time before the coranencement of

the match. I walked along the South Stand and towards Leppings Lane

terrace. The Leppings Lane terracing was becoming full, though there
was still room for further people, particularly outside the central

two pens which were almost full, but were not posing any undue

problems or concern. There were a number of officers on the perimeter

track along Leppings Lane at the time, though I cannot recall exactly

which ones. I made my way along the Leppings Lane end, along the North

Stand and down towards the Spion Kop end. As I walked along the Spion

Kop end 4 Liverpool Supporters attracted my attention. They were

obviously at the 'wrong end'. They asked to be moved to the leppings

Lana end, which I refused. Speaking to them at a distance of some five

feet proved difficult due to the noise - the time would be about 2.

55pm (1455) and the players had either just come onto the pitch or
were about to. I instructed PC GROOM who was on the gate nearest to

these supporters to escort them to an area in the Spion Kop near to

the North Stand which had been specially earmarked for depositing

Liverpool supporters who had got into the Spion Kop terrace. There

were already a number of Liverpool supporters in that section. I then

mads my way to the players tunnel which would be my position during
the game with Sergeant CHAPMAN. The time was just about 3pm (1500) and

the game ready to start. I was unaware at that time that there were or

had been any problems with supporters outside the ground at the

Leppings Lane end. I am not sure if this was due to continued
                                                                 PAGE    5
                                                                 S1615

interference on the radio or the volume of noise generated by the

crowd. I think it was probably a combination of the two. The game had

been underway for a few minutes and I was at the track perimeter near

to the tunnel. Supt. GREENWOOD was also there and we were

moving on a number of photographers who were congregating around the

tunnel waiting for Mr CLOUOi, the Nottingham Forest Manager to take

up his position in seats immediately behind the "dug out".

As the photographers were moved on it would be about 3.05pm (1505)

and I was about to take my place just inside the tunnel when I looked
towards the Leppings Lane terracing and saw what appeared to be seme

sort of commotion taking place immediately behind the goal. I made

I made my way round to that location, Supt. GREENWOOD was seme 20 yds

in front of me, and there were other officers either there or making

their way there. When I got to the section of the terrace to the
South Side of the centre I could see there were people crushed up
against the perimeter fencing. Some were obviously unconscious, many

others clearly could not move at all, and were having difficulty

breathing. The gate which gave access to this pen was open and

officers were trying to pull people through. I went to the gate and
tried to assist but the gate was s6 narrow that only a certain number

of officers could be effective, otherwise we were simply getting in
each others way. Just inside the gate I could see that injured people

were piled on top of each other, unable to move. Police officers were

pulling them out and onto the perimeter track, but this was proving

difficulty as many of the injured in this pile of bodies just inside

the gate were unconscious and unable to assist themselves in anyway.

I stood on the advertising boards on the perimeter track and shouted

to the crowd further back to push backwards. The mood of a large

section of this crowd was angry, and they were shouting abuse back at

me. Some fans on the outside of the central pen managed to climb over
                                                                 PAGE    6
                                                                 S1615

the metal fence into the outer pen and I remember that there was

sufficient room in the outer pen for them to climb down from the fence

fairly easily. Some officers had made their way into this outer pen

and were assisting people over. Despite this there was still many

people crushed and unable to move at the front of the centre pen. One

or two managed to climb over the perimeter fence and onto the track. I

went back to the gate and started to assist bringing bodies out from

the terrace and take them onto the pitch.   I did not know which were

dead and which were simply unconscious, I just helped to pull them

from the terrace and take them onto the pitch where other officers, St.

John Ambulance staff and others were attending to them. Only slowly as

the dead and injured were brought onto the pitch did it become
slightly easier to bring more from the terrace, through the gate and

onto the pitch. I alternated between assisting with this and helping

others who were climbing over the perimeter fencing. I lost all track

of time as this continued until the central section of the terrace had

been cleared. During this time I cannot recall having heard any radio

messages, but the noise from the ground was deafening. When the

terrace was clear there were many of the fans obviously in a very
distressed state, seme were crying together in groups, others were

shouting abuse at Police officers - seme abuse was directed at blaming

Police officers for what had happened. That criticism was always

directed in the terms 'Its your fault, you should have given us more

tickets.'
I became aware that a Police cordon had been formed towards the Spion

Kop end preventing Liverpool supporters going to that end. As order
began to slowly restore, and the pitch cleared of bodies I tried to

assemble a serial of officers together. Those I assembled were

officers mainly from serial 2. We then assisted in slowly clearing the

pitch after it was announced that the natch had been cancelled. After


                                                                             3310
                                                                          PAGE
                                                                          S1615

         the pitch was cleared I did not assist in any particular duty.




                                              Peter Colin Darling INSP SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:    120589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
Incident 102      270790 OP227        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER S2258

                                                                          Station
Surname            HARVEY

Forenames          TREVOR
Age                                      Date of birth
Address


Occupation        POL INS DISCIPLINE & COMPLAINTS
Telephone

IC                Height                 Build
Hair colour

Ha^^ type

Eyes                                     Complexion
Facial hair

Glasses           Use                    Accent
Number of Pages

Dated                                                             T HARVEY Signed

          I am an Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police presently seconded to

          the Discipline and Complaints Department, Force Headquarters.      Prior

          to this appointment 30.1.89 (300189) I was an operational Inspector

          at 'F' Division stationed at Hammerton Road.    I have at least 4 years

          experience of uniformed supervisory duties at Hillsborough Football
          Ground and several years experience of working in criminal
          investigation duties at this venue.

          I have assisted in the last three cup semi-final football matches to

          be played at Hillsborough. My main uniform supervisory duties at this

          venue have been the supervision of serials 1 to 3 (perimeter track and

          car park areas) and more lately Crime and Vandal Conmander duties,
          being deployed where and when required.   (The majority of these

          requirements have been at the Leppings Lane area of the ground on
          coach reception, etc).




                                                                                     3 3 1 1A
                                                                      PAGE    2
                                                                      S2258

 I have also supervised serials having responsibility for all sections

of the ground, including the West Stand area but this has been on a
 lesser footing than the other areas mentioned.

At 9.45 a.m. (0945), 15 April 1989 (150489), I reported for duty at
the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground Semi-Final - Liverpool v.

Nottingham Forest.       My call sign was India 2, in charge of serials 4 -

6.    My overall sector commander was Superintendent GREENWOOD, his
deputy was Chief Inspector BEAL.

Briefing was held in the South Stand, given by Chief Superintendent
DUCKENFIELD - incident carrmander.

Serials 4 - 6 overall coverage of roadway frcm Penistone Road - rear

South Stand to Leppings Lane turnstiles (barriers).

Serial Sergeants: 4 PS266 JACQUES (E) +10

                       5 PS1084 HODGETT (E) + 10

                       6 PS729 NORBURN (E) + 10


All experienced officers in football duties.         No problems foreseen.



Serial 4 - Penistone Road area, safety of persons,

                vehicles, etc.   Run South Stand

                Supervision of turnstiles etc.


Serial 5 - Supervision turnstiles and

                security of TV vehicles etc.



Serial 6 - Erections of barriers near to 'C' gate

                Leppings Lane end.     Security of South
                Stand car parks etc.



1 1 .2 0 ( 1120 ) .
                                                                   PAGE        3
                                                                   S2258



All serials, 4, 5 and 6 at their respective details.      No problems,

spectators light good humoured.     Mainly Nottingham Forest supporters
except near players' entrance of both.



Both teams arrived - no problems.    Fans well behaved.


Approx. 2.30p.m. (1430).



Apparent radio fault - buzzing when control pass message - similar to

radio battery fault.    Enter ground by players' entrance and tunnel

speak to officers there - fault on radio system - saw Chief Inspector
BEAL who apparently had civilian radio engineer with him on way to
control box.



South Stand and Spion Kop - filling well.



North Stand and West Stand and terracing - large gaps.



Liverpool players on field, pre match kick around.



Whilst speaking to other officers near to players' tunnel, approached

by Doug LOCK (Ex Police Superintendent FI) now head of security at

ground.   Looked very worried, made mention of large crowds at Leppings
Lane end of ground.

It looked as if they were trying to push their way in.     Seme had already
got in through a gateway.   Mr. LOCK stated that ground control was
aware.    Players had left pitch by this time.

Exit ground via players' tunnel and called at Doug LOCK'S office.        Saw

large group outside Leppings Lane end on camera.
                                                                  PAGE      4
                                                                  S2258

Left South Stand via players' entrance and comrtenced to go to Tappings
Lane turnstiles.

Once outside, rear of South Stand, heard Superintendent MARSHALL on
radio requesting permission to open gates.

Two horses pass by towards Leppings Lane.

Whilst passing television vehicles mention on radio of possible

postponement of kick off. Radio reception poor.      Unknown source.
2.55? (1455).

Arrive at barrier near to 'C' gate - large crowd possibly 4,000
outside turnstiles all pushing and shoving.    Horseman in middle of

crowd - didn't look happy with situation, didn't look as if he could

get out.   There were a number of 10 - 20 youths climbing on wall above

turnstiles towards 'B' gate.     I could see Inspector BENNETT on top of
turnstile wall trying to stop them.

Crowd chanting and pushing very frightening scene - never seen

anything like this at a football match.    In fear that someone would
get badly injured or worse.

Noise frcm inside ground - possible teams onto field.     This made crowd

push even more.    Real danger of people being crushed.   Several being
pulled or pushed out at side.


Saw Inspector PURDY - worried.



Noise too loud to hear radio etc - could smell alcohol drifting frcm

crowd.   People shouting for help.

Gate 'C' opened frcm the inside - unable to see by whom.    Crowd surged
forward and allowed into ground, unable to stop.    The smell of alcohol

got worse the nearer they got. Aproximately 1500 or more passed

through the gateway.

Horses move and close crowd down scmewhat.    Gate pulled together
                                                                 PAGE    5
                                                                 S2258

slightly and crowd let in a little more orderly.    Those holding

tickets in the air were allowed to pass. Another 5 or 600 allowed in
pressure easing by this time.

I then went around the barrier and saw 200/300 supporters at the

turnstiles still trying to get in that way, it didn't appear as though

they had seen Gate 'C' open. Then someone, I couldn't see who, opened

Gate 'B'. The people at the turnstile then ran through this gate and
the pressure on the turnstile was relieved.

There were several people who were limping, etc., and had obviously

been injured in the crush.   None appeared serious and there were

definitely no bodies at this location.

I do not know who opened gates 'C' or 'B' or if control had requested

them to be opened.   I can only say that if they had not been opened
when they were serious and probable fatal injuries would have been

caused.   There were roars frcm the crowd inside, possibly kick-off or

football action of seme description, I was unable to tell.

I spoke to Sergeant NORBURN And we discussed the behaviour of the

crowd and the pressure build up.

Started to walk back towards the television vehicles as the problem

had cleared and we intended to activate phase 2.
I heard Sergeant GODDARD'S voice ccme over the radio, although

reception was none too clear there was an anxious tone in his voice.

'All officers on to perimeter track.' (repeated).

I shouted to the serial (6) and we all ran towards the entrance near

to turnstiles 19 to 22 at the rear of control point. We entered the

perimeter track via the front area of the South Stand.   People in the

South Stand were stood up and shouting abuse towards the West Stand

area.   It looked like a pitch invasion frcm the West Stand terraces.

There were no players on the field. Numerous police officers near and

around the perimeter fencing and goal mouth area.   Fans were spilling
                                                                   PAGE      6
                                                                   S2258

onto the field, climbing fencing etc. My immediate thought was that
it was a pitch invasion and nothing more.

With the officers I made my way to the perimeter fencing.      I made my

way to the fencing towards the left hand side of Gateway No. 3. This

gate was open and police officers were trying to clear the gateway of
fallen people.

To my horror I then saw the reality of what was taking place.      The

first 4 or 5 rows of supporters who had been stood behind this section

of fencing had all be crushed together up to the fencing.      Several

were obviously dead and others appeared to be dying.

There was one elderly man, greying hair,



                                      He was obviously dead.   Others
around him were turning blue/purple as they were suffocating. A young

girl probably 15 or 16 years was struggling to keep alive.     She was

unable to speak and I suspect fading fast.     The gateway was open and
officers were trying to remove what I realise now were bodies frcm the

gateway.     The bodies were entangled with other bodies which were
alive.     Supporters frcm the back were climbing over bodies to get out,

thereby hindering the rescue attempts by the officers concerned.

The crowds were still pushing forward and chanting at the police.        I

joined the officers stood on the wall and shouted at the crowd to stop

pushing.     Shouts of abuse were the only reply.

Officers were trying to make their way through the section of crowds

to the left compound 2, and climb over the adjoining fence.     They were

being pushed and jostled by the crowd as they did so.

Other supporters were climbing over the dead and injured at the front

to escape over the fencing.     The crowd at the rear of this section and

the West Stand area did not seen to realise what was happening at the

front.     They continued to shout abuse at the police.
                                                                     PAGE    7
                                                                     S2258

I was unaware if control had realised the seriousness of the

situation.     It was impossible to hear radio transmissions if in fact
they were being made.

I jumped down frcm the fencing and ran towards the goal mouth area in

the hope that I could contact control and ensure that other services

were attending. We urgently required cutting equipment, bullhorns or
the public address system to let the crowd know what was happening

etc., and for officers to be deputed to attend from the rear tunnel,

that being the main entrance to areas 3 and 4.

It was mayhem and there was no way that a message could be passed from

my position.     I ran towards the South Stand where I saw Superintendent
GREENWOOD near to the touchline facing the South Stand and the control

box.     I shouted to him that there were fatalities and we needed

assistance quickly.    I did not wait for an answer and ran back to the
fencing area near to gateway no. 3.

By this time several officers had climbed the fencing and were hanging

over the top trying to pull people up frcm the other side of the

fence. To sane extent this was being successful.     Some were being

extracted frcm the gateway.    By now a number of severely injured were

laid on the playing area to the left of the goal mouth.    Police

Officers and supporters alike were giving what assistance they could.

I ran towards the gateway and as I did so a youth was pulled from the

gateway. Assisted by sane supporters, I carried the youth aged about
17 years to the playing area, his breathing was shallow but he was

alive.    I, therefore, placed him in the ccma position and as I started

to get up I saw Chief Superintendent NESBIT go past me and go towards

the gateway no. 3.

I followed him and saw that the gateway was still blocked.    Chief

Superintendent NESBIT had told the officers to clear the gateway of

bodies as best they could but they were being hampered by two bodies
                                                                  PAGE    8
                                                                  S2258

in particular, one of which was laid face (town, his head and upper

body being entangled with the other bodies in the doorway, his legs

and lower body being on the perimeter track.

I intended to attempt to remove this body when the body of a male 40

to 45 years, well built, salt and pepper hair, was passed through the

gateway.    Sergeant 840 WRIGHT and myself carried this man on to the

grassed area.    I cleared the man's throat and Sergeant WRIGHT

cormeneed heart massage, whilst I commenced mouth to mouth

resuscitation. After a couple of minutes we realised that this was a

pointless exercise, the man was dead and I covered his upper body with

my coat.
I returned to gateway no. 3 and saw Chief Superintendent NESBIT

lifting a small boy up the perimeter fence.    The child's shoe

or shoelace had become entangled in the perimeter fence and it had to

be released by Sergeant GOTCHER, Serious Crime Squad, who was inside

the canpound.    By this time a number of officers had made their way

into the enclosure and were either moving bodies, assisting others
over the fences, or giving mouth to mouth resuscitation.    Two officers

in particular came to mind, although there were many others whose
names I do not know.    Sergeant GUTCHER and Constable HUMPHRIES of 'C'

Division.    Their actions were praiseworthy to say the least.

I then assisted several other officers with the removal of casualties

from the area of around gateway no. 3. With Chief Superintendent

NESBIT, Sergeant MDRTON, HQ Serious Crime Squad, and other officers,

we made a chain and continued to pass injured and dead people frcm the

compound.     It is proper to say at this time that the majority of these

people were in fact dead by now.
As the number of bodies inside the compound dwindled, I assisted
police officers and supporters to carry the dead away on make-shift

stretchers.     These were advertising hoardings used on the perimeter
                                                                    PAGE    9
                                                                    S2258

track of the ground.

The bodies were carried to the gymnasium where they had to be taken

frcm the stretcher in order to get than through the door. The bodies

were then either left with one of the officers who had assisted in

carrying than or handed over to officers inside the gymnasium for
continuity purposes.

I assisted with the removal of 3 or 4 such bodies but I am unable to

recall anything about than other than they were all male and in either

their late teens or early twenties.

As I was about to leave the gymnasium on the last such venture,

somebody I am unable to say who, asked if a check could be made

outside to see if there were any more dead in the inmediate area of
the prison van and police room.

I went outside and assisted in carrying the body of a male 20 to 22

years, fair hair, no other details, into the gymnasium.    I returned

and saw one more body outside.     It was laid on the floor between the

prison van and the gymnasium wall.     It had been partially covered with

a green blanket.   Together with PC2051 JACKSON, I carried this body

into the gymnasium.    I assisted PC JACKSON with the completion of a

sudden death report and left him with the body.    This body was later

identified as Stuart William Paul THOMPSON, 17 years,

__________ . Liverpool.

Sometime after 4.30 p.m. (1630).
I then returned to the playing area and made my way towards enclosure

no. 3.   I saw that the wire fencing had been bent away from the frame

at one comer.   This I understood had been done by police officers in

an attempt to remove the casualties.    I then noticed the broken

barrier which must have had an effect on the outcome of this tragedy.

The cross member had snapped near to the neck of the securing stand

and then the whole stand had been pushed forward, no doubt by the
                                                                           PAGE 10
                                                                           S2258

        pressure exerted by the supporters at sane stage. Chief

        Superintendent NESBIT had already positioned officers to preserve the
        imnediate scene for evidential purposes.

        I looked around the scene at seine of the officers and saw that sane

        were overcane with enotion and others were physically exhausted. All,

        I felt sure, were numb with the scenes they had witnessed.   It was at

        this time that I noticed that my shirt had vomit and blood on it, my

        trousers and shoes were covered in mud, my hat, coat and tie were
        missing.

        I went around speaking to police officers giving what support and

        encouragement I could under the circumstances.   I stayed on the

        playing area until nearly all the supporters had left the ground and

        then remained in the ground until I was stood down at 7.00 p.m. (1900)
        that evening by Chief Superintendent MOLE.




                                                             T HARVEY SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:
          TIME:            DATE:
tflT ^ S TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

tO OF REPORT




                                                                                     3 3 1 1J
Incident 102      260390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                       STATEMENT NUMBER S877
                                                                       Station

 lumame           CHAPMAN
Forenames         PETER
Age                                       Date of birth
Address           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE, HAMMERTON RD PSTN

Occupation        POL PS454
Telephone

IC                Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type
^^s                                       Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                     Accent

Number of Pages

Dated             020589                                  P.CHAPMAN PS454 Signed


          Duties at Hillsborough Semi Final Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489).
          I was Serial 1 Sergeant that is in charge of all Constables on the

          perimeter track around the ground.   My specific duty was to stay in

          the vicinity of the players tunnel and to indicate to my officers

          when to stand and face the crowd once play had commenced.

          I took up my position as did the rest of the serial at 11.00am (1100)

          and nothing untoward occurred. Went with serial for hot meal at

          1.00pm (1300) and all returned to duties at 1.20pm (1320).

          At 2.41pm (1441) PC814 FINNEGAN walked up to me and made a corrment

          "Where are all the scousers?"   I looked around the ground and noticed

          that the Spion Kop and south stand appeared to be full of Notts.

          Forest supporters. The North Stand opposite me and the Leppings Lane

          end were not full although of course there were plenty in.   In
          particular there appeared to be lots of rocm on the 'wing terraces'

                                                                                   3312
                                                                 PAGE      2
                                                                 S877

of Leppings Lane.     I think I recall seeing spaces in both the Leppings

Lane and North Stands.

The game commenced on time and shortly after I noticed that

supporters at the Leppings Lane were what I thought to be spilling

onto the track at the back of the goal.     Peter Beardsley had just hit

the bar and I thought that it was just a surge forward of supporters.

I then saw Superintendent GREENWOOD run onto the pitch and speak to

the referee and it was when this happened that I began to think that

it was more than an overspill.     Normal policy is that if the referee

needs to be contacted a message is relayed to me through police

control and I in turn would contact the linesman nearest to me to

attract the referee's attention.

At this point the referee brought the players off but he with his

linesmen stayed with me at the bottom of the tunnel. In the next few

moments all hell seemed to break loose. Hundreds of Liverpool

supporters had spilled onto the pitch and were around the players

tunnel.   Many were berating everything and everybody and had

obviously been drinking.
I told the referee Mr LEWIS to go to his dressing room and that I

would give him any news as I got it and this he did.     I was then

engaged on keeping Liverpool supporters from going up the players

tunnel.
I was then instructed (I don't know whether this was verbally or by

radio) to take Mr CLOUGH and Mr DALGLEISH to the police control
point, which I did.    There Chief Superintendent DUGKENFIELD explained

to them the seriousness of the situation but that he could not make an

announcement to the crowd because he did not want the rescue services

to be hampered in their approach to the ground.

I returned the Managers to the dressing rooms and then stayed near

the players tunnel. At this time the office staff directly at the


                                                                               3313
                                                                      PAGE
                                                                      S877

        top of the tunnel were allowing people to 'phone home from the office

        and I was engaged in keeping them orderly etc. Many of the

        supporters were shouting obscenities. At one point BBC TV were going

        to do an interview with Graham KELLY in the tunnel but abandoned it

        because of the unruly behaviour of the Liverpool supporters near the

        tunnel.

        I then went to the North Stand at about 5.40pm (1740) for de-brief

        and left the ground at about 7.00pm (1900).



                                                      P CHAPMAN PS454 SIGNED

^P^TEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:
          TIME:            DATE:   020589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                3314
Incident 102     260390 OP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER S2202

                                                                         Station

Surname           SMITH

Forenames          PETER EDWARD

Age                                       Date of birth

Address


Occupation        POL PC1285

Telephone

IC                Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type

i^ e s                                    Complexion

Facial hair
Glasses           Use                     Accent

Number of Pages

Dated             290489                                         P.E.SMITH Signed


          SEMI FINAL - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND - 15 APRIL 1989 (150489).

          On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I commenced duty at 0945 am
          (0945) at the Hillsborough Football Ground. At this time I was
          in company with Police Constable 417 ILLINGWORTH and we went straight
          to the North Stand for the 1000 am (1000) briefing.    The briefing

          was taken by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELP and Superintendent

          MURRAY, followed by criminal intelligence given by Detective Sergeant

          CHARLESWORTH.
          Following the briefing, I remained on the North Stand
          and took meal. I was part of Serial 1 whose duties were on the

          perimeter track. Police Sergeant CHAPMAN was the Serial Sergeant and

          Inspector DARLING was the Sector Inspector.     I was deployed to the

          perimeter track in front of the Leppings Lane terracing together with
          Police Constable ILLINGWORTH.   This is the duty I have carried out at
                                                                PAGE      2
                                                                S2202

the ground since about 1983 (000083), with the exception of isolated

matches.

I was on this duty for the Coventry v Leeds Semi Final in

1987 (000087) and for the Liverpool v Notts Forest match in 1988

(000088).    My duties there include supervision of the gates leading

from the terracing to the perimeter track and the gates are not opened

without permission of a supervisory Officer, other than to allow

injured persons onto the perimeter track to receive medical

attention.

Prior to the kick off fans are monitored for misbehaviour,

etc.   It is my normal practice to inform Control of any such incidents

and they normally pass that information to other Officers for action.

On only one occasion have I had to enter the terracing during a game

to deal with fans.    This was an Everton Cup match.

The 1988 (000088) Semi Final between the same teams had taken place

with myself and Police Constable ILLINGWORTH on the perimeter track.

That year the terraces were filled well prior to the kick off. We had

a constant job asking people to get off the top of the perimeter
fence. I noticed that a large number of fans were worse for drink and
I suffered much abuse from them consisting of the usual verbal and

spitting.    At the conclusion of the game the gates from the terraces

to the pitch both opened by bodily pressure and by fans reaching

through the fencing and releasing the gates.    The wire meshing on the
perimeter fence was also ripped out by the fans to gain access to the

track. Otters simply climbed over the fence and dropped onto the

track. Others had climbed over during the match and were either

escorted from the track or returned when approached by Police

Officers.
One fan who re-scaled the fence to return, was later treated for an

ankle injury.    Having Policed that match and other matches involving
                                                                   PAGE    3
                                                                   S2202

Liverpool over the last two years, I had no doubt of what my duties

would entail in 1989(000089).

At 11.15am (1115), together with Police Constable ILLINGWORTH, I

collected a track stool and went to the Leppings Lane end of the

pitch.    I placed my stool initially at gate four and Police Constable
ILLINGWORTH placed his at gate five. At this time the turnstiles were

not open, according to the briefing they would open at midday 1200

(1200). I checked all the gates and secured them.   The gates, as

the previous year, have one large fastening device which replaced two

slide bolts positioned at the top and centre of the gates.

Following last year's match, fencing had been replaced with a smaller

mesh where it had been made insecure and at the sides of the gates and
the gates themselves, to prevent fans reaching through and releasing

them. Metal sheets were also welded on to prevent the same.

I remained in sight of the terraces until about 11.40am (1140) when I

saw about half a dozen supporters enter the terracing.    I again

rechecked all the gates and stood facing the terracing at the rear of

the goal. There was no great influx of fans at this end of the

ground.
I can recall radio messages regarding fans looking for Public Houses

and this served to reaffirm my earlier apprehensions of what I could

expect later.
About 12.20pm (1220) , I was relieved for a drink and returned about

12.35pm (1235).    I saw the terraces were still filling slowly.    I

remained on the track until around 2.pm (1400) when I was relieved for

meal. When I left the track there was still no great number of fans

in the terraces or stand.
On arrival at the gym for hot meal the kitchen was closed and I waited

for it to re-open and then took a meal with Police Constable

ILLINGWORTH.    We returned to the track about 2.50pm (1450) and I can
                                                                   PAGE    4
                                                                   S2202

recall that during that time away there had been mention of radio

problems.    The two centre pens behind gates three and four had filled

considerably whilst I was away as had the outer pens.

There was a gap of about ten foot (10') to the front of the outer pens

and though there was no gap in the centre pens, they were not full.        I

saw a fan on the railings dividing pens three and four, that is the

centre pens, leaning over the perimeter fence, and told him to get

down. He got off the perimeter fence but remained squatted on the

dividing railings.

From previous experience I knew I could do little about that and I
left the fan there.    I saw Police Constable ILLINGWORTH stood in the

front of the end pen between gates five and six, where several

supporters had climbed the fence and were leaning over.

I walked back towards gate three and saw a group of fans numbering 20-

30 junping up and down and pushing, causing surging towards the front.

This group were positioned about half way down the terracing to the

left of gate three as I looked at them.
As I stood at gate three a cheer went up and I knew that the teams had

come out.    There was a lot of pushing and the crowd in the pen in

front of me, the centre South, surged forward to the fencing and

people at the front shouted and screamed.    The crowd then moved back.

I recall a ball hitting the perimeter fence near to gate 4 and the

fans again surged forward and back.    I moved slightly to my left away

from the goal mouth to avoid being struck by a ball during the pre­

kick off knock about.    I still did not look onto the pitch and

continued to monitor the fans.
I noticed a Serial of Police Constables walking in front of the North

Stand near to the comer with the terracing and as the first of them
reached the comer gate three flew open and the crowd moved back frcm

the fence.    I closed the gate immediately and no one tried to get out
                                                                 PAGE      5
                                                                 S2202

and I assumed the pressure of a surge had opened the gate.

There was no great pressure on fans at the front after the gate was

re-secured.     I was then joined by two more Officers frcm the Serial

previously mentioned.     As they reached me the gate three again opened

and I attempted to reclose it but was unable to do so due to pressure

from the fans.    These were not the same fans who had been stood there

on the previous occasion.    One or both of the other Officers also

assisted in trying to close the gate.     I am unaware of whether or not

the gate was fully locked at this point, but the fans were again

screaming and shouting, "WE'RE SQUASHED, OPEN THE GATES YOU BASTARDS".

I had stepped back from the gate at this point leaving the other two

Officers.     I saw people were tight up to the fence, particularly two

or three young women to my right of the gate.     I got out my personal

radio which I wear hung around my neck under my tunic and cannot

usually hear at a large match.     I tried to pass a message asking if

we could open the gate to relieve pressure.     I got no reply but think

there was seme message about a gate being opened elsewhere.

The noise was terrible and people were screaming, a different type of

scream and I opened the gate three fully.     I saw people were being

forced onto the fence and turning blue.     I passed another radio

message, "THIS IS SERIOUS PEOPLE ARE DYING IN HERE"
I attempted to pull people out of the gate but they were jairmed solid.

The female previously mentioned was turning a dark colour and I

climbed onto the hoardings and looked over the fence and gestured for

the fans to get back but was spat at and someone shouted, "FUCK OFF

COPPER"
I got down and returned to the gate where a number of Officers had
arrived, including Superintendent GREENWOOD, who I assist in trying to

get people out of the gate.
I remember looking at the rear of the terrace near to the tunnel, I
                                                                 PAGE      6
                                                                 S2202

believe when I was on the hoardings, and seeing three young males

talking and looking at the pitch.    They are stood in plenty of space

whereas people there at a normal match are struggling to see.    I

notice a number of fans on the hoardings shouting to other fans to get
back but no one does.   I assist taking bodies onto the grass area and

recall thinking, "Are they still playing football?" By this time

there was a large number of Police and fans and people laid on the

pitch.
I have no idea of the time of these events but think people were being

crushed prior to the kick off.
I continued moving bodies away from gate three with the assistance of

other Officers and fans, other fans were pointing at me and saying,

"THIS IS YOUR FAULT"
Sane time during this I had radioed for bolt croppers. This was to

enable the mesh to be cut.    I could not hear arty reply. A supervisory

Officer calls for us to form a tunnel to get people frcm the gate but

people are trapped by the step from the terraces.    I recall many

people giving mouth to mouth, St John's, fans and Police.
Superintendent GREENWOOD tells me to assist in getting the St John's

Ambulance to gate three, this I do.    I saw Inspector DARLING about

more ambulances.
I rsmarter a large number of Liverpool fans charge down the pitch with

a roar and at that point expected the fans to begin fighting.    People

are now being removed on advertising hoardings but I assist with

loading bodies onto them.     I recall a photographer during all this

pushing past me and taking a picture of the young wcman up to the
fence, from about two foot.     I was now considerably distressed and in

shock.
A smartly dressed man, about 40, came to me and said, "MY SON, I'VE

LOST MY SON". I suggested he continued to look and he shook my hand.
                                                                PAGE      7
                                                                S2202

I assisted one particular body onto a hoard that I remember.    She was

in a state of undress and fans were jeering but I couldn't tell what
they were shouting.   I assisted in making her decent and she was taken

away on the hoard.

I can recall other Officers including Police Constable 3069 and

Inspector HARPER asking if I'm alright.   Superintendent GREENWOOD

tells me to get in an ambulance due to the state I am in.   I don't

and wander off trying to assist people to find relatives.
Police Constable ILLINGWORTH joins me and takes me to the rear of the

North Stand and then down to the Police Room where I am given a cup of

tea.   Police Sergeant LANG began to verbally caution prisoners and I

left the Police Room where a Police Constable took me aside and then

with Police Constable HULLEY they took me to an ambulance where I

refused to be taken to hospital but was given oxygen for a time.
Shortly afterwards we were instructed to go onto the North Stand for a

de-brief.   There were no fans and I noticed broken seats and thought

'What are these people?'   I sat with other Area Officers frcm serial 1

and Mr MOLE and walked from the South Stand across the pitch.     The

de-brief took place and we were told we had done a good job.

During the briefing it was mentioned that the start would not be
delayed and that we should not get involved in the atmosphere but be

detached.   It was to be Policed fairly and, if necessary, firmly but

within the law and that no complaints were wanted.
It was surprising that hot meals v^re being taken utmediately prior to

kick-off as ususally if hot meals are provided, they are taken first

or certainly not prior to kick-off.
I feel there was no atmosphere at the lappings Lane end prior to the

match which is unusual and could be accounted for by the few numbers

having entered the ground earlier.    I had mentioned earlier in the day

to Police Constable ILLINGWORTH that to prevent people climbing over
                                                                       PAGE    8
                                                                       S2202

     the fence between pens, it would be an idea to have gates at the

     bottom as at the top, which could be locked open on large matches.

      If these had been there, casualties may have been less, but I

     personally would never have expected the consequences that have

     ensued.     During the tragedy, I can recall seeing fans from the rear of

     the terraces being lifted into the stand above. This is a common

     practice and on this occasion there appeared to be no reason for it as

     to the best of nty recollection, the tunnel entrance was clear.

     On reflection, I cannot see any connection between the gates being

     opened at the rear of the Leppings Lane Stand and the crush in the

     terraces.     There never appeared any blockage in the tunnel entrance/

     exit.

      I formed the impression when trying to get people out of the gate that

      there were people underneath the ones I could see. Whilst getting
     people out of the gates a barrier from the terrace was thrown over the

     perimeter fence.     It was at this time I realised that a barrier had

      given way.    I was completely unaware of where it had ccme fran.

      The fencing mesh had bulged outwards whilst the fans were against it

      and I later saw that the barrier was situated directly behind gate
      three and the perimeter fencing had been forced to the perimeter

     wall and buckled.
      At no time did there appear to be any great influx of supporters into

      the pens.    The crush at the front had been considerably lightened by

      the time the barrier was thrown.




                                                            P.E.SMITH SIGNED

IATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:        DATE:   290489
^pTNESS TO SIGNATURE:
 OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                         3323
Incident 102    260390 QP8064          DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT
                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER S873
                                                                         Station

Surname           ILLINGWORTH

Forenames         DAVID ALFRED

Age                                        Date of birth

Address           S. YORKS POLICE
                  HAMMERTON RD PSTN

Occupation        POL PC417

Telephone

 IC               Height                   Build

Hair colour

Jteir type

^^es                                       Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                      Accent

Number of Pages

Dated             040589                                   D.A. ILLINGWORTH Signed


          During my service with South Yorkshire Police and Sheffield and

          Rotherham, I have been to many large football matches at S.W.F.C.,
          and during my time at West Bar did many duties at the leppings Lane

          end of the ground.
          In September 1987, (000987) I started serving with the Ccxtiminity

          Constables at F.l and have been on duty at the majority of matches.

          At all these games I have been on Serial 1 (the track) and I have
          placed myself behind the goal near to gate number 5, and PC 1285 Smith

          has been near gates either 3 or 4.
          I originally took up this position as there was less manpower at

          that end of the ground.     I have never been detailed any particular

          position on the track.
          On Saturday, 15th April 1989,(150489) I arrived at the ground at 9.45

          am (0945) and went into the North Stand for the briefing at 10 am.
                                                                 PAGE     2
                                                                 S873

(1000) Insp.   Darling was in control of our sector and PS Chapman was

in charge of Serial 1. After the briefing from Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield and Supt Murray I had a packed meal in the North Stand but

received no other instruction regarding my duties for the day.

I collected a stool and placed it near to gate 5. At most games I

sit at this position as it is directly between two sets of railings

on the terrace and often fans climb up on to and over the railings and

gives easy access for climbing the perimeter fence.    (Two Liverpool

fans scaled the perimeter fence at the start of the 1988 (000088) sani

final and ran onto the pitch.    I detained one as he attempted to get

back in the crowd.    The other one got back in but was later taken out

by St. Johns with a leg injury, caused when he fell frcm the fence).

The fans began arriving at the Leppings Lane end before 12.00 (1200)

and I stood on the track behind the goal with PC Smith. The next

officer on the track was PC 442 Cookson who was near the small gate in

the North Stand.     I don't know where the next officer was in the

opposite direction (South Stand)
There were very few Liverpool fans in the ground but the ones near PC

Smith and me were sober and well behaved.     I'm not sure of the time
but about 1 pm (1300) I heard a radio message frcm PS Chapman (The

radio was on talk through) to the effect "I'm taking half my serial

for meal before it gets busy" Reply "Roger".      I then saw a group of
officers on the track, near the players tunnel leave the track via the

North Stand obviously going for their meal.
About half an hour later I saw PS Chapman back near the players
tunnel and assumed he had had his meal and I was anticipating a radio

message to go for mine. At 2 pm (1400) I had received no instruction

regarding a meal and walked over to PS Chapman and asked him if PC
Smith and I could take our meal. He said O.K.      On our way to the

canteen a message came over the radio "The canteen will close in


                                                                              3325
                                                                  PAGE   3
                                                                  S873

20 minutes" On our arrival at the canteen we found it was closed and

one of the ladies said "We're closed for the next twenty minutes" PC

Smith and I then stood in the queue until they re-opened at approx 2.

20.(1420) We were served and returned to the track about 2.45-2.50
pm. (1445-1450)   PC Smith went to the toilet I walked onto the

Leppings Lane end where I found PC 700 Helliwell was standing behind

the goal.   I saw the centre pen (CN & CS) was very full but the two

outer pens were only about half full.    This suprised me as I'd never

seen the fans so badly distributed. At first there didn't appear to

be a serious problem the fans were swaying back and forth and some
were climbing from the pen marked N on the map into the stand above.

This is a common occurrence at large matches.    The swaying and pushing

became much worse to the extent that females were screaming and fans

were beginning to panic. I put over a radio message to the effect: "

There is a serious crush down here it is serious".    I don't know if it

was received or not as I was unable to hear my radio due to the
noise. At this time I was near gate four and it was obvious that

people against the fence were in serious trouble.    There was only PC

Smith and me at this section and I think he was near to Gate 3.     I
opened gate 4 and assisted the first injured man who I saw onto the

track. The fans began to spill out.     I assisted this man with a leg
injury to the St Johns at the comer of the North Stand. All the fans

who were spilling onto the track and the grass I was attempting to get

them back on the terrace through gates 5 and 6 which I opened. At

this stage I was joined by another serial which arrived from the

direction of the North Stand.    The first body I saw was on the terrace

just behind the fence.   I cannot describe this person as I could see
little of him due to the crowd but he was male, white and laid flat

out with fans standing on him.    It was impossible at that stage to get

to him. We were dragging fans out of gate 4 as quickly as possible.


                                                                             3326
                                                                 PAGE       4
                                                                 S873

They were climbing over the fence onto the track and over the railings

into the North Pen. The fans began pushing the dead and injured

through the gate. Officers began resuscitation on the grass.     I

assisted in pulling a large fat man from gate 4. He was about 50

years of age.     I think bald/greying, wearing a green jumper. He was

with his son about 30 years he had black hair and a black moustache.

He seemed uninjured but very distressed.    I carried his father onto

the grass but I thought he was dead as he wasn't breathing and wasn't

conscious.    I began to give him heart massage but it didn't appear to

have any effect but I continued and he began to breath for himself.

A Police Officer who I don't know but I think he was either from

Barnsley or Woodseats was near by said "make sure he doesn't swallow

his tongue"     I turned him onto his side and after a few minutes he

regained consciousness.    By this time an ambulance had arrived and

was parted near to the goal.     I carried this man by his arms and a
civilian had his legs to the ambulance.     Inside the ambulance there

was a body on the bench and one or two on the floor. We had to put

the casualty down and take the bodies out of the ambulance then put

him inside.     He was still breathing and conscious and his son was

with him.     I obtained no details and don't know what happened to him.

I don't know how long I stayed with this particular casualty but
whilst I was reviving him on the grass many more bodies had been

brought from Gate 4 and were covering the grass. At some stage I saw

the first officer, he was Inspector Harper.     I said to him "Can't we

get rid of these bodies".     He replied "Bodies?" with disbelief.     It

appeared to me that officers were being directed to that end of the
ground who had no idea what was taking place. At some stage I ended

up at Gate 3 where the crush to get out was enormous, several fans

had fallen over the small wall and were trapped by their legs and the

crush behind than and as a consequence they began to pile up.        I think


                                                                                3327
                                                                       PAGE
                                                                       S873

       it was at this stage the fans began to pull at the fencing which

       started to rip away I together with other officers, fans, ambulance

       staff began to kick at the bottom of it, sufficient gave way so we

       could get the fans under it.

       I did several journeys carrying bodies and injured on advertising

       boards, at first to the ambulance station.   I first remariber seeing

       about 6-10 bodies or injured on boards on the floor outside the gym.

       I made another journey and on my return with a body the whole floor
       outside the gym was covered.   I made another journey and on returning

       this time I saw the bodies were being taken into the gym itself.     I

       followed suit.   I don't know how many trips I made, the descriptions

       of the bodies or who I was with during this time. The only
       recollection of staff in the gym I have is an officer shouting: "

       Someone must stay with the bodies".
       After all the dead were in the gym and the injured had gone I was
       informed we should all go to the North Stand where we were de-briefed

       by Chief Inspector Beal. After that I was asked by Inspector Calvert

       to sit with fans on a S.Y.T. bus in Fenistone Road.   I went with PC

       700 Helliwell and 2954 Morledge. The fans were in fact missing
       friends and relatives. We obtained their details and descriptions of

       persons missing. After this was completed a coach arrived in

       Penistone Road and we put the relatives on the coach which I was

       informed was to take them to Hairmerton Road Police Station. My

       overall feeling of events of that day are that at the height of the

       disaster no one seated to take control.



                                                      D.A.ILLINGWORTH SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:
         TIME:             DATE:   040589


                                                                                3328
                                                                        STATION
^piE:          HEDLEY
               HELLIWELL

ADDRESS:       S YORKSHIRE POLICE, HAMMERTON RD PSTN,
               S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION: POL PC700


Who states:- This statement consisting of 000 pages, each signed
by roe, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 050589                                       H. HELLIWELL PC700 (SIGNED)



        On Saturday 15th April, 1989 (150489) I attended at the Sheffield
        Wednesday Football Club, Hillsborough at 9.30 am (0930) for a 10.00 am
           (1000) briefing.   I was a member of Serial Number 1, which was to

        police the perimeter track under the command of PS454 CHAPMAN 'F' and

        Inspector DARLING 'FI'.
        After the briefing, which was followed by light refreshment, at 11.00

        am (1100) this date I took up my position on the perimeter track,

        in front of the South Stand terrace open seating, in a position

        between the players' tunnel and the Spion Kop.

        This is a position with which I am well acquainted, having policed

        there for several seasons under a scheme devised by Chief

        Superintendent MOLE, whereby carmunity constables were allocated to

        one particular position on the perimeter track in order to become

        acquainted with supporters who regularly occupy those seats and in a

        position near to the players tunnel being acquainted with members of

        the staff at the club.
        On the day of the Semi Final these seats were allocated to Nottingham

           Forest supporters.
HELLIWELL               HEDLEY                                             2


After the opening of the turnstiles at 12.15 pm (1215)

approx. it soon became clear to roe that Nottingham Forest
supporters seamed to be entering the ground in larger numbers than the

supporters of Liverpool FC. At 1.15 pm (1315) I was instructed

by PS454 CHAPMAN to attend at the gymnasium for meal.

At 1.45 pm (1345) on conclusion of my meal I was then requested

by PS838 LONG from the Police Roam, to assist with escorting a
prisoner from Liverpool to Ecclesfield Police Station.     In company

with PC2954 MQRLEDGE, the Transit Driver, I escorted a prisoner by the

naire of             to Ecclesfield Police Station, arriving at 2.00 pm

(1400), where he was handed over to the Prisoner Reception

Sergeant, DS510 HOMER. At 2.05 pm (1405) we left Ecclesfield to
return to Hillsborough Football Ground, where we arrived at

approximately 2.15 pm (1415).
En route I noted that coaches from Liverpool were now beginning to

park in Halifax Road, I saw approximately 5 or 6 coaches in that

location.     I saw a crowd I would estimate approximately 200 to 300

strong in the yard and footpath near to the "White Horse" public
house in Halifax Road at its junction with Southey Green Road. We
continued down Halifax Road to Penistone Road North and Leppings

Lane.      These roads were thronged with supporters and I was surprised

that at this time many were making no obvious attempt to make their

way in the direction of the ground, indeed quite a few were walking

away from the ground, perhaps seeking licensed premises which were

open ?.
We entered the ground via the Leppings Lane gate to drive through the

car park to the rear of the South Stand.      I remember remarking to

PC2954 MQRLEDGE, that in my opinion many of the Liverpool fans would

have no possibility of being inside the ground in good time for the 3.
HELLIWELL            HEDLEY                                                3


00 pm (1500) kick off. This remark was based on local knowledge

and the distance which many would have to walk.

In order for the Transit van to enter the ground it was necessary at

this time (approx. 2.20 pm (1420)) to use the van siren to force

a way through the crowds.

1 then returned to my position on the perimeter track and at
approximately 2.25 pm (1425 hrs) I was requested by PS454 Chapman to

take up a position on the track in front of the Leppings Lane

terracing, whilst Officers in that location, namely PC1285 SMITH and

PC417 ILLINGWORTH were taking their meals.   I took up a position

approximately in front of the gate number 4, in the perimeter

fencing, with the centre pen to my left. That pen appeared to be
quite full to the rear, but there was room at the front, the bottom 3

or 4 step® were almost empty.   I was surprised at the lack of

supporters in the right hand pen (number 4 ?) I held a conversation

with Superintendent GREENWOOD regarding the movements of spectators.

Sara were seen continually climbing over the fence from the centre pen

to the right hand pen, and also in the reverse direction.   One youth
was seen to climb from the terracing into the Leppings Lane stand.     I

was unable to contact Ground Control by radio to inform them of this

fact, however, a short time later this youth was seen to jump down

again from the stand to the steps of the terracing.   The crowd in the

centre pen were seen to push and surge forwad on three or four
occasions, apparently being pushed from the rear, but there was no

crushing at the front at that time. We also saw the crowd in the

centre pen playing with an inflatable beach ball which was being

knocked up in the air over most of that pen.

At approximately 2.40 pm (1440) I was joined in that location by

PC2348 Hanson.   Together we spoke to a group of 4 or 5 teenage male
HELLIWELiL              HEDLEY                                            4


Livarpool supporters who kept calling to us by our numbers, ie "2348

are you all right?" "700 are you all right?" and then words to the

effact "We're not all idiots you know, we just want to be friendly".

This group were standing directly on and around steps to gate number

4. At approximately 2.50 pm (1450) PC'S417 and 1285 returned to

that location.   I then made my way back to my original allocated

position near to the players' tunnel, arriving just as the two teams

took to the field.    Shortly after the game started I was aware of

Liverpool Supporters climbing the perimeter fence onto the track at

the Leppings Lane end of the ground, however, from my position I was

not aware of what was happening on that terrace.    I remember hearing
PC1285 calling Ground Control in an obviously agitated manner, and
then I remember seeing Superintendent GREENWOOD running onto the pitch

towards the referee waving his arms in the air, obviously requesting

the referee to stop the game.    Once this had happened, and the players

and officials had left the pitch matters then appeared to me to

progress very slowly.    I was aware that casualties wer being carried
away, however, until I heard a radio message from Chief Inspector
SUMNER to Ground Control, suggesting that a mortuary be set up, was I

aware of the magnitued of the incident.    I then remember a single

Livarpool supporter wearing what I believe was a black or grey

sleeveless 'T' shirt running the length of the pitch, gesticulating

towards the Nottingham Forest supporters on the Spion Kop.    Forest
supporters in the open seated area were by now becoming agitated at

the behaviour of this and other Liverpool supporters who had made

their way onto the pitch.
I was approached by                of the Nottingham Forest coaching

team, who asked if the youth on the pitch ought not to be arrested as

he was inciting the Forest supporters by his actions.    I informed him
HELLIWELL               HEDLEY                                          5


that our instructions are not to chase pitch invaders across the

pitch, but to wait until they left the pitch when that action would
then be taken.

I ramember that the youth in question was detained as he returned
across the pitch to the Leppings Lane end of the ground.   I was then

aware of large numbers of Liverpool supporters running towards the

Spion Kop end of the pitch, who were then restrained, and returned by

a line of police forming up on the half way line. Owing to this line

of police I no longer had a view to Leppings Lane.   By this time

Liverpool supporters, many in the 20 - 30 age group were making their
way along the perimeter track towards the Forest supporters.    These
people were generally threatening and in an agitated mood, and were

making verbal threats towards Nottingham supporters and the police.

Although caught up with the desire to get to the Leppings Lane end of

the ground to assist in whatever way possible, I was obliged together

with other Officers to remain in that location to prevent fighting
occurring on the pitch.    It was obviously not practicable under the

circumstances to begin arresting people, however, I experienced a
sense of anger that this was happening whilst injured and dead were

being carried from the pitch.

Many Liverpool supporters were obviously the worse for drink, in fact
I saw one who could not stand, who kept falling down, and had to be

supported by friends.

I saw one youth, a half-caste, of approximately 14 years of age

verbally abusing an Officer, believed to be Police Sergeant HILL, 'F2'

at the players tunnel, and then spit directly in his face.     I was

obliged to restrain 4 or 5 supporters who were shouting obscene
threats and abuse at the Football Association Secretary, Graham KELLY,
whilst he was being interviewed for TV whilst standing in the players'
HELLIWELL             HEDLEY


tunnel. This group of males all smelled strongly of alcohol.    Once

the ground began to clear, when the announcement of the abandonment

had been made, my inrnediate reaction was one of anger that Liverpool

supporters had killed the Italians at Heysel stadium in Brussels and
that by their actions had now done the same thing to their own

people.   This, I repeat was my irmediate reaction, before knowledge

of what had actually occurred.

At approximately 4.30 pm (1630) when the ground had cleared I

made my way to the North stand to be de-briefed.    I was amazed to see
several broken seats in the vicinity of where I was seated.    Such

damage after only 6 minutes of actual football.    These were seats
which had been occupied by Liverpool Supporters.

At approximately 5.00 pm (1700) I was requested by Inspector CALVERT

to get to a SYT PSV parked in Berries Road South, to obtain details

from Liverpool supporters of their friends or relatives who were

missing. I obtained initial details of 3 persons and then accompanied

these, together with others on a South Yorkshire Police coach to the

Hillsborough Boys Club, Langsett Road.

I then made my way to the Incident Roam at Hammerton Road Police
Station where missing person reports were initiated and handed to the

Officer in Charge.
At approximately 6.30 pm (1830) I obtained transport with an 'A'

Division PC back to Sheffield Wednesday ground to offer what

assistance I could.

On returning to the ground I remember feeling uplifted by seeing and

being spoken to by Chief Superintendent MOLE and Chief Superintendent

NESBIT.
At the ground I was instructed by PS COX 'FI' to remain available to

travel to the Northern General Hospital, to return to the ground
HELLIWELL              HEDLEY                                           7


with bodies from that location.   This was the first opportunity to ask

how many fatalities there had been, and I remember a sense of shock

and despair when told that the figure was in excess of 90.

At 7.45 pm (1945) I arrived at the Northern General Hospital,

together with officers from other Divisions. We returned to the

gymnasium with 3 bodies.   I was personally responsible for the body

of one unidentified male of approximately 25 years of age.

At 8.30 pm (2030) in the gymnasium the body was laid out, given
the number 90 and the relevant paperwork was initiated.

I was then obliged to remain on standby in the gymnasium together

with other 'F' Division PC 's.

The hours spent waiting now in the gymnasium proved to be very

harrowing.   Strangely I felt a certain responsibility towards the

unidentified male deceased, perhaps because I have a son of a similar
age.

During the night the morale of Officers was visibly raised by the
appearance of the Chief Constable, who together with Chief

Superintendent MOLE spoke to Officers still retained on duty. At this

time they were accompanied by the Minister of Sport, Colin MOYNIHAN

and Irvine PATRICK, MP.
At 2.55 am (0255) the body for which I was responsible was

identified by his father as David Leonard THOMAS, 23 years. After
the distressing formal identification I was impressed by the way in

which the deceased's father was then sympathetically interviewed by

DC OBRIEN, 'F2' CID.
At 3.40 am (0340) I accompanied the body to the Medico-Legal

Centre, where after all procedures had been completed I returned to

the gymnasium at 4.30 am (0430), where I then went off duty.

Throughout the time spent in the gymnasium I was impressed by the
        HELLIWELL            HEDLEY                                             8


       manner in which officers of all ranks present carried out their

        duties connected with this tragic incident.
        I have been a Police Constable for 19 years, and in that time, in

        sore way or another, I have been involved in policing most games

        played at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, and I have been on

       duty at all Semi Finals played there during that period of time. As

       previously stated I have carried out perimeter track duties for

       approximately 8 years.




                                                  H. HELLIWELL PC700 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME              DATE:   050589
WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE




                                                                                    3336
Incident 102     260390 QP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT
                                                       STATEMENT NUMBER S1076
                                                                        Station

Surname           RICHARDSON

Forenames         FIONA

Age               21    100               Date of birth

Address           S YORKS POLICE
                  HAMMERTON RD PSTN

Occupation        POL PC3034
Telephone

IC                Height                  Build

Hair colour

  ir type


« es

Facial hair

Glasses           Use
                                          Complexion



                                          Accent

Number of Pages
Dated             300489                                      F RICHARDSON Signed


          On duty 9.30am (0930) Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) at SWPC.

          Duty - serial 1 ic PS CHAPMAN
          Deployed to cover perimeter track.
          After briefing had packed lunch, patrolled perimeter track ic PC

          MARSDEN including behind Penistone Road turnstiles.

          At 2.10pm (1410) took meal.
          At 2.35pm (1435) took up position on perimeter track between Gates 1-2

          Leppings Lane end.
          At that time looking round it appeared that the majority of the

          Nottingham Forest fans were already in.
          Ifost of Liverpool seats taken in South Stand but terraces and seats

          above Leppings Lane seemed only half full.
          At about 2.45pm (1445) chased 3 youths, who had climbed the wall and

          fence between terrace 1 and South Stand, disappeared into crowd.
                                                                 pas:        2
                                                                 S1076

About 2.50pm (1450) the same three youths approached me asking to go

into terraces, had been sent back round by a PC on South Stand opened

gats and they went into terrace 1.

I did not have a radio.

A St. Johns man told me they were going to delay match - he had a

radio.

The terraces were still fairly empty.

Gates 1-4 half full.

Gates 2-3 three quarters full.
At 2.53pm (1453) (I looked at my watch). At Gate 2 I let out a man

and 5 kids they were sweating and distressed, they asked to go in

terrace 1 because it was getting cramped in terrace 2.
Another PC then came and stood by gate 2.    I went to Gate 1and opened

it.    I turned round and saw half a dozen people had come out of Gate

2.    I went to Gate 2, I didn't know what was happening.

I looked through the open gate and saw a man's face in themiddle,       it

showed terror, I began to pull people out fast.

A couple of fans were swearing and pushing me.

A club official in a suit was trying to push people back in the gate

and shouting and swearing at the fans.
More people came on to the pitch.    TVjo PC's were withme at Gate 2

pulling people out.
I went over to terrace 3. There were now about half a dozen PC's

standing around near end of pitch, Gate 3 was open.

I saw a girl pushed right up by the fence of No 3. Someone was

shouting "She's dead, she's dead."
I saw a man holding up a boy in terrace 3, he was limp.     I climbed
fence and pulled him up and out, with help of another PC gave mouth to

mouth and heart massage.    He was dead.   Body looked 12-14 years,

male, white, light curly ginger hair, freckles.
                                                                 pas:        3
                                                                 S1076

Satteone else dragged a man out about 40 years, white, clean shaven,

very large man.    I began heart massage and a fan tried mouth to mouth.

He was dead.

Stood up looked around people everywhere.

Dead people all over pitch.

I moved the two bodies with me out of the way as more bodies were

still being brought out.

PC's giving resuscitation all around me.

An ambulance had arrived.     PC's were taking oxygen bottles out and

trying to use them.

Someone shouted get bolt cutters.    Firemen were arriving.

Together with some fans, I put two bodies on the advertising hoardings

and ran across pitch to police room end.

Went back to terraces.     Someone hurled barrier pole over fence.

One fan who was one of the first to be pulled out kept running around
swearing at PC's pushing and shoving.     PC's just kept pushing him out

of the way.    Saw him again and again.
Went to police room, opened door of gym as two PC's were carrying a

body, looked in, bodies everywhere, that many had not come frcsn the

pitch.
Help carry walking wounded to a transit ready to go to hospital.       Got
in an ambulance which had two badly hurt young men. Went to the Royal

Hallamshire, helping with giving oxygen in ambulance.

Whilst travelling down in ambulance, saw a group of about five fans

walking down Middlewood Road with Police jackets and helmets. At

hospital got lift back with a Police transit, on the way back to the

ground got diverted to a fight on Penistone Road.     Liverpool fans

attacking Notts.Forrest.     They smelt strong of beer.
On arrival at ground went to Police room.     People were crying. Helped

(tried) to comfort a man who couldn't find his son.
                                                                       PAGE     4
                                                                       S1076

        At one point I remember seeing a Liverpool fan who had been let off of

        gate 2 run around pitch shouting and swearing sticking fingers up at

        Notts. Forrest fans. The crowd reacted.

        Among the walking wounded a lot smelt strongly of beer.   2-3 were very
        abusive.

        I have worked just about every major game at SWFC for the past five

        years when duties allow.

        Although I usually work South Stand I have worked the perimeter track

        about five times before.



                                                         F RICHARDSON SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:
OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                    3340
Incident 102     260390 OP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                       STATEMENT NUMBER S927

                                                                        Station

Surname           CUCKSON

Forenames         ROGER
Age                                       Date of birth

Address           S YORKSHIRE POLICE
                  HAMMERTON RD PSTN

Occupation        POL PC442

Telephone

IC                Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type

t s                                       Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                     Accent

Number of Pages 5

Dated             040589                                        R CUCKSON Signed


          At 9.45 am (0945) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I conmenced

          duty at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground for duties regarding the

          F.A. Cup Semi-Final between Liverpool FC and Nottingham Forest FC.
          Shortly after arrival at the ground I mustered with other officers in

          the North Stand to be given a briefing by Chief Superintendent

          DUCKENFIELD on the forthcoming match. After this briefing we were

          all given a light snack and were given our duties by our Serial

          Sergeants.    I was on Serial 1 under Sergeant CHAPMAN and Inspector

          DARLING, my duty was to patrol a section of perimeter track at the
          corner of the North Stand and Leppings Lane terrace. After I had had

          a hot drink at the rear of the North Stand near to the Police room I

          collected a stool and went to take up my position on the track. Once

          the gates of the ground had been opened a steady trickle of

          supporters began to enter the ground and I noticed that the Kop end
                                                                 PAGE    2
                                                                 S927

of the ground began to fill faster than my end.    Several Liverpool

supporters who had come into the North Stand began to cane down to

the wall at the botton of the stand near to the pitch.    I engaged in

conversation with some of them and even at this time, about 12 am

(1200) I could smell drink on nearly all of them. They were however

quite good natured and well behaved part from jokingly trying to

get onto the pitch. About this time the terraces behind the goal at

Leppings Lane were beginning to fill up, but again compared to the Kop

end they appeared empty.
As more and more Liverpool supporters filled the stand and terraces

the usual football chants began.

At about 1 pm (1300) I went into the gym for a hot meal, after which

I returned to my section of track.    I noticed that the Liverpool

part of the ground was still empty compared to other parts.
Supporters in the North Stand appeared to be mainly families, couples,

old and young people of both sexes. The supporters on the leppings

Lane terrace and the raised section next to the North Stand appeared

to be mostly young men and by this time I could see that most were

the worse for drink. At this stage some supporters on the terraces
were beginning to climb into the elevated section of the North West

terrace. The mood of the crowd in front of me was quite buoyant

with the usual cracks and jokes.     Several fans in the North Stand

wanting to move into the terraces were directed back into the Stand,

it being explained to them that being all ticket, they should get

back to their seats.
When the teams came out for a warm up kick about the football chants
began in earnest.   It was noticed that there was still plenty of room/

space on the Leppings Lane terrace at this time and other parts of the

ground appeared to be full.
Just before kick-off several officers began to come onto the


                                                                             3342
                                                               PAGE      ;
                                                               S927

perimeter track near me these appeared to be going to the rear of the

goal. At this time I noticed that several fans, young men, were

climbing the fence that separates the North Stand from the leppings

Lana terrace.   These were obviously trying to get into the North

Stand, which by now appeared full, although there was plenty of room

on the terrace still.
With a couple of other officers, from the ones just coming onto the

track, I went into the stand to try to prevent them from climbing

over.   These men were on the fence just about 'A' entrance, when I

reached them, one had climbed back, after shouts that the Police were

coming, another was almost over and as I reached up to him he fell

heavily onto the seats of the stand. The fans on the other side of
the fence became very hostile at this thinking I had pulled him
down.   I tried with other officers to drag this person away frcm the

seats but was unable to move him.
He was very heavy and appeared the worse for drink, as were the fans

on the other side of the fence. These were trying to grab me and

throw punches at me. With the possibility that the fallen person was

injured I looked back at the ground to see if I could catch the
attention of a St Johns Ambulance man.   I had my back to the pitch

all this time and was not aware of anything wrong at this time except

the fans near to me were very threatening and loud.
As I looked around I saw what appeared to be a pitch invasion fron

behind the Leppings Lane goal with fans climbing over the perimeter

fence and spilling onto the pitch.
I decided to go back down to the track as I went past 'A' entrance in

the stand scores of fans were coining out of it onto the seated area

of the stand and pushing all before them.   I tried to tell them to go

back but it was useless, the amount of people caning up the entrance

was unbelievable.   They kept caning out and pushing and overflowing


                                                                             3343
                                                                 PAGE     <
                                                                 S927

onto the track.   I forced my way onto the track and made my way to

the people on the pitch.    I still thought it was a pitch invasion but

when I saw seme of the fans close up I could see it was more than

that. However, I tried to direct fans back into the terrace via

Gata '6' where there was plenty of room with 3 or 4 sections of

terrace still empty.   The vast majority of fans near to the goal area

wera pale and gasping for breath and looked exhausted.    I still did

not realise what had happened and so I tried as best I could to

persuade fans to move away from the playing area and to calm them

that appeared distressed.
I then saw people - Police, fans, stewards carrying bodies away from

behind the goal area on boards.   This area was now a mass of people

sate crying, sane in shock and distressed.    I still could not see the
extant of what was happening but seeing the bodies being carried I

realised something was seriously wrong.    I think I was then overcane

by events as I cannot recall much of what I did after that.

Sane time later, I believe it was when a cordon was put across the
pitch I spoke to a steward and his son. What I said or what was said

to me I don't know, but I do recall a middle aged couple who said

they were Liverpool fans and had been at the Heysel Stadium, cane up

to me and thanked me for what I had done. Whatever it was I don't

know but I must have caught their eye because they said they had cane

back just to see me.   I felt very overcane at their carments.    From

then on I was in what I can only describe as shock.
Suddenly the ground was becoming more and more empty and I recall

standing with the rest of my serial near to the players tunnel.     It

was then that the extent of it all began to sink in.     I felt terrible

and had to leave the rest of the serial.     I went into the players

tunnel for a smoke and to try to pull myself round.
Shortly after I sat with other officers in the North Stand where I


                                                                              3344
                                                                           PAGE
                                                                           S927

           learnt of the extent of the incident.

            I recall being stood down and leaving the ground.

           I went back to my own beat at Crosspool but felt unable to do

           anything. I remained at Crosspool for some time until I returned to

           Hammerton Road Police Station at about 9.45 pm (2145).   I was given
           duties at Hillsborough Boys Club where I was under Insp HOGAN-HOWE.

           I remained there until about 1.20 am (0120) Sunday morning on duty at

           the main entrance giving advice and assistance as best I could.

           Whilst on the main door I had occasion to speak to - in no uncertain

           terms - to a "Granada Film Crew" who wanted to enter and film

           relatives.     They were told where to go.
           On Sunday 16th (160489) I worked at Casualty Bureau at Ecclesfield

            from 8.30 am (0830) to 6 pm (1800).
            I have been stationed at El Sub Division for some 13 years now and I

           have worked at most of the major matches staged at S.W.F.C. including

           last years Semi Final, for the most part I have worked at the same

           location at the ground ie, perimeter track, but I have worked in all

           parts of the ground at big matches.

                                                                R CUCKSON SIGNED

    STATEMENT TAKEN
^             PLACE:

             TIME:               DATE:

    WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:
    OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                   3345
Incident 102       260390 OP8Q64       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER S879

                                                                         Station

Surname            FARTHING
Forenames          NIGEL CHARLES

Age                                       Date of birth

Address            S YORKS POLICE
                   HAMMERTON RD PSTN

Occupation         POL PC1977

Telephone

IC                 Height                  Build

Hair colour

  ir type


« as

Facial hair

Glasses            Use
                                          Complexion



                                          Accent

Number of Pages

Dated              280489                                 N FARTHING PC1977 Signed


          NIGEL CHARLES FARTHING                       PC 1977 SERIAL ONE



          My duty at the Sheffield Wednesday FC Football Ground began at
          9.00 am (0900) on the Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489).     I was on
          serial 1, the duty being to police the perimeter track surrounding the

          pitch.    My position on the track was in front of the South Stand

          approximately 10 yards (Ten yards) from Gate 1 at the Spion Kop. After

          briefing etc I commenced duty at that position at about 11.45 am (1145),

          and spectators began entering the ground at about noon (1200).     I
          distinctly remember that the Spion Kop and South Stand, both to house

          Nottingham Forrest supporters, were being filled a lot quicker than

          the stands for the Liverpool spectators.     Even at around 2.20 pm

          (1420) to 2.30 pm (1430), there were still relatively few Liverpool

          fans in the ground compared to the opposite side of the ground, which
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 S879

was virtually full with Forest fans. However, as is usual, the

section at the Lappings Lane end immediately behind the goal was

virtually full this time - In the six years I have been working

football matches at Hillsborough I would say that this has always

been the most favourite position for the fans occupying those

terraces.    There was still plenty of room in the sections at either

sida of this central pen, and also in the raised section between the

Leppings Lane terraces and the North Stand, which is usually left

"starile".

At about 2.30 pm (1430), I was directed by Sergeant CHAPMAN to patrol

the part of the track immediately in front of the West Stand and

Leppings Lane Terraces in order to relieve officers at the end who

wera to meal.    The terraces were continually "filling up" with fans.
A lot of people appeared to be still trying to enter the terraces via
the tunnel, because there were a lot of people climbing over the

partition fencing into the winged terracing, which still had a lot

of rocm.     I can remember that children and teenagers were in the main

occupying the front positioning behind the goals. At this time, the

Livarpool supporters within the ground were in good humour.
At about 2.55 pm (1455), just prior to the teams entering onto the

pitch, I returned to my original position in front of the South

Stand. Most of the noise in the ground was being made by the Forest

fans, who were drowning out the singing of their opposition, simply

due to the fact that there were obviously many more Notts Forest

fans in the ground. At this time there was still a fair bit of room
in the North and West Stands, and in the Leppings Lane Terraces.

When the game started, the atmosphere was charged.     During the first

few minutes I was piaying attention to the Nottingham supporters in

front of my position, and, therefore, did not see what was happening

at the West Side of the ground.


                                                                           3347
                                                                  PAGE
                                                                  S879

After about five minutes I remember that a Liverpool player had a

shot which hit the crossbar of the Nottingham goal, and when Forest

began attacking immediately after this, that is when I first noticed

the Liverpool fans climbing the fencing, onto the perimeter track and

the pitch.   No more than one minute later, I saw a Police Officer, of

at least Inspector rank, run onto the pitch towards the referee.       I

then realised that something serious was happening and, as I did not
have a radio, I assumed some sort of crowd trouble. As this was

happening the Forest fans were obviously angered and one youth, a

Notts Forest supporter c    a   l    l   e   d    o   f
                                Leicestershire, jumped onto the

perimeter track and started shouting. With the aid of PC2046
HOLMES, I escorted         to the Police Room where his details were

obtained and he was then ejected from the ground by the usual

procedure, this would have taken no longer than 5 minutes.   Under

normal circumstances I would have charged         with an offence.         In

my opinion, he had used threatening words and behaviour towards the

Liverpool fans, and he had been drinking, but as it appeared to me

then that the pitch was being invaded, I thought it better to deal

with         quickly and return to my position where I would have been

of further assistance. PC HOLMES had a radio with him and when I

asked him if he knew what was happening, I remember him saying that

he didn't know or he wasn't sure.   I then returned to my duty on the

perimeter track and, at this time, being totally unaware of the

severity of the incident at the opposite end of the ground, I

strongly believed that my job was to prevent the hooligan element

within the Nottingham contingent from entering onto the pitch.

Obviously, they were totally ignorant of the facts and, at this time,

there was much abusive chanting and shouting from many people.     I

then realised it was serious because of several things.   Firstly,


                                                                                3348
                                                                 PAGE     4
                                                                 S879

people being carried away from the Liverpool goal - Policeman

attempting to resuscitate people - youths tearing down advertisement

boardings around the pitch to use as stretchers - rumours spreading

from officers, near my position, who had radios - I assisted ball boys

in tearing down the advertisement boards near my position, but, due

to the taunting and abuse from the Forest fans, I decided to remain

in my position (still to prevent the minority of those fans who were
either stupid or aware of what was happening but chose to ignore) as

I feared crowd trouble.   This decision turned out to be correct

because, at one stage, a group of about 50 Liverpool fans charged at

the Forest end - I am not ashamed to say that I became quite

scared.   I do not believe that this was because of "wanton violence",
I think that these people were obviously angered and frustrated and

the chanting was not helping matters.   I (ref 1977) stopped 3 or 4
youths, who I simply re-directed back to the Liverpool end, after

strongly advising them.   But one youth of about 16 years of age
called                Ercm Merseyside), whom I had to "rugby tackle" in

order to stop reaching the Forest Kop, was absolutely hysterical and
crying heavily. When I spoke to him, he stated that he had been

looking for a 12 year old friend of his whom he had lost due to the
crush.    I therefore talked to him in an attempt to calm him and

reassured him that we would find his mate.    I thought that the best

course of action would be to take him to the Police Room or the
Gymnasium in order to obtain details which could be passed via

personal radio and tarrnoy but, when we reached that area immediately

behind the North Stand, I then realised that the situation was more

severe than I had initially anticipated. I was unaware that anybody

had died and, when I saw the large numbers of dead and seriously

injured laid out, I went totally numb - I turned cold and was totally
speechless.    The young lad with me then became hysterical again and


                                                                              3349
this brought roe back to my senses.   I re-directed        md myself

to a quiet area away from the dead and, after again calming him down,

obtained details from him regarding his friend.    I then waited around

the dead and injured and, thankfully, there was no-one answering the

description of the missing boy.           :hen decided to continue his

search amongst the Liverpool fans on the pitch and I informed him of

my position in the ground and told him that if he needed roe again to

look for roe. I did not see him again nor did I see the boy.    I did

not give anyone else details of the missing boy, and did not pass the

details via personal radio due to the large amount of "traffic" on it.

I then returned to my original position and was totally shocked and

sickened to hear a small number of people still singing and chanting
obscenities. Others were only concerned whether the match was going

to be played or not.   However, there were, thankfully, many people

ready to give any help they could, and I directed some people, who

claimed to be trained as doctors, nurses or simply first aid, to

positions where I thought they would be needed.
When people began to leave the stadium (at about 3.45 pm (1545)), I
was then directed, together with other officers, to prevent people

from entering the players' tunnel and the South Stand, where there

were still some "official looking people". Many of these fans had

obviously been drinking and some were drunk (about 10 that I saw).

There were two men in particular who were having great difficulty in

standing up.   They did not appear injured, just drunk. A lot of
these people were shouting and swearing at myself and other officers,

but were simply strongly advised.     I can remember a youth, who was

only about 5'4(Five feet four inches) tall. He was probably 16/17

years of age but looked much younger.    He was very abusive to a couple
of officers whom I don't know. When they advised him, he spat at one

and then became violent towards him - ie kicking and throwing punches
                                                                 PAGE     6
                                                                 S879

at him.   It took two other officers to restrain him, however, he

continued kicking out and throwing punches.    He was then led away by a

few other Merseysiders who I assumed to be associates.

Before being informed that the game had been abandoned, I saw
who I had earlier ejected.    I had a short conversation with him, and

he said that before the game he had been drinking in a pub with

friends and Liverpool fans.    He said that it had been good natured

and there had been no trouble.    He also told me that they had all

arranged to meet in the same pub after the match.

When all fans had left the ground, myself and many other officers were
sat in the North Stand awaiting to be debriefed.    It was obvious that

many policemen, as well as women, had been crying and it was obvious

that the vast majority were very upset.
Naturally, there was much talking about the events and I remember

PC Green, who had been on the perimeter track nearby me, stating

that, whilst attempting to resuscitate somebody, he was urinated on

by some unknown person.
I was eventually "stood down" at about 7 pm (1900).    I can say that

during the incident that I felt many different emotions:- Fear,

helplessness, numbness, guilt and most of all sickness (DISGUST) at

the attitude and behaviour of some fans and the press, none of whcm I

saw give any assistance.


I have policed many games now at Hillsborough including the two

previous semi-finals.     During this time I have worked in all areas

around the ground.




                                                      N FARTHING SIGNED

                                                                              3351
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   280489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:




                                         3352
Incident 102    260390 OP8064           DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT
                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER S876

                                                                            Station

Surname             COLLINS

Forenames           FENWICK

Age                 48                      Date of birth

Address             S. YORKS POLICE
                    HAMMERTON RD PSTN

Occupation          POL PC2387

Telephone

IC                  Height                  Build

Hair colour
Jteir type

Eyes                                        Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses             Use                     Accent

Number of Pages

Dated               030589                                  F COLLINS PC2387 Signed


          On Saturday, 15 April 1989 (150489) I commenced duty 10am
          (1000) working football duty at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground on

          the occasion of the FA Cup Semi Final between Liverpool and Nottingham

          Forest.    I was detailed duty on Serial 1 engaged in the perimeter

          track. My specific duty was in front of the uncovered seats halfway

          between the players tunnel and the West Stand.        Sgt. CHAPMAN was in

          charge of the serial and I was not in possession of a radio.

          I was stood near to a television camera when at about 2.30 pm (1430)

          the cameraman conrrtented on how empty was the part of the ground

          allocated to the Liverpool supportrers at that time.

          The game had just started when I noticed that supporters behind the
          goal at the Leppings Lane end of the ground were trying to climb over

          the fence.      I could see Police officers helping the supporters onto

          the field at that end of the ground.       Suddenly there were hundreds of
                                                                         PAGE
                                                                         S876

        supporters on the pitch.   I tried to help the supporters off the

        pitch but due to the amount that was impossible.   Most of the

        supporters I came into contact with were aggressive and tried to get
        amongst the Nottingham supporters who were sat in the uncovered seats

        and consequently had to be advised and on occasions restrained.     Due

        to the amount of Liverpool supporters on the pitch and the attitude

        of most of them I was fearful of a confrontation with the Nottingham

        supporters in the uncovered seats.   It was clear that many of the

        Liverpool supporters had been drinking and many wanted to fight.

        It was some time before the enormity of the incident was realised and

        my feelings about most of the supporters I came into contact with is

        that I would compare them with enraged animals.    I am sure that they

        must have been aware that a major incident had occurred and did very

        little to help the Police and in many cases added to the problems.



                                                             F COLLINS SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

    ICERS SIGNATURE:
END OF REPORT
                                                                       STATION

               ANDREA
               MARSDEN
ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:    POL PC3151


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 190589                                               A MARSDEN (SIGNED)



       At 0945 am (0945) on Saturday, 15th April 1989, (150489) I conmenced

       duty at the Hillsborough Football Ground, briefing commenced at 1000
       am (1000) in the North Stand, conducted by Chief Superintendent

       DUCKENFIELD, and other senior officers.     I was under the supervision

       of PS CHAPMAN serial one which covered the track area of the ground.

       After completion of the briefing I took up position on the track under

       the North Stand near to the West Stand, Leppings Lane end.     Usually I

       always work the track below the West Stand but for sane reason I
       stayed at the North Stand on this particular match.     I then cortmenced

       patrol around the track area noticing a few Liverpool fans were

       already within the central pen of the West Stand.     The Spion Kop was

        also beginning to get a trickle of Nottingham Forest fans in. At

       approximately 1.45 pm (1345) I went to the gymnasium on direction of
       PS CHAPMAN for a hot meal.     I returned about 2.15pm (1415) to see that
        the Spion Kop was almost full with Nottingham Forest fans, as I walked

       past the first gate of the Kop I was called back by several Liverpool

           fans requesting that I escort them to the West Stand so that they

        could be with their own side.    I asked them where there ticket
MARSDEN              ANDREA                                                  2


allocation was for within the ground, they stated the Spion Kop.     I

refused than stating that they should stand to the left of the Kop in

a partitioned area set aside for Liverpool fans, approximately twenty

Liverpool fans came to ask the same question whilst I was speaking to

this particular youth, again they were all refused.     I told them to

return to their places, they then became abusive and I walked away.       I
tock up my position around the track and remained there awaiting kick

off.   I could see that all areas of the ground were full apart frcm

the extreme pens situated in the West Stand where Liverpool

supporters were, but I did not tend to take much notice as I

concentrated on the North Stand where I was stood.    The crowd was very
noisy, chanting and singing and I could not hear any radio

tranmissions whatsoever.   At approximately 2. 50 pm (1450) the
Liverpool footballers came out onto the pitch, again I did not take

any notice of the pitch area only the North Stand where I was. As

kick off took place I saw Liverpool fans climbing over the fencing

from the central pen in the lower West Stand into the extreme pens.
The central pen now looked overcrowded and I could see that there was

still room in the outer areas.   I again did not give it a second

thought and carried on with my own duties.At 3.05/6 pm (1505) (1506) I

was aware of Police Officers coming onto the pitch and could see

Liverpool fans from the West Stand spilling onto the pitch.    I

irrcrediately thought that Nottingham Forest fans had managed to get

into the West Stand and that fighting was taking place and that Police

Officers were bringing them out to transfer them to the Spion Kop.       I

still could hear no radio transmissions taking place.     I remember an

announcement being made on the tannoy by Police Constable RYAN in the
control box but I couldn't hear any of it due to the noise and mayhem

on the pitch.   Nottingham Forest fans were chanting towards the West
MAFSDEN                ANDREA                                               3


Stand, it became obvious from watching that there was a major problem

with overcrowding and fans were now straying onto the pitch area where

the match was taking place, I saw a senior officer run onto the pitch

and take hold of the referees arm and obviously ask for play to be

stopped.    This he did and the footballers ran up the players tunnel.
I then saw a young man with his arm totally broken as though it had

been embedded around the steel barriers within the pen. He was taken

by a St. John Ambulanceman towards the gym area.     It then struck me

that not only was there overcrowding but casualties as well.     Still

there was no conxnand or none heard as to what we as police officers

should be doing at this stage.     I then saw hoardings being ripped from
around the track by both police and football fans, casualties were

being carried on these hoardings which were being used as stretchers

towards the gymnasium area. There were hundreds of police and fans on

the pitch but still no instructions were made and it was a case of

doing what everyone thought they should at the time.     I tried to calm

drunken Liverpool fans down who had come to the front of the North
Stand in order to jump over onto the pitch, I was explaining that
there was enough problems at the moment and they would only contribute

to that further by going onto the pitch, this they ignored and became

very abusive    and I expected getting assaulted at this stage by them so

I left them and walked up to the West Stand area to see if I could

help anyone.      As I approached I saw a drunken Liverpool youth run

down towards     theSpion Kop, scarf in hand and entice them.   There was

a lot of shouting and abuse going off around the pitch area by all

concerned and I remember thinking that besides trying to deal with a

major incident there was going to be a pitch invasion and a full scale

riot.     I saw Police Officers and fans together carrying people on

hoardings and officers carrying out mouth to mouth as were St John's
MARSDEN                ANDREA                                             4


Ambulancemen/Women and fans.    I saw people laid on the floor with

coats/jumpers over their heads and it only then struck me that a major

disaster had happened.    I helped injured people to the gym area, a

woman who was frantically looking for her husband came and grabbed

hold of me and begged me to look for her husband with her which I did

and we eventually found him safe and well at the gym area.    She

thanked and hugged me and they went on their way. Whilst at the gym

area I started together with another policewoman obtaining names and

addresses, phone numbers if possible of casualties being transported

to hospital by ambulance so that some reference could be made to
people enquiring about relatives/friends. After a short while I'm not

sure of the time I went into the gymnasium area and saw the extent of

what happened, dead bodies were beginning to be laid in rows into seme

type of order if that was possible. A Detective Sergeant 724 HALUDWS

approached me whilst in the gym and requested I follow him, he then

identified to me the body of Eric HUGHES I was then told to stand by

with the body and that I would be dealing with this sudden death. I
then remained in the gym all evening together with other officers

until there were eventually 95 bodies in this area, identification of

the deceased was talcing place all through the night but no relatives

attended to identify Eric HUOffiS that evening so at around 0445 am

(0445) on Sunday, 16 April 1989 (160489), a decision was made for all

bodies to be transported to the Medico Legal Centre.    I then escorted
the body of Mr. HUOffiS by ambulance to the mortuary together with

all his possessions.     The body was laid out by CID officers and the

relevant paperwork completed as in a normal sudden death.     At

approximately 0515 am     (0515) that date I retired frcm duty.
        MARSDEN          ANDREA                             5


                                         A.MARSDEN SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   190589
WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                3359
Incident 102     260390 OP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                       STATEMENT NUMBER S655A
                                                                        Station

Surname          HANSON

Forenames        KEVIN MICHAEL

Age              29                     Date of birth

Address


Occupation       POL PC2348
Telephone

IC               Height                 Build
Hair colour

  ir type


« es

Facial hair
Glasses          Use
                                        Complexion



                                        Accent

Number of Pages 7

Dated             100589                                       K M HANSON Signed


          My full name is Kevin Michael HANSON, I am 29 years of age, married

          eight years, with two young children.    I have been a Police Constable
          for five years, during which I have served throughout at Hammerton
          Road Police Station. At present I am working as a Community Constable

          in the Brocmhall area of the city.   Previously I have worked in the

          Broomhall area and the first three years of my service with 'B' group

          at Hammerton Road.
          Throughout my five years service, I have regularly attended football

          matches at Hillsborough, Bramall Lane, Barnsley and Doncaster.      I
          consider myself to be well accustomed to every public order situation

          which arises at most football matches.    Most of my experience with

          public order has been obtained at Hillsborough.    I have previously

          attended at two other FA cup semi-finals.    I have officiated at
          various parts of the ground and therefore know problems that can arise
                                                                   PAGE    2
                                                                   S655A

in different areas during a football match.
The following account of the events which took place on the above date

is of a personal nature.     In no way do I wish to 'point the finger' at

anyone.     However, I have put pen to paper and write the following

words as I saw the terrible tragedy with my own eyes.



            it's difficult to put a true perspective on the events of

that day.

At 9.45 am (0945) the day in question, I paraded for duty at the
Hillsborough Ground, North Stand.     It was a glorious sunny day and the

hundreds of other officers on duty were in a happy, expectant mood.        I

have always enjoyed working on big occasions like this and enjoy the
carnival mood the semi-final brings.     I can remember looking back up

the stand seeing fellow officers laughing and joking.    None of us

aware of the disaster that was lurking around, a time bomb ready to

explode.

Shortly after Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, who I had not met

previously officiated the initial briefing.     The briefing was the
normal speech we get at all football matches, along with other

'goodies' one can expect at a football match of this scale.     I sat and

listened to what was being preached and knew already that I was to be

allocated to serial no 1., the perimeter track.     This duty I have

performed on several occasions over the last two years.     I am

therefore very experienced and knowledgable of my duties and
requirements.     I always tried to position myself in front of the North

Stand approximately 20 yards east of gate number 7. After the
briefing I ate a small packed meal in the North Stand, together with

Police Constables BROOKES, SMITH, ILLINGWORTH, COOKSQN, WPC's

and MARSDEN. We sat chatting and discussing various things to pass

the time quickly. After meal we took different positions on the
                                                                 PAGE    3
                                                                 S655A

perimeter track.   I always stand talking to Police Constable BROOKES

before the match, as he is positioned next to me, some 20 yards down

the North Stand.
About 12.30 pm (1230) the first supporters came into the ground at

Leppings Lane terraces.   Police Constables SMITH and ILLINGWORTH were

positioned directly in front of gates 4 and 5 respectively.    The
Leppings Lane and North Stands would contain the Liverpool supporters.

Police Constables BROOKES and myself remained in front of the North

Stand talking.
Around about 1 pm (1330) Police Constable ILLINGWORTH came over to

my position and asked if I could keep an eye on his gate.     I agreed to
do this and took up his position.   There were plenty of officers in

front of the North Stand so I didn't mind.    By this time a steady
stream of Liverpool supporters had congregated behind the goal in the

bottom standing terraces.   I had built up a rapport with several fans

and stood talking to them. They were in high spirits and all

convinced their passage to the final was awaiting them. The fans
generally were impeccable in their behaviour.    It was a pleasure to

work in that section of the ground.   At seme stage in the proceedings

I was joined by Police Constable HELLIWELL.
About 1.45 pm (1345) I realised that I had not taken my allocated

meal and together with Police Constable BROOKES, I went to obtain my

meal ticket from Police Sergeant CHAPMAN at the players tunnel. We
then proceeded to the West Yorkshire canteen wagon situated behind the

North Stand next to the gymnasium. When we got there, we were told

that the canteen had shut for 20 minutes. We therefore went back to

our original positions in front of the North Stand.

About 2.20 pm (1420) Police Constable BROOKES went for his meal
while I covered both our positions.   By now the ground was filling up

nicely. I thought at the time though there was still a lot of people
                                                                   PAGE     4
                                                                   S655A

yet to come in and time was getting on. About 2.45 pm (1445)

Police Constable BROOKES returned and I went for a quick bite to eat.

I returned shortly before kick off to my position.    By now the

atmosphere was electric. As I walked back to my position, the game

started. When I arrived at my point I stood facing the crowd. Then

about six youths jumped over the concrete wall and into the perimeter

track. At first I was astonished.     I managed to grab hold of one

youth.   I asked him if he had a ticket which he hadn't, so I escorted

him down the perimeter track towards the Police Room.    I took his

details and ejected him out of the ground via '0' gate situated on

Penistone Road, near the Spion Kop. As I turned to go back onto the

track, I saw several Police Officers run from the gymnasium onto the

perimeter track.   I could hear garbled messages over my personal radio

to the effect that there was some trouble at the Leppings Lane end.         I

quickly ran after them onto the track. As I entered the ground

between the Spion Kop and North Stand I looked down to the Leppings
Lane end.   I could see several Police Officers stood between gates 4

and 5 and what appeared to me to be a crowd spillage or some sort of

pitch invasion.    I ran up the track beside the North Stand, the

football match still continuing.    I took up my original position in

front of the North Stand as I thought the situation behind the goal in

the Leppings Lane terraces was policed adequately.    I thought it best
to stand fast where I was with my serial and make sure no one else

came over from the North Stand.
At this point I didn't realise the extent of the situation developing.

Having already ejected one person, I thought that the spillage behind

the goal was due to other idiotic fans climbing over the fencing.       I

didn't see much else that was happening behind me as I was facing the
supporters in the North Stand.     I think play was stopped by now.

The crowd in the North Stand were up out of their seats and seemed to
                                                                 PAGE      5
                                                                 S655A

be shouting and pointing over to the Leppings Lane terraces.     Some

were booing, gesticulating to the fans behind the goal.    Probably

because they thought, like I did, it was seme sort of crowd invasion.

They appeared to be incensed and the situation started to get out of

hand. Supporters jumped over from the North Stand and onto the

perimeter track.   It was at this stage I looked behind me and saw

Liverpool supporters being assisted over the fencing by Police

officers.

Several appeared to be injured.    They all appeared to be walking,
holding their stomachs and lower regions.    I then became aware that

something serious was happening and that people were injured.     It

became chaos.   I assisted several injured people to the advertising

hoardings in front of the North Stand. A lot were in shock and

crying. The best I could do was sit them down to make them comfortable.

I lost count of the number of people that come over to me but it must

have been 50 or more.    There was a problem that a lot of uninjured
people were wandering around the pitch making it difficult to assist

those who needed treatment or first aid.    I can remember feeling very

angry towards people just stood talking, lighting up cigarettes on the

pitch.   I must have told hundreds to move away and they would

ignore me.   They even ignored injured people.   During the chaos I

helped to stretcher off several injured youths using advertising
hoardings for stretchers.    These we placed near the Spion Kop comer

flag near to the North Stand.     I went back and forth several times
assisted by supporters.     They were magnificent in getting the injured

away from the trouble.    On one stretcher run I teamed up with Police

Constable BROOKES and when we got to the Spion Kop comer flag I think
we asked a Special Constable to reassure him until medical help came.

He didn't look too bad although he couldn't move his legs. As I

turned to go back to the Leppings Lane end I heard hysterical
                                                                    PAGE        6
                                                                    S655A

screaming from a woman knelt over a youth lying nearby.       He looked

seriously injured, very ashen faced and motionless.       He was lying on

his back and didn't appear to be breathing.      I grabbed hold of Police

Constable BROOKES who was still with the injured lad and the Special

Constable. We went back to the ashen faced youth.       I noticed he wasn't

breathing and I could not feel his pulse. We pulled him onto his side

and made sure his air passage was clear. We then put him onto his

back again and Police Constable BROOKES gave heart massage whilst I

gave him the kiss of life.




                            At this stage a wonan appeared and knelt

down beside me. She said "Let me help, I'm a Staff Nurse".        At this

she took charge and continued to give heart massage whilst I continued

to give mouth to mouth.
                                                             the staff

nurse was great, she encouraged all of us to continue.       I can remember

feeling the youth's body and thinking "It's still warm, he can't be

dead", we continued what appeared at the time to be an eternity, but

to no avail.    The staff nurse finally stopped pumping, she said, "He's

dead, he's gone". The staff nurse then got up and went . I never saw
her again.     I presume she went to help others.    I can remember feeling

very angry, I was totally shattered.     I shook the body and I can

remember saying, "You bastard, you bastard".        I don't know why, I

probably just had to let go.     I failed him.   I was really angry

towards him. There he was just lying there, I don't know what I

really felt.
Anyhow, Police Constables: Andy and myself stretchered this youth off

the pitch. As we carried him someone put something over his face.           I

can remember Andy getting annoyed and pulled it off.        He was right as
                                                                           PAGE    7
                                                                           S655A

       well, we didn't want the other supporters to think he was dead. To

       them he was just another injured person being carried off. We took

       him into the gymnasium and there we were greeted by other dead bodies.

       Rows of them with stunned Policemen stood over them like black crows.

       Othars were lying down or sitting down. We placed our body into one

       of the rows. Andy then took a body off a Special who had just cone

        in. He was in no fit state to deal with it. The rest was pretty non-

        important. We documented the bodies etc, we seaned to stand over them

        for hours until we were told to go to another part of the gymnasium.

        I found 'my' youth's details on some personal papers.    I'll never

        forget his name:- DAVID WILLIAM BIRTLE, DOB 060566 (06051966),
                                STOKE ON TRENT, STAFFS, or his face, NEVER.

        It's quite ironic I thought that David would have been 23 years this

        next month.    His birthday was to be                      - life can be

        full of daft little things like that, 23 years, what a waste.

        After that I sat in the gymnasium with the other Police Officers

        waiting hours and hours to get them identified and took down to the

        mortuary.     The atmosphere was obviously strained. We sat around in

        little groups and kept going over and over what happened. We all had

        our own little stories to tell.    It helped quite a lot talking
        together. We even managed to laugh, let's face it's better than

        crying. As a Police Officer you get used to switching off your

        emotions - you have a job to do and you do it. That's what all the

        training and years of experience drums into you. You don't forget you

        just push it aside - life goes on.
        I went off duty at 2.00 am (0200) the next morning.




                                                      K M HANSON PC2348 SIGNED

^^ATEMENT TAKEN

                                                                                       3366
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE;   100589

j^4E;SS TO SIGNATURE:
OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                         3367
Incident 102      260390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT
                                                      STATEMENT NUMBER S705B

                                                                       Station

Surname            BROOKES
Forenames          ANDREW JOHN

Age                                      Date of birth
Address


Occupation         POL PC1842

Telephone

IC                 Height                Build
Hair colour

  ir type


« es

Facial hair

Glasses            Use
                                         Complexion



                                        Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                        A J BROOKES Signed


          Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) serial 1, trackside, Sgt CHAPMAN.

          9.00 (0900)
          On duty at Bolsover Section Station.

          9.30 (0930)
          Parade at Hillsborough.

          9.45 (0945)
          Briefing by Chief Supt DUCKENFIELD.

          Briefing was similar to that given at previous semi-finals. Chief

          Supt DUCKENFIELD stated that there was no provision for the kick off

          to be delayed.

          1 0.10 ( 1010 )

          First meal.

          11.30 (1130)
          Onto track side, ray position was North Stand, 20 yds frcm the lappings

                                                                                    3368
                                                                 PAGE    2
                                                                 S705B

Lana end.

11.50 (1150)

First few fans trickle into ground.

2.00 (1400)

Second meal.   I went to get meal tickets frcm PS CHAPMAN at players'

tunnel and he was in conversation with a Club Official.   I heard that

at 2.00 p.m. (1400) there were only 12,000 fans in the ground.    I told

this to one of ray colleagues at meal.
2.20 (1420)

Meal taken - canteen shut at 2.00 p.m. (1400)

2.40 (1440)

Resume position. At this time Kop appeared full, Leppings Lane centre

sections both full and steps still visible in the comer sections,
first few fans climbing up into West Stand but I thought this was to

get a better view.

2.45 (1445)
Radio message to send two more horses up to Leppings Lane end. The

crowd was massing outside.

2.50 (1450)
Man/ fans climbing into West Stand - hears Supt MARSHALL on the radio

saying how big the crowd was.   It appeared to me that the centre

section was now full and the step® were still visible in the comer

sections.

2.55 (1455)
Liverpool team come onto the pitch, PC BUXTON outside at leppings Lane
end asks for kick off to be put back, he says "You'll have to put it

back." As the Notts Forest team take to the pitch I looked at the

main stand clock, it was just gone 2.56 (1456), I thought they were

late, the answer to PC BUXTON was "The match will go ahead, one of the

teams is already on the pitch." Supt MARSHALL says that a gate must
                                                                   PAGE    3
                                                                   S705B

be opened to prevent fatalities outside the ground.

2.58 (1458)
Fans start coming out of the North Stand onto the track from the first

tunnel waving tickets asking where their seats are.    I put them back

into the stand and tell them to walk beneath and find the

appropriate tunnel.    More fans cone out as game kicks off, 3.00

(1500), fans at Leppings Lane end start to come over fence behind

the goal; Supporters in North Stand are shouting "Shitty Ground,

Shitty Ground," etc. as more pour over the fences. Control give

message re gates going to be opened.    Permission given to open gates

to North Stand.    Then a large roar behind me (apparently Peter

BEARDSLEY had hit the cross bar) still trying to get fans into stand.
Impossible now so just trying to get them to sit on the track, seme

are walking around frcun Leppings Lane end.

3.05 (1505)
Play is just behind me and I turn and see ball go for a Notts Forest

corner.   I then realise that there is a Policeman on the pitch, by now

fans spilling onto pitch behind the goal.

3.06 (1506)
Match stops.
Man frcun the stand grabs me and says he can see his son in the melee,

I take him onto the pitch and we find him and return him to the side

of the pitch.     I try to get dazed and winded fans to sit at the side

of the pitch but few respond.
A press cameraman grabs me and shows me a man laid face down in the

turf, I ask him what hurts and he said his back so I took his pulse -

strong - and tried to get him to move his toes. He smelt of alcohol.

I asked how much he had drunk and he said two or three pints. Seme

fans brought a board but as the man had hurt his back I didn't want

him moved.     Soon an ambulance man (a Liverpool fan not on duty)
                                                                       PAGE     4
                                                                       S705B

       checked the man and said we could move him, some fans were there

        instantly with another board. Vfe carried the man at a run to the

       bottom comer of the pitch.   We put him down and looked to our left

       where a man on a board looked dead. We left the other man and PC

       HANSON (2348) gave mouth to mouth as I pushed his chest and tried to

                                                      A nurse - Notts Forest

        fan not on duty - tried but to no avail and we carried the body behind

       the North Stand and into the gym to get it out of the public view.

       Ones inside I saw at least 30 other bodies already laid out. Three

       Liverpool fans and a tall Special Constable carried a body (body no

       48) - Gary COLLIER, 22 years - and put it next to me.    I took it off

       the special and dealt with the sudden death.

       Sunday (160489), 5.00 a.m. (0500)

       Off duty Medico Legal.

                                                           A J BROOKES SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME             DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE

      REPORT
Incident 102     260390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT
                                                       STATEMENT NUMBER S3489
                                                                        Station

Surname           TATTERSHALL

Forenames         STEVEN ARTHUR

Age                                       Date of birth

Address           S YORKSHIRE POLICE
                  WEST BAR PSTN

Occupation        POL PS915

Telephone

IC                Height                  Build

Hair colour

  ir type


« L
Facial hair

Glasses           Use
                                          Complexion



                                          Accent

Number of Pages
Dated             060589                             S A TATTERSHALL PS915 Signed


          At 8 am (0800), 15 April 1989 (150489), I commenced duty at West

          Bar Police Station for briefing in relation to the FA Cup Semi

          Final between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.
          Phase 1 of my serial's (11) duty ccmmenced about 9.30 am (0930) at the

          Midland Station, Sheaf Street. We were specifically detailed to

          supervise the arrival of Nottingham Forest football supporters
          travelling by rail and their subsequent escort by PSV to Hillsborough.

          The early arrivals were very orderly, although in general spirits were

          high. The later the arrivals, the higher the spirits.     It was
          apparent that alcohol was a major influence towards this.    I believe I

          travelled on the last PSV escorting the Forest supporters. These were

          under the influence of alcohol, shouting and swearing. We increased

          the number of Police Officers on this escort to prevent trouble.

          However, this did not stop them singing obscenities and there was
                                                                    PAGE      2
                                                                    S3489

a stream of urine flowing from the upper deck of the PSV.

At that time we didn't have enough Policemen to police effectively and

safely. Although Phase 1 was successful a large number of supporters

went to Hillsborough under the influence of alcohol.

I arrived at Hillsborough about 2.30 pn (1430) and immediately went to

the gymnasium to regroup my serial. They were all present.         However,

4 of the Officers were completing arrest reports. I was issued with'

meal tickets and obtained a meal.    On completion serial sergeants were

called to the reception desk in the gymnasium.    I reported that

because of arrests my serial was currently reduced to 3 PC's and

myself.   I was told to remain on standby.
A few minutes later serial sergeants were again called to the

reception desk.    I informed an Inspector the numbers on my serial.        He

told me to go to the Leppings Lane straight away.      I asked him outside

or inside.    He told me to go around on the track.      It wasa

bit vague but I thought I would be met by an Inspector in Charge of

the ground.
I informed serial members engaged in arrest reports that I was going

to the Leppings Lane.    I switched my radio to the match channel and

walked towards the Leppings Lane.    I was with PC 269 BROOMHEAD,

PC 22 FLETCHER and PC 1785 CHEETHAM.
I could see that the two teams were warming up on       the pitch. Aswe

walked down the track the atmosphere was electric       and thenoise

deafening.    I couldn't hear a thing. When I reached the leppings Lane

end I walked towards the middle where I met briefly with PS 993. We

carmented on the middle of the terrace section.       I could see that

it was packed.    Too packed.   People were scaling the perimeter fence.

The fence was bowing with pressure and the people at the front were

screaming for help, shouting for the gates to be opened.       I was
completely surprised by this because the terracing to the right of me
                                                                   PAGE      3
                                                                   S3489

was far from full.     I could see the terracing steps.   It seemed

ludicrous.

I want towards the safety gate and I think someone opened it just in

front of me.     It seemed that we should allow some in the middle

section into the right hand section. One of the first people out, a

man in his late teens, came screaming towards me.      He shouted that he

had been screaming for the gate to be opened and a police officer had

refused.     He had the number written on his hand. He screamed that

people were being killed.     I told him to get off the pitch so I could

get others out.     I continued to filter people out towards the right

hand terrace.    They were refusing to go in and stayed on the

perimeter.     I was looking round for people to help me but I had

already become detached from my serial.

I noticed that several people were coming out injured as a result of

the crush.     St Johns Ambulancemen were getting involved with these.      I

still tried to filter people from the middle towards the right.

Everyone seemed to have a go at me.     Shouting abuse.   I was getting

embroiled in argument after argument.       I still didn't know anything of

the tragedy.     I heard nothing on the radio.    I believed we were still

trying to prevent a pitch invasion.     The numbers of police were

increasing but the situation was getting out of hand. The crush

didn't seem to abate and the crowd were frantic.

There seemed to be loads spilling onto the pitch over the fence.        I

saw a young man on the pitch near the goals and a policeman running

onto the field.
The number of injured people coming from the terrace increased
rapidly.     I began helping the injured.    Sitting them on the pitch or

trying to get them assistance.     I can't remember how many I helped.       I
remember one chap who really worried me. He was unconscious but he

was breathing. A man asked me to help him.        I placed him in the
                                                                    PAGE         4
                                                                    S3489

recovery position with the help of an ambulanceman.        He said he would

be alright.     I left him when the other man came back.     I helped

another girl to the side of the pitch with an arm injury.       She was
extremely distraught. Whilst I was at the side of the pitch a young

man jumped from the stand. He had a brace on his teeth and was

screaming that it was our fault.     I told him we couldn't get people

out. I saw the ambulance on the pitch and went back towards the goals.

Several policeman were giving mouth to mouth. One man had his head

covered and was obviously dead.     I looked around and therewere others
covered.    I realised we had   a tragedy but not the enormity of it.

The fire brigade were there     and the fence was being pulled down.      I

saw sane youths with wooden     boards and we put a man on it. He was

about 35 years old and heavy. We ran across the pitch with him. He

was dead.     I left them at the Kop end of the pitch and went back

towards the Leppings Lane. The Forest supporters were taunting the

Liverpool end. A large number ran towards the Kop.         It looked nasty.

An Inspector shouted at me to get my men together.     I didn't know

where any of them were.     I saw sane other officers from West Bar and

we formed a line across half way. We were there for a few minutes

when a Chief Inspector told me to go outside onto the Leppings Lane.
I stood on the Leppings Lane while the Liverpool crowd dispersed.

Most of the crowd were shocked, sane were distraught, others were

nasty and abusive. We stood there mainly in silence and took the

flak.   I don't know how long I stood there but that is where I heard

the first messages over the radio.
When the crowd had dispersed I went into the ground looking for the
remnants of my serial.     I found PC CHEETHAM in the gymnasium.        He was

dealing with a body.     I became aware how big the tragedy was.        The

other members of my serial were outside the ground completing the

escort of the Forest fans back to the Midland Station.
                                                          PAGE     5
                                                          S3489


                                    S A TATTERSHALL PS915 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                (




                                                                       3376
Incident 102      260390 OP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT
                                                      STATEMENT NUMBER S1092

                                                                         Station

Surname           MERCER

Forenames         STEPHEN JOHN

Age                                      Date of birth

Address           El HACKENTHORPE


Occupation        POL PC10
Telephone

IC                Height                 Build

Hair colour

  ir type


« es

Facial hair

Glasses           Use
                                         Complexion


                                         Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                     S.J.MERCER 10 Signed


          I camnenced duty at 0830 hours on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) at
          'El', Hackenthorpe, where I joined colleagues to form serial 13, under

          the direct cortrnand of Sergeant 2001 BURMAN. We arrived as a serial

          at Hillsborough football ground at 0930, and attended the general
          briefing at 1000 given by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD. Ifeal time

          for our serial was set at 1500 hours and we were provided with a snack

          meal immediately following briefing. We made our way to the West
          Stand to take up our designated positions at 1115, in plenty of time

          before the opening of the ground to the public at 1200 noon.
          Together with another officer, I went to gangway U in the West Stand

          at the Leppings Lane end. Our position was to the left of the goal

          when looking at the pitch, almost directly above gate 5 in the

          perimeter fence.
          Our duties were to:
                                                                 PAGE     2
                                                                 S1092

1.       Stop fans climbing over the fence separating the North end

of the stand frcm the raised section of terracing (overlooking gate 6

and 7 in the perimeter fence).
2.       Prevent fans frcm throwing items frcm the stand onto the

pitch, or onto fans below.
3.        Supervise the use of the emergency gate situated at the

front comer of the North end of the West Stand (above gate 6 in the

perimeter fence). Two stewards were also near to the gate (one in

training).

At this time (and up to phase two) there were only eleven officers

(Serial 13 consisted of 12 officers, plus Sergeant, but was depleted
by one due to illness) in the West Stand, which has a capacity of

about three thousand five hundred. At phase two, we were to be

relieved by Serial 16 to go for meal (three o'clock) (1500).

The times listed thereafter are as accurate as I can make them, to the

best of my recollection, but I would emphasise that they are

approximations only.
1200     Ground opened to the public.
1345     Large numbers of Nottingham Forest supporters in their

          allocated enclosures, but only low numbers of Liverpool

          supporters, notably women and families.

1430     Still relatively low numbers of Liverpool supporters in

          ground.
1440     Visited by Sergeant BUFMAN who I had not seen since taking

          up position at 1115. Conment passed by me to him about

          the low numbers in the stand up until that time and the

          large numbers now entering the stand. Central terracing

             (rear of goal) and stand now substantially filled with

          supporters.    North and South ends of the terracing
          relatively empty.    Raised area of terracing to the North of
                                                       PAGE     3
                                                       S1092

the West Stand nearly full. Large numbers of youths

congregating near to the dividing fence, apparently with

the intention of climbing over.    Several aborted attempts

made.   Complaints made by female members of the crowd in that

section of youths urinating in the enclosure.    Several

youths seen at the rear of the raised terracing climbing

onto the fencing above the rear entrance tunnel and removing

the barbed wire.    Moving through the crowds at this time,

in an effort to stop those wishing to climb over the fence,

it was obvious that large numbers had been drinking, seme

heavily.
Looking down onto the terracing, it was obvious that the

centre sections were overcrowded.    Persons were climbing

over the fencing separating the pen at the rear of the right

hand side of the goal looking from the stand, to the pen

on the left hand side of the goal.The double row of fencing

which separates pens 4 and 5 form a gangway frcm the

entrance tunnel to a gate in the perimeter fence.

Officers were standing on the perimeter track supervising

those fans climbing and preventing them frcm climbing over

onto the track.
Fans begin climbing over onto the perimeter track and then
the gate in the pen behind the goal was opened and fans were

allowed to walk along the perimeter track and re-enter the

terracing via gate 6 as shown on plan, which is directly

below gangway U.
Crowd in West Stand stood up.


I went to barrier with Police Constable 2717 and looked down

on terracing.     I could see fans surging forward in the two
                                                              PAGE     4
                                                              S1092

       pens behind the goal.    Fans were now climbing over the

       perimeter fence onto the track, and over the fence separating

       the two pens (single fence). Large numbers of fans seemed to

       be crushed into the comers of those pens.
1504   Obvious that persons were being crushed at this time and fans

       were being assisted over the fence by Police Officers.

1505   Heavy surge of spectators towards the front of the terrace,

       but instead of the gap left in the crowd when fans sway

       forward, the space was immediately filled by other fans.       It
       was now obvious that there were serious problems in the pens,

       and more and more fans were spilling over the fences and

       onto the pitch.    Looking at them it was obvious that seme

       were injured.     More Police began to help at the fences and

       supporters in the stand were now helping those below up into

       the stand over the front of the balcony.
1506   Bolt croppers were requested and request acknowledged.
       Ambulance requested and acknowledged. Large numbers of
       spectators walking and being carried onto the pitch, seme

       lying still.    Numerous Officers now giving first aid.

1510   Further request for bolt croppers.    None forthcoming and

       fence tom down by hand by Police and spectators.
1511   Onto food bar area at rear of stand (upper level). Assist
       with injured passed up frcm terracing.     Three placed in

       recovery position, breathing, but unconscious. Ambulance

       requested by me. Assistance obtained frcm medically

       trained persons in crowd to stay with injured until arrival

       of ambulance.     Approached by doctor and together with Police

       Constable 2717, guided him down behind the Police box and

       made a path through the crowd and onto the pitch.     Returned

       to food bar area.


                                                                           3380
                                                                    PAGE    5
                                                                    S1092

Ref Z

1519      Approached by Inspector GRACE and told to join him in the

          stand to prevent fans causing damage. On arrival saw that
          fans were tearing down hoardings to use as stretchers, no

          action taken.

1522      Return to food bar area.    Injured now removed to ambulance.

          Joined by Police Constable 928 PARKIN.    Took up position at

          one of the aisles. Approached by literally hundreds of fans

          distressed and needing to know what to do. All they wanted
          was to be told what to do, as they were incapable of making

          decisions themselves. Advised them to leave ground quietly

          and make their way heme.
          On looking around the bar area I noticed a heap of discarded

          tabards which the stewards had been wearing.    On purposefully

          looking around the stand I realised that there were no

          stewards in sight.

????      Official announcement of match abandoned. Maintained station

          supervising fans leaving ground.    Large numbers in a

          truculent and abusive mood, seemingly caused by frustration.

          Mental note that it wouldn't take much to provoke a major

          public order incident.
7777
• • • •   West Stand cleared and serial reformed.    Stand searched for

          items left behind.    Negative result.   During this time I

          noticed two stewards taking tabards from under coats and

          putting them on again.     I spoke to
                          and told him what I had seen. He replied,

          "What do you expect them to do if they're going to get
          thumped." Heard radio message regarding number of places

          available in mortuaries and realised full scale of

          catastrophe.     Obtained details of remaining fans for
                                                                       PAGE      6
                                                                       S1092

                   purposes of taking statements.
        ????       Return to gymnasium for re-deployment and placed on standby

                   in North Stand.
                   During the time span of the disaster unfolding, I closely

                   monitored radio traffic. The only messages I heard were

                   those requesting assistance of one sort of another, and

                   where appropriate, their acknowledgements.

        1930       Off duty at 'El'.
        On the occasions which I have worked at the ground, I have often, but

        not always, worked the West Stand duty.



                                                         S J MERCER 10 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                     3382
                                                                         STATION

               ERIC
               HALL

ADDRESS        S YORKSHIRE POL
               SNIG HILL, SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE 3F BIRTH: 49

OCCUPATION:    POL PS690


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 080589                                           E. HALL PS690 (SIGNED)



          I am a Police Sergeant in the South Yorkshire Police, stationed at

          the Crown Court, Castle Street, Sheffield.

          At 7.40 am (0740) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I reported for

          special duty at West Bar Police Station for the football semi-final
          at Hillsborough. I was working serial 14 duties.   Between 10.0 am

          (1000) and 2.20 pm (1420) that day ray serial was located at the

          Midland Station escorting Liverpool supporters frcm the station
          precinct to public service vehicles nearby for conveying to the

          football ground.
          At 2.20 pm (1420) this day and date with officers frcm ray serial and

          other police officers at the Midland Station I accompanied the last of

          the Liverpool supporters that had arrived by train on a public service

          vehicle frcm the Midland Station to the football ground. We arrived
          at the Penistone Road North end of the ground at 2.55 pm (1455) that
          date and I reported to an inspector in the gymnasium. At that time we

          were on standby duty at the ground but ray serial was not ccmplete.

          At 3.03 pm (1503) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I was
          instructed by a senior officer to take ray serial inside the ground and
HALL                   ERIC                                                  2


report to the Leppings Lane end as spectators were invading the

pitch frcm the Leppings Lane Terrace.      I entered the ground frcm the
Spion Kop end alongside the North Stand and walked on the track in

front of the North Stand.      I could clearly see spectators climbing

over the perimeter fence of the Leppings Lane centre-north terrace and

entering the pitch area.      Some of these were then entering the North

Stand seating area. Many spectators were walking down the track in

front of the North Stand towards me. They complained of being pushed

and crushed. I instructed them all to sit down on the track in front

of the stand and then reported to a police Inspector nearby.      The

time was then 3.06pn (1506).
I then heard a roar from the crowd and saw spectators on the Leppings

Lana end lurch forward, but they did not go back.      There were screams

and cries for help.    The noise was deafening.     I moved towards the

back of the goal area.     Spectators many of them injured were being

pulled over the top of the perimeter fence.       Police Officers were

desperately trying to pull down the perimeter fence.       I could clearly
see spectators' faces jammed into the fence. Arms and legs were

everywhere and I could see people on the floor at the front of the

terrace.    I went towards the perimeter fence gate but could not get

near it. The gate suddenly opened and people spilled out onto the

pitch.     I assisted many of these onto the pitch area. Many were

badly injured.
With other officers I then went to the gate and yelled at spectators

to hold back and let us in to help them.      On entering the terrace

through the gate, I was then confronted by a further dividing fence

about 6 feet (6') high that ran from the front to the back of

the terrace.     Spectators passed injured parties over the fence to us.

The last person handed over to me was a young boy frcm the centre
HALL                 ERIC


south-stand area (Leppings Lane). On carrying him onto the pitch

area                                 I placed him on the playing area

and looked round for a medical team but none was available.    I

cleared his mouth and began to give him artificial respiration and

mouth to mouth resuscitation.     I was then joined by Police Constable

MACMANUS 'B' Division, South Yorkshire Police and a civilian

(unknown) who assisted me to try to revive him. This was done for a

period of over ten minutes.     During this time an ambulance pulled up

behind the goal and I shouted for oxygen on two occasions but was

told there was none available or it had all been used. A medical

officer then came to me and placed a oxygen mask over the youth's
face, but there was no response. Almost immediately a doctor

(unknown) came to me and checked his femoral artery and informed me

that he was dead.   I placed my police anorak over him.    I requested

spectators nearby to assist me and they bought a nearby hoarding and

with the help of the spectators the boy's body was removed to the

gymnasium.
On arrival at the gymnasium at 3.45 pm (1545) that day and date the

youth was certified dead by Doctor KIRBAN (Middlewood Hospital). I
then examined the body and could find no marks of violence other than

a graze on the forehead and a graze under the chin.     I was instructed

by a senior officer to remain with the body a complete a sudden

death report.
I described the youth at that time as male, 20 years, 5 feet 8 inches

(5'8") slim build, blue eyes, clean shaven, wearing navy blue/green/

white 'NIKE' long sleeved shirt, light blue jacket, brown corduroy

trousers, brown belt,                            white football socks.

He had in his possession a football ticket for the senu. final and a

coach receipt issued by Amberline Coaches No___        in the name of Mr
        HALL                 ERIC                                                  4


        TYRELL                        Runcorn.   Identification labels were

        attached to the body. The body was numbered No.36.

       At 12.50 am (0050) on Sunday 16th April 1989 (160489) I was present

       when the boy's father Francis TYRELL of                           Runcorn

        formally identified the youth to me as Kevin TYRELL, 15 years,

        19.6.73 (19061973) schoolboy of                       Runcorn.    The

       sudden death report was then completed in full.

       At 1.45 am (0145) on Sunday 16th April 1989 (160489) the body was

       conveyed to the public mortuary, Watery Street, Sheffield.   The body

       was examined again and there were no marks of violence.   The property

       and clothing were left with the body.

        I rang off duty at 2.45 am (0245) on Sunday 16th April 1989 (160489).
                                                         E HALL PS690 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE       PC6899 GOODYEAR 'M
Incident 102       260390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER S3335

                                                                         Station

 Surname           AKRED

 Forenames         LILLYAN
 Age                                       Date of birth

 Address           B1 ROYSTON


 Occupation        POL PC3198
 Telephone

 IC                Height                  Build

 Hair colour

Jteir type

^^es                                       Complexion

 Facial hair
 Glasses           Use                     Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated                                                      L AKRED PC3198 Signed


           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I cortroenced duty at 8am (0800) at

           Barnsley Police Station and was transported together with Sergeant

           SWIFT, Serial Sergeant, PCs HOOSON, TATTERSHALL, PHILLIPS, PACKER,
           MACKENZIE, COOPER and TAYLOR.   Taken to West Bar Police Station at 9am

           (0900) attended briefing in the gym at West Bar. After briefing,
           walked down to Midland Station, Sheffield to take up duties as Serial

           16, control of fans alighting frcm trains at station.   Fans divided

           into two exits frcm station.    Continued with these duties until
           approximately 2.30 pm (1430) when together with rest of Serial was

           transported to Hillsborough Ground by a public transport which had

           been laid on by South Yorkshire Passenger Transport.

           At approximately 2.45pm (1445) the bus went via the Lepping Lane end

           of the ground and at this time I noticed that the roadway and nearby

           adjacent roads were filled with a very large crowd of fans. This
                                                               PAGE      2
                                                               S3335

caused the bus to slow down, and I commented to other officers that

this seemed a very large crowd so near to the kick-off time.

Alighted from the bus on Penistone Road end and entered the ground via

the main Police access road.

Together with rest of the serial, went into the gymnasium and at this

time we were preparing to take our meal. We had only been in the gym

for a matter of one or two minutes when we were informed by Sergeant

SWIFT that we were required to go to the track in front of the West

Stand. At this time we were not aware of why we were required to

attend.

I walked onto the track, walked past the North Stand and round the

track side to the West Stand. At this time the two teams were on the

pitch so we walked to the West Stand and saw that there was a large
crowd in Sections 3 and 4. Did not pay any particular attention to

other sections of the stand. At this time I was unaware of any

emergency.   I saw that the crowd were surging forward towards the

front of the fencing of the stand, but took this to be just normal

actions of the crowd at any big game.   I turned to face the crowd and
saw fans crushed up against the barriers. Many appeared to be in deep

distress and totally crushed against the barrier. Many further in the

crowd shouting, "We're being crushed, open gates."

I then saw that people at the front of the crowd were going blue in

the face and were apparently unconscious, only being kept up by the

weight of people at each side.   I shouted for people to try and ease

back, but they were unable to do so. Went to Gate 4, directly behind

the goal with PC HOOSON and Sergeant SWIFT and the gate was opened.

The crowd began to surge to the gate and together with Sergeant SWIFT

and PC HOOSON, I began to pull people out of the crowd.   Many were

in panic and many were ignoring our instructions and just climbing

over people who had already stumbled.   Saw three men trapped by their
                                                                 PAGE    3
                                                                 S3335

legs laid on top of one another at the base of the gate and was unable

at first to release them due to the weight of the crowd pushing against
them.

Eventually managed to free them and pull them onto track.   Ey this

time there was a large number of fans already on the track and pitch,

many looking for friends and shouting. Many were shouting at the
Police to try and get more fans out.   I went back to the gate to try

and evacuate more people, one man repeatedly tried to return to the

crowd through the gate, impeding our attempts to get people out, and

he had to be physically held away. This man had been pulling at

Police Officers, including myself as he tried to fight his way back

into the crowd.
One man from the crowd jumped over people trying to get out of the

gate and as a result caught my head with his feet and knocked me to

the ground.   I returned to my feet and continued with my efforts to

release people.

I saw a gap appearing towards the rear of the stand and I shouted for
people to go back, but this was ignored.   I shouted for them to look

round and see that there was room at the back, but this was also

ignored. As the crush eased, together with other officers, I went

into the Stand via tom fencing and I saw the body of a young woman

laid on the ground. With other officers I carried the woman out of

the stand and onto the track.   She was blue in the face and did not
appear to be breathing.   Together with other officers, I attempted to

give rescusitation, kiss of life and heart massage. The wcntan

appeared to be in her mid-twenties and was wearing black trousers and

a red top.    Joined by two men, who stated they were doctors, they

examined the woman for signs of life and then informed me that she was

dead.
I looked around and saw that numerous other bodies were on the track
                                                                 PAGE      4
                                                                 S3335

at this time, together with a large number of fans and large numbers

of the Emergency Services.     I was knelt on the ground at the side of

the woman when a man came to me, looted at the woman and became very

distressed.     He stated that the woman was his wife and he gave the

name of Steve JONES.    Because of his distressed state he was left with
the body of his wife and another Liverpool fan who was assisting him.

I then went to assist other officers pulling bodies onto the pitch.        I

then saw the body of a young boy, aged approximately 12 years, wearing

a light barter type jacket. He was laid on the pitch at the rear of

the goal.     I went to assist another officer to carry the body of the

child down the pitch towards the exit between the North Stand and
Spion Cop.     I was relieved by another officer who took over the body

of the child.
I want back to the West Stand and covered a body laid on the pitch

behind the goal with my anorak.     I was then joined by Sergeant Swift,

who told us to remain where we were.     By this time the majority of the

bodies had been carried away either by fans or the Emergency Services.
Together with Sergeant SWIFT and other officers from our Serial,

walked back down the pitch to the gym and all were totally exhausted.

All the Serial appeared to be shocked and after regaining our

composure we were taken to Claywheels Lane where we were given cups of

tea.
Shortly after 6 pm (1800) we were returned back to our Divisions,

transported by a driver from Claywheels Lane. Our transport being

left at West Bar.
As a result of trying to evacuate people from the stand, I received

straining to my arms, bruising to both legs and a large bruise and

swelling at the back of my left hand and bruising to the top of my

left arm.
Although Hillsborough is not situated in the Division where I normally
                                                                        PAGE     5
                                                                        S3335

        work, I have performed duty at the football ground on a number of

        other occasions and I have in fact performed duty at the 1988 (000088)

        Semi-Final at this ground between the same teams.   I did not think

        that this match would be any different from the ones I have
        previously worked on, which had always run smoothly, although I did

        think that the large group of fans outside the turnstiles at Lapping

        Lana prior to our entry into the ground appeared to be larger than

        normal, but I am unable to say for what reason this might be.   Even so,

        at this stage I did not anticipate what took place a short while

        after.



                                                      L AKRED PC3198 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                     3391
Incident 102      260390 QP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                       STATEMENT NUMBER S2173
                                                                       Station
 Surname           HOOSON
Forenames          PHILIP
Age                                       Date of birth
Address


Occupation         POL PC42

Telephone

 IC               Height                  Build
Hair colour

Jteix type

'Eyes                                     Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                     Accent

Number of Pages
Dated                                                                       Signed


           PHILIP HOOSON

           Police Constable 42

           On Saturday 15 April 1989, (150489) I was engaged on football duty

           at Sheffield for the semi final football match between Nottingham
           Forest and Liverpool Football Club at the Hillsborough Stadium. My

           scale of duty commenced at 8am (0800) at Barnsley DHQ.

           The serial I was attached to was 'D' Division serial 16, which

           consisted of other officers.

           PS 2379 SWIFT

           PC 42 HOOSON (self)
           PC 803 TATTERSHALL

           PC 3198 AKRED

           PC 2083 PACKER
           PC 12 TAYLOR

                                                                                     3392
                                                                PAGE    2
                                                                S2173

PC 1368 MACKENZIE

PC 1453 PHILLIPS

PC 2185 COOPER
We all travelled to West Bar Police Station by transit van and paraded

there for briefing at 9am (0900). Chief Inspector KING conducted the

briefing, Superintendent BATES was officer in charge. After briefing,

personal radios were issued, one radio between two officers, but it

was found that there wasn't enough radios to go round. So myself and

PC TATTERSHALL teamed up with PS SWIFT having one radio between the

three of us. We were then joined by two officers from the HQ Drug

Squad, who were attached to our serial working in uniform, one of whan

was PC 3211 PRIESTLEY.   The other Drug Squad officers name I don't

know. We were each given a packed lunch.

Our allotted duty was to attend at Midland Station and escort the
Notts Forest fans and Liverpool fans who would be arriving by train,

separate them at the station and put them on a number of double decked

PSV's provided by South Yorkshire Transport. After the fans were

placed in their respective buses they were transported to the

Hillsborough Stadium being escorted by 2 PC's per PSV. Then marshalled

off the buses and into the stadium. The PC's would then return to the

Midland Station.
We attended at the Midland Station and commenced our duties at 10am

(1000) that date.
My serial remained at the station all the time, not travelling with

any of the football fans on the PSV's.
All the fans who arrived at the station were well behaved and
co-operated with our requests. All appeared to be decent, genuine
football fans from both teams. There were exceptions when one or two

of the younger element from both Notts Forest and Liverpool tried to

get through the cordon and into the city and using all sorts of
                                                                 PAGE     3
                                                                 S2173

reasons.   The snooker tournament being one of than.

Each of these were searched and when football tickets were found on

them they were sent to their respect PSV's without putting up much

argument. This was the way in which my serial dealt with the fans

filtering the non-fans through the station gates, but the vast

majority did what they were requested to do. There were no unpleasant

situations at the station, everything was good humoured having a

laugh and a joke with seme of the fans from both sides.

At about 2.25pm (1425) we were informed by the British Transport

Police that all the expected football fans who were travelling by
train had arrived at Midland Station and that they were not aware of

any large groups of fans still being in the rail system.

In view of this, rny serial along with other officers from other

serials, boarded the PSV's at Midland Station and were transported to

the Hillsborough Stadium.
The route taken by the driver of the PSV in which we were travelling

took us along Middlewood Road past Hillsborough Park and right into

Leppings Lane. I noticed that there were large crowds of people

walking along Leppings Lane towards the football ground.   These people

were walking on the pavements and into the road on both sides of
Leppings Lane. As we neared the comer of the road where the entrance

road is to the turnstiles at Leppings Lane, the area was completely
swamped with football fans. I could only see Inspector SYKES who was

standing on the comer to the entrance and he was totally surrounded

with Liverpool fans. It was like a sea of faces in that area

stretching from half way along the pavement from the junction with
Vera Road and well past Gate C at the Leppings Lane turnstile.     This

area of the turnstiles was wall to wall people who seemed to be packed

into that area.   I could see several fans climbing over the top of the

gata.   I did not see any Police Officers in this area, unless they
                                                                 PAGE    4
                                                                 S2173

were lost in the sea of people.   I could see two mounted officers who

were completely surrounded also and were quite obviously struggling

to control this crowd of fans.    It would be fair to say that this area

at this time was totally congested with fans trying to get into the

ground at these turnstiles and still more large numbers of fans were

converging on Leppings Lane from the direction of Penistone Road and

Middlewood Road.
With difficulty the driver of the bus in which we were travelling

managed to work a way through the fans making their way along Leppings

Lana from the direction of Penistone Road, towards the turnstiles at

the rear of the West Stand.   I could hear on other officers' radios

that officers at the Leppings Lane turnstiles were shouting for

assistance.   I couldn't make out any specific request only calls for
assistance and more mounted officers to attend at this location.    I
hava worked football duty at Hillsborough stadium on more than

several occasions during my service, including a number of semi

finals, but I have never seen such a large number of fans at the

Leppings Lane end at that time of day, the area was totally over-run.

This would have been at 2.50pm (1450).
At about 2.55pm (1455) we arrived outside the gates to the North Stand

in Penistone Road and debused. My serial went straight into the

gymnasium where we were to be held on standby as a reserve serial. We

managed to get a hot drink and were just about to eat our packed

lunches, having only been seated for a matter of a minute when
Sergeant SWIFT told us we had to leave because we were required on the

track in front of the West Stand. We immediately left the gymnasium

and went into the playing area of the stadium.    This was before 3pn

(1500), because as we entered the playing area, I saw players from

both teams on the football pitch warming up.
We walked along the track in front of the North Stand towards the West


                                                                             3395
                                                                 PAGE     5
                                                                 S2173

Stand and when passing some fans in the North Stand I heard some of
them "hissing". As we made our way along the track, there was no

indication to us at this time, that anything was wrong in the West

Stand of the stadium.

My serial at this time, including myself consisted of PS SWIFT, PC

TATTERSHALL, PC MCKENZIE, PC AKRED, PC TAYLOR, PC PACKER and PC
COOPER. We reached the comer of the track between the North Stand and

the West Stand, and without looking too carefully I got the

impression that the area was not as full as the West Stand appeared to

be. As we began walking along the track in front of the West Stand

the noise was deafening.   The whole stadium seemed to be shouting but

I didn't take any particular notice at this time, this sort of
behaviour not being unusual for a game of this importance. PC Packer

was in front of me at this time. As we made our way further along the

track towards the South Side I began to sense something was not quite

right. I could see at this time that there were already three other

Policemen standing on the track in front of us. As I neared Gate 4, I

realised that the people in the West Stand were not shouting but were

screaming.
I realised then that something was seriously wrong and I heard people

in the crowd screaming, "Let us out," "Oh God help us." I looked at

the people in the crowd and I could see by their faces and that people

were crushed up against the fencing and they were clearly in a
desperate situation.    I immediately grabbed the officer on the track

and asked him to get seme assistance to us.   I knew that I had to open

the gate to get people out even if it meant getting a bollocking.     I

can remember thinking, "If you're wrong Phil lad, you'll get a right

bollocking for this." I then went straight to Gate 4 at the fence

behind the goal posts and shouted to Sergeant SWIFT who was a number

of yards away from my position to my right: "I'm opening the gate" and
                                                                 PAGE    6
                                                                 S2173

I opened the gate. PC 3198 AKRED was with me at this time.

On opening the gate, the crush was so great that the people behind the
safety fencing in this stand could not move to free themselves. With

PC 3198 AKRED, I immediately began pulling people out from the crowd

and through the gate and on to the track. Most of the people that we

pulled out initially were able to walk and did not have any apparent

serious injuries. Each and every person that we pulled out from Pen 4

took a great deal of physical effort, not one of them came out easy.

Each one was trapped in one way or another by various parts of their

body.

After a short while, at Gate 4, we were joined by Sergeant SWIFT and

we continued to pull these people free. On more than several
occasions jackets, pullovers, shirts etc were ripped on peoples backs

in the effort to free them.
There was no doubt that the people in the stand were desperate for

their lives.    The best description would be to say that people were

drowning in a sea of people. All the faces that I saw at the front
were pale, grey, white or blue all with panic and pain written all

over them.     The people at the front couldn't scream for help, only

stare, screaming at you with their eyes. There were many whose eyes

were closed.

Whilst we were standing at the gate, I could see two men on the floor

at the gate opening, we were frantically pulling people out as feist as
we could to try and get to the people at the front, but as soon as one

was pulled free the space was filled with another and pressure was

still being pushed forward from the back of the stand.

I got down on my hands and knees and grabbed hold of one of the men

who was on the floor face down, hanging out of the gate into the

track.   I put my arm under his armpits and tried pulling him out.
Whilst I was doing this, people who were being pulled free above me
                                                               PAGE     7
                                                               S2173

were standing on my back to get to the track, other officers present

grabbed hold of me and other parts of the man and with a great deal of

physical effort we managed to pull him free.   We carried him to the

grass area behind the goal nets, put him down, established that he was

breathing and alive, he muttered some words and we left him and
immediately returned to the gate and continued pulling people frcm the

pen.   I became aware that the man we had pulled out frcm the floor

was in fact being attended to by another officer.

It is difficult to say how many we physically pulled frcm the pen but

it must have been in the hundreds, most of whcm were walking, seme

unconscious, some dead, some collapsed.   The ones who were brought
out unconscious were tended to immediately by whoever pulled than out.

They were brought round by slaps across the face or if they were

collapsed mouth to mouth resuscitation where necessary.    I didn't

count how many times I did this, I couldn't guess. As time was

passing more and more officers were arriving at the scene, this was

quite obviously within minutes of opening the gates even though we
seemed to have been there a hell of a long tune before anyone actually

came, but it was only minutes.
The main problem was that no matter how many were pulled frcm the

front, the crush was so great from the back we couldn't relieve any

pressure to get to the people at the very front or sides who were in

serious trouble.
It became obvious that pressure needed to be released frcm the rear

where there was now space appearing.   Officers were telling or

shouting to people to move back from the front but they wouldn't so

 the situation continued.
 I made a request to one Inspector who was standing on the grass to get

 a serial in through the back to pull the people out. Whether he did

 or not I don't know, he seemed a little non plussed and walked away.
                                                                 PAGE    8
                                                                 S2173

I can remember pulling a boy of about 16 years from the crowd who had

a broken arm.    By that, I mean, I could clearly see that the bone in

his right forearm was broken.    He had somehow managed to pull himself

above the people in the crowd and shouted to us that he had broken his

arm. With another officer, we managed to grab him and pull him

through the gate and on to the track. He just thanked us and walked

off.   Most of the ones who were pulled out, who were able, thanked us

and were crying, thanking God that they had got out.

As more and more officers arrived at the scene, they began to tear

down the fencing with their bare hands, trying to get to the people in

the pen.   Seme even tried to kick it down.   Same officers were hanging

over the fencing and pulling people over quite clearly in seme danger

of falling into the pen themselves.
At this time I moved away from the gate and started checking the

people laid down on the grass.    I cannot remember how many were laid

on the grass at this time but my estimation would be in the region of
about 30 to 40. Other Police Officers were engaged in attempts to

revive people.
I made several attempts to revive people with artificial resuscitation

and whenever I thought I felt a pulse I would shout any medical

personnel who were near at hand.      I seemed to have found more dead

than alive.
The situation in this area was quite chaotic, bodies all over the

place, people wandering about crying, screaming, shouting, Police

Officers and what few medical personnel were there trying frantically

to revive people.
After some time at checking bodies and making several hopeless
attempts to revive people it became obvious to me that there was

nothing more that I could do.    I was feeling absolutely physically

shattered.    By this time all the people in Pen 4 had been pulled out
                                                                       PAGE     9
                                                                       S2173

        and there only remained the dead bodies in Pen 3, a large number of

        which had been taken out and placed on the field.

        During the most frantic moments of trying to revive the people on the

        grass, there were no medical personnel to speak of and the St John's

        Ambulance Brigade consisted of what I could see, two old men and one

        young boy of about 12 - 14 years who was totally overwhelmed by the

        situation. Although on saying that, once they had gathered their

        senses, they got stuck in and worked very hard.

        With regard to the behaviour of the fans, I can say that the ones who
        were seated above the pens were shouting and screaming abuse, but the
        ones who were on the ground got organised into groups and helped us

        with the injured etc by carrying them on advert boards and were a

        credit to themselves.

        As I have previously stated I have worked football duty at

        Hillsborough on quite a number of occasions and have always been
        inpressed by the pre-planning and organisation of the duties and crowd.
        I would consider it one of the best policed grounds in the country.

        Whatever happened on this occasion to cause such a tragedy can only be

        speculated upon, but again I have never seen as many fans at the

        Leppings Lane end at that time of day.

                                                             P HOOSON SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
Incident 102     260390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER S3188

                                                                         Station

Surname             TAYLOR
Forenames           ADRIAN MARK

Age                                        Date of birth

Address             S YORKSHIRE POL
                    BARNSLEY

Occupation          POL PC12

Telephone

IC                  Height                 Build

Hair colour

  ir type


€ es

Facial hair

Glasses             Use
                                           Complexion



                                           Accent

Number of Pages
Dated               270489                                      A M TAYLOR Signed


          At 8.00am (0800), Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I reported for
          duty at Barnsley Divisional Headquarters, I formed part of Serial 16

          with PS SWIFT in charge.
          We then travelled through to West Bar Police Station Gymnasium where

          we were detailed to attend supporters arriving by train at the

          Midland Street Railway Station, in Sheffield City Centre.    I was

          issued with a personal radio.
          About 10.15am (1015) the same date, we arrived at the Railway Station,

          our role being that two Officers were to travel through to
          Hillsborough by bus with supporters, then return with the empty bus

          for further supporters, the Senior Officer in charge of the station

          duties.     I cannot remember who directed our Serial to remain with the

          public exit and direct any football supporters through to the correct

          exit for transport to the ground. Nottingham Forest supporters were

                                                                                     3401
                                                                 PAGE    2
                                                                 S3188

directed to the exit near Pond Street, Liverpool through the station

car park to the transport.

Numerous supporters attanpted to avoid catching the awaiting transport

and continue by foot into the City Centre.

Most of the supporters were in good spirit of mind and agreed to our

direction, although many slipped through.

On numerous occasions when supporters were questioned about tickets
they stated they hadn't got any and were collecting them from friends

they had arranged to meet in Public Houses in the City Centre.

One fan I can describe as being in his late twenties, wearing a denim

jacket and jeans, managed to pass through the public exit.   I saw as

he was passing me a glint of a gold pin beneath his jacket and

attached to his shirt, believing he was a football supporter I
approached him.   I saw he had all the characteristics of a drunk. On

stopping him I asked if he was going to the match, this he denied, his

attitude being quite aggressive.   I pulled back his jacket and saw a

Liverpool supporters badge.   I then escorted him to an awaiting bus

with the aid of another officer.
A further 5-6 youths passed through the public exit, I stopped them.
PC Packer joined me as I asked them where they were going, they
replied that they were collecting tickets frcm Sheffield City Centre.

I told than no one was to go into the centre if going to the match and

began to muster them to the Liverpool buses, as I did so one of the

youths, about 20-22 yrs, with dark brown short hair, produced a

Merseyside Police Warrant card.    I then believed their claim to be

true and allowed them to pass.
I heard on a number of occasions over my personal radio calls about

fighting around the town centre, one of which I recall taking place

outside Force Headquarters, Snig Hill.
Our contingent continued these duties until about 2.40pm (1440) when
                                                                PAGE    3
                                                                S3188

about one hundred supporters arrived by train and boarded the last

bus. We boarded an empty bus and began the journey to Hillsborough

via Suffolk Road, St. Mary's Road, Upper Hanover Way, Hanover Street,

Netherthorpe Road, Hoyle Street and onto Infirmary Road.

I saw on Infirmary Road large numbers of supporters mostly Liverpool
walking in the direction of the ground, many of which were drinking

from cans of intoxicants, the route being littered with empty cans.
Onea on Langsett Road, crowds of supporters increased dramatically and

vehicle traffic was very heavy causing slow progress. At its junction

with Holme Lane I saw a chip shop completely full of supporters.

Travelling from Middlewood Road, into Leppings Lane crowds of

Liverpool supporters merged into one mass, many drinking frcm cans.
On drawing level with the Lepping Lane entrances to the West Stand,

the bus driver stopped I was seated on the nearside of the bus away

from the offside looking at the offside at the turnstiles, the road

was completely clogged with pedestrian supporter traffic.   I saw a

number of Police horses in attendance, but due to the sheer volume of

the crowd, I could not see any foot officers.   I saw approximately
five supporters climbing over the perimeter fence to gain entry.

Other supporters were standing on the gates on the pavement.

Ifost of the crowd were in an aggressive and agitated mood and the

atmosphere was electric. A supporter banged on the front offside of

the bus just behind the driver, by the stairs. The driver asked if we

wished to get off the bus here, but suggested that we would have

trouble getting in. The time was about 2.55pm (1455). Someone

suggested that we move round to the Penistone Road North End, this the

driver did.   On rounding the roundabout Penistone Road North it was

completely different, very few supporters walking towards the ground

to the Nottingham Forest turnstiles. Our bus stopped and we made our

way into the ground via the Main Police access.
                                                                 PAGE      4
                                                                 S3188

Sergeant SWIFT asked us to remain in the Gymnasium prior to getting

our meal as a precaution of being needed.     I had just sat down, there

were approximately one hundred officers eating.     I listened to the

Police traffic on the radio and heard from an officer at the Lepping

Lane turnstiles that they were having problems with the crowd and they

required further officers assistance.
The time was about 3.00pm (1500) a senior officer replied on the radio

that he had five serials ready to go and where were they required.

Sergeant Swift then came over and said we were going. Once outside

and our serial was together he directed us onto the track around the
pitch, entering via the field entrance of the North Stand and Spion

Kop comer.   We were to take up a position on the track by the field

front of the West Stand.   I was aware that the kick off had taken

place, but did not see any football being played.     On reaching the

corner adjacent to the North West enclosure at the West Stand,

Sergeant SWIFT directed us to spread out along the track.     I walked
down to gate 3 and stopped with the Officer covering the gate.     I
reirtamber PC TATTERSHALL also stopping.   I looked at the Centre South

enclosure of the West Stand and saw that the crowd was very

dense, only being able to see supporters heads and not their

shoulders.
I passed on my regards to the gate officer, who was standing back frcm

the gate by the billboards, but watching the crowd at his section, he

acknowledged me, in doing so gate 3 opened and five youths ran out onto
the track.   The gate officer and I ran forward and pushed the supporters

back into the centre South enclosure and pushed gate 3 closed.

We stepped back to our original position.     I believed this incident

was the start of a pitch invasion.    I looked at the enclosure again

and still believed nothing was wrong.      I saw supporters climbing over

the partition fence between the Centre South enclosure and South
                                                                PAGE      5
                                                                S3188

enclosure and being pulled up from the centre South enclosure to the

West Stand seated area.   Supporters around the centre of the Centre

South stand began spitting and throwing things at us, abuse and

gestures. Again, I thought it was just a rowdy crowd.     Still I
believed the enclosure (Centre South) was crowded, but safe and

comfortable.    The gate officer began to speak onto his personalradio,

I couldn't hear what was being said due to the volume of the crowd. I

placed my radio to my ear, radio traffic was intense, non stop.     I

heard a transmission that one gate was breaking under the weight of

the crowd, but do not know to which area of the ground it referred.
Then gate 3 burst open again, I dropped my radio to my chest and went

to stop three supporters along with the gate officer.   I took hold of

one young man and began to push him back to the open gate. There was
a solid line of standing people in the gate.    I saw people pushed flat

up against the fences, two to three yards (yds) back into the centre
south enclosure, peoples heads were just disappearing under the mass

of the crowd.    I saw a man in his twenties scrabble onto the top of

people and began to run on peoples heads and shoulders towards the

pitch perimeter fence.    I let go of the supporter and began to pull

supporters from the gate, other officers joined in, we couldn't pull

people out fast enough.    The gate was so narrow, with the gate opening
outwards onto the field, it prevented assistance frcm the right and a

lean to support on the left gate pillar prevented assistance frcm the

left of the gate. Three officers or supporters could only enter the

gateway at one time to pull because of the tight space. The step

up from the centre south enclosure caused people to trip over, falling

to the ground, then on top of each other.    The gate became eight deep

in fallen people, so tightly packed that they could not be pulled
 free. As one supporter was pulled free your momentum followed the

 supporter back onto the field, other supporters and officers then took
                                                                   PAGE      6
                                                                   S3188

your place at the gate pulling.     I climbed onto the low wall to the

left of gate 3 still facing into the centre south enclosure and pulled

myself up onto the overhang.     I gestured for the crowd to move back
with my arms, the supporters to the centre of the centre south

enclosure just jeered and gestured abuse back, they didn't know what

was happening.    People were reaching up to me, but I couldn't reach

them, the spikes on the overhang digging into my arms.
I climbed down and went back to the gate.     I pulled further supporters

free and in doing so I saw a gap between the legs and bodies of people

at step level. There I saw a man's face, about 40-45 years, I tried

to reach him, but couldn't.     I could hear him shouting,"Help me.
Help me" and     as I watched the crowd fell back over him and        I neversaw

him again.   I began pulling at people in a hurry to free him.     Each

time someone     came frcm the crush I fell back with them.   I again lost

my place the     gate was too narrow.   I moved to the rightofgate 3, but

before the start of the Centre North enclosure.     I saw a stocky man,
aged about 28 years, with a white and blue striped dress shirt, supported

by the crowd, about 3-4 yards (yds) frcm the perimeter fence, he

was still normal in colour, but his eyes were glazed
                         People around him did not appear to be aware or

care.   I saw that the section of fence was bowed out near the low wall

about one foot.     I saw two girls in their late teens about 18 or 19
yrs, both pinned up against the fence, both of the girls were blue.

The first one nearest gate 3 I didn't really get a good look at and I

cannot recall her appearance, the one to the right had long mousey

brown hair to the shoulders, straight and plastic square fashionable

glasses, her head was at an angle to her right and bowed, she had
                                  open mouth, her lips were purple, her

skin was pasty and blue, her eyes half closed and glazed, I knew she

was dead.    Her right hand protruded through the mesh, her right
                                                                  PAGE       7
                                                                  S3188

forearm bare to the elbow, both were blue her fingernails also purple,

she had rings on this hand on three fingers.      I cannot remember their

description.    I took a hold of her hand in my palm, it was cold, very

cold.    I tried to find a pulse, but couldn't.   I turned away frcnt her,

I couldn't face the other girl or reach to them, I was now in a daze

of shock.
An Inspector, who I do not know or recall, approached me fran the

field.    I repeated to him that the two girls were dead. He just

pushed past me and climbed the fence trying to reach them.      I knew he

couldn't, he was shorter than me.
I returned to Gate 3 and began to pull people out, I don't know how

many.    I then saw a girl, I later discovered her name to be         pxm

         She was fourth down in thegate with four people on top of

her, she was wearing a light greenjumper she was bent around the

left hand gate pillar at gate 3. She was unable to move and I
couldn't reach her.    I moved to the left side of the gate, got down on

my knees and leaned in to within a foot of her under the left leanto

gate support.    I was unable to get my arms in fully to reach her, she

was falling into unconsciousness. I shouted at her to keep her awake

and clapped my hands in front of her face, this seemed to work, but I

was getting in the way frcm people pulling in the gate.      I began to

stand and in doing so a man, in his late twenties, well built, about

6'0",(6'0) wearing a white dress shirt open at the neck, shouted to

me. He was standing at the left hand gate pillar, but unable to move.

He shouted, "I'm not bothered about me, but get the boy." I turned to

where he was looking, about three feet (3')to the left of the gate but

against the perimeter fence there I saw a boy I now know to be

                      of                                    Doncaster,

dressed in a Liverpool shirt and tracksuit bottons.      I saw that he was

upset and in a great deal of pain, he appeared to be alone, people
                                                                   PAGE    8
                                                                   S3188

around him did not appear concerned for him.   I went to the fence in

front of him and asked his name, he said, "I want my mummy." I then

told him to calm down and breathe steadily, this he did.    I told him

my name and then instructed him to reach up and climb as hard as he

could, he tried, but just didn't move.   I climbed the fence and

reached over to him.   I couldn't reach, I called to the man to help,

he took hold of the boys left arm stretching it to reach me.    I could

just touch his fingers, but couldn't get a grip.    I climbed down and

reassured him. I returned to the gate, looked in and in doing so
someone grabbed my shirt at the throat and began to pull me into and

through the gate to the crowd. Two buttons gave way and my tie fell

off.
I saw a man about 25 yrs, wearing a black leather dress jacket
standing 2-3 yards (yds) from the gate, he appeared conscious and I
shouted to him if he was alright and whether he was on firm ground or

not.   He replied he was.   I called that I was going to stand on him.

He nodded back.   I took a hold of the top of the gate with both hands

and swung inside the gate from the left, placing my right foot on his

right shoulder then quickly swung back to the inside of the perimeter
fence to the left, bending my legs to prevent kicking anyone in the

crush below me. I pulled myself up by the arms so my left arm was over

the overhang, my armpit on the spikes.    I then suspended by my left

arm and began to pull out the boy.    He wouldn't move.   I yelled at him

to climb, I had him by the left arm, the man in the white shirt
beneath me began to pull at his left arm and people around him, seeing

what I was doing, began to pull him as well. He began to move and
once his behind was above head height I pushed his behind with my

right arm as an officer, I don't know who, pulled him over and on the

spikes and to the track.    I couldn't hold on any longer, I was

exhausted.   I wanted to help more, but couldn't.   I climbed out with
                                                                    PAGE        9
                                                                    S3188

the assistance of other officers through the gate.    The boy had been

passed, I believe to another officer.    I didn't want to leave him.        I

followed, he was placed on the field and I examined him for serious

injuries. He said his stomach and left leg hurt him.

We then carried him to the players injury room where he was laid on a

table, he began to fall asleep.     I feared that he had internal injuries

and to prevent him falling into sleep and then a coma, I talked to him

non stop.   He seemed to improve.

Another couple came in, one girl in a sling from           and a young

man, both were agitated, but soon left to seek



A further couple entered, the girl being          she was deep in shock

and complained of chest and abdominal injuries, plus crushed ankles.
The boy was worried about his friend, who had brought him to the

match, named         wearing a green jumper.

I want to look for him, outside I saw a Liverpool supporter who was

swearing and very aggressive to officers at the players tunnel.       He

wanted to speak to the manager about the incident, the officers

eventually moved him away. I went back over to the West Stand, people
were lying all over the field, some worse than others, all being

attended to. On reaching the Centre South enclosure, I saw that the

crowd had moved back or cleared and people were laid many deep to

about 6 yards (yds) back from the fence.     I do not know their

condition. Supporters at the back were turning in revulsion, others

gestured angry and shouted abuse at rescuers.     I began to walk back

and saw the West Stand goals being pulled down and seme supporters

shouted from the pitch to stop asking what they were doing.     Sergeant

SWIFT found me and asked if I had seen the others, I hadn't, I said

that I intended to remain with the boy, which he agreed to.        I began

to walk back to the tunnel, an off duty nurse approached and asked
                                                                         PAGE 10
                                                                         S3188

        what help she could give, I just pointed to an arriving ambulance and
        said try there.

        I returned to the boy and continued our conversation and contacted his

        parents. We then continued through to the Northern General Hospital by

        ambulance and after depositing him there, I again contacted his hone
        address notifying them where he was about 6.00 pm (1800). While at the

        hospital casualty a nurse approached and said there was fighting in
        the main entrance between supporters.     I went to assist, but when I

        arrived there was already police there.

        I managed to get a lift to Claywheels garages and joined another

        serial returning to Barnsley. We arrived back at Barnsley Divisional

        Headquarters at 8.00 pm (2000), where I went off duty.
        I could not help feeling guilty of the helplessness of the incident,

        being unable to get to the injured or dead an unbearable loss.    I have

        worked a previous semi final, the year before with the same teams and

        supporters, their attitude and conduct was of the same nature, many of

        the crowd were drunk and aggressive.    I worked that particular game at
        the Penistone Road North turnstiles, these turnstiles ran smoothly,

        although the atmosphere was tense.     I saw the North Stand seats after

        the match and many had been ripped apart.




                                                             A M TAYLOR SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME             DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
                                                                         STATION

               ADRIAN JOHN
               BRAZENER

ADDRESS:       TOE FORCE SUPPORT DPT, FORCE HEADQUARTERS,
               SHERWOOD LODGE, ARNOLD, NOTTINGHAM

AGE / DATE OF BIRIH: 32

OCCUPATION:    POL SCT


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.

DATED: 220589                                               A J BRAZENER (SIQ®D)



           I am a uniform Police Sergeant in the Nottingham Constabulary, and I

           am attached to the Force Support Department.    One of the duties of
           the Force Support Department is to travel to away football fixtures

           with Nottingham Forrest Football Club supports where it is felt the

           presence of Nottingham officers would be of a benefit to otter police

           areas.
           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) my tour of duty was 8am to 10pm.

           (0800 to 2200) I was detailed together with Police Constable 1265
           Brian WALTON and Police Constable 887 Nick HOAD to attend the F.A. Cup

           Semi-Final at Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield, the Semi-Final

           was between Nottingham Forrest and Liverpool.    I together with Police

           Constables, WALTON and HOAD were in uniform and we were accompanied by

           TONY DONNELLY a reporter for the Nottingham Evening Post.
           DONNELLY accompanied us to the match at Sheffield and both police

           forces were aware and in agreement with this arrangement. We

           travelled to Sheffield in an unmarked police vehicle. We parked the

           vehicle in the Hillsborough Stadium car park. We arrived at the

           football stadium at about 9.30 a.m. (0930) We were introduced to Chief
BRAZENER             ADRIAN    JOHN                                     2


Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, and he spoke briefly to Mr DONNELLY of the

Nottingham Evening Post.   Basically he welcomed Mr DONNELLY but said

that he prefered him not to be at the police briefing. Mr DONNELLY

had no objections to this, and we were told to be at the police

briefing at 10am (1000) in the North Stand.
At 10am (1000) together with PC's HOAD and WALTON I attended the

briefing in the North Stand.

At the conclusion of the briefing we returned to our vehicle in the

Stadium car park, where we took a short meal break.

We then travelled with Mr DONNELLY to Sheffield Railway Station

arriving there at about 11.30am (1130). We then liaised with the

uniform police inspector at the railway station. We then monitored
the arrival of four special trains from Nottingham, which were all

carrying Nottingham Forrest supporters.   The first train arrived at

12.31pm(1231), and the last train arrived at 1.22pm (1322). None of

the fans were drunk or troublesome, in fact they were well behaved.

We then returned to to our vehicle and made our way back to the
ground, we parked in the stadium car park. We all three worked as a

team in company with Mr DONNELLY. After we left our vehicle we made

our way to the Coach Park, where the Nottingham Forrest coaches were
parking. We remained on the Coach Park for about 20 to 30 minutes,

again monitoring the arrival of Nottingham Forrest fans. We then made

our way back to the stadium and went to the turnstiles in Penistone
Road the Spion Kop end of the ground. We remained on the turnstiles

until 3.05pm( 1505). Whilst I was outside the ground at the turnstiles

I was aware from about 2.30pm (1430) onwards that there were obviously

problems at the Leppings Lane end of the ground, the port of the

ground for the Liverpool supporters.   I gain this opinion as I had

with me a police radio and I could hear the messages frcm the police
BRAZENER             ADRIAN   JOHN                                       3


control to officers on duty at the ground.    There were various

requests for more officers and more horses at the Lepping Lane end.

On request was "For God sake get the gate open." A further request

was for the match to be put back due to the volume of crowd outside

the ground in Leppings Lane. At this time I was under the impression

that the game was being put back, however I was later made aware that

the game had not been put back and it was in fact a 3.00pm (1500) kick-

off.   Shortly after 3.00pm (1500) we made our way into the ground

over the turnstile at the rear of the Spion Kop, as we entered the

ground we heard a message over the police radio asking all police

officers to go on to the pitch. We made our way to the front of the
Spion Kop and onto the pitch. At this point Mr DONNELLY went with

PC HOAD.   I saw that the game had been stopped and both teams of

players were leaving the pitch.   I walked across the pitch to the
West Stand, as I walked across the pitch I was under the impression

that the Liverpool fans were attempting an invasion of the pitch.

It was not until I got to the cinder track on the West Stand that

I became aware of how serious the situation was.    I could see

policemen at the fence in pen 3 pushing persons back over the fence as

they were attempting to climb over it. As these persons were pushed

off the fence they were falling on top of other persons who had been

pushed frcm the fence, in fact they were falling on top of each other.
At this my 'minds' eye was on the people at the front of the Pen who
were being crushed up against the fence.     I saw a young girl, her face

was blue, and pushed right up against the fence, and she couldn't move.

I don't know what the girl was wearing, but she looked about 18yrs of

age and had long brown hair. On seeing this girl I looked up and down

the pen at the front, and I could see a lot of people had been pushed
to the floor.   I immediately climbed up on to the fence and shouted to
BRAZENER               ADRIAN   JOHN                                         4


the policemen "Let them get over the fence, people are being crushed."

I then got off the fence, walked back onto the pitch, in my view then

both the gates at Pen 3 and 4 were locked.       I then got onto my police

radio and I said, "Sgt Brazener Notts Police to match control." Reply "

Go ahead." I then said, "You must open all the gates immediately

there is a serious situation developing." Reply "Yes Yes." At this

tiire because of all the local police around the gates, I believed the

gates to be padlocked, as no one had opened them.       I am now aware that

the gates have a spring loaded lock and had I known this at the time I

would have opened the gates myself without asking for permission.

After I had made this request over the radio I believe I went to a
number of people who were lying or sitting on the grass in the penalty

area. On realising that the gate at pen 3 was open I irrmediately went

to that gate. When I got to the gate I put my right foot on the

bottom of the gate frame, and then lifted out of the crowd a youth

aged about 18-19 yrs, he was white wearing blue denim jeans, and I
think he had a blue denim shirt.       I carried this youth on to the pitch,

and lay him down. He appeared to be breathing, so I left him on the

ground. As far as I can remember this youth was not the first person

I assisted out of Pen 3, I remember him because I carried him on to

the ground, where as with the other persons I was given help to get

them out of the Pen.
From what has been said to me since this date, I accept that I cannot

recall to memory everything I did after I got to the Pens 3 and 4 at

the West Stand. However I can recall standing at the gate in Pen 3,

pulling people onto the pitch, by their shoulders and head and someone

at the gate would hold their legs. We would go onto the pitch and
when we could find a space we would put the person down on the ground.

If it was obvious to me that a person was breathing, I would put them
BRAZENER             ADRIAN   JOHN                                          5


in the recovery position, but I do feel that nearly every person

I took out of the Pen I did put in the recovery position.     I can't

recall how many times I went back to get someone out of Pen 3, but it

must have been at least a dozen.     I recall a uniform Sergeant in his
late 30's being inside Pen 3, passing bodies out, as our eyes met he

gave me the impression he was absolutely exhausted.    I said something

to him like you've had enough, I then helped him out of Pen 3. There

was no one in Pen 3, Policeman wise, so I said to a Uniform Inspector,

"Get a serial in there." He looked at me and began to move away.        I

then went and held him and said "You've got to get someone in there"

and I ushered him towards Pen 3. His presence there and what he said

encouraged other officers to go into Pen 3. I was satisfied that

there was no one else either dead or seriously injured in that Pen, so

I then moved on to Pen 4.   I went to the gate of Pen 4 and it was here

I saw 20 to 30 bodies lying on the floor inside the Pen.

I don't know why but it was not until this moment that I realised how
serious the incident was.   I could see the bodies just inside the Pen

and there were policemen lifting the dead bodies off each other.    I

then recall someone shouting "There's people breathing here who are

alive." The people were supporters who were stood behind the

policemen and the dead bodies.     I then said to the policeman "Leave

them they are dead, they are going nowhere, lets concern ourselves

with the ones who are breathing." At this time I recall speaking to

PC WALTON.   I said something to him like, "Let's get a chain organised

each side of the fence." Together with PC WALTON I then organised a
chain of policemen each side of the fence to help get people out.

We remained throughout either at the gate of Pen 4 or carrying people

on to the pitch. We stayed here until all the injured and dead had

been taken frcm Pen 4. Again we put people in the recovery positions
BRAZENER               ADRIAN   JOHN                                        6


and I am led to believe gave heart massage and mouth to mouth but I

can't recall giving anyone mouth to mouth. As far as I am aware when

Pen 4 was empty, I recall seeing supporters running towards me
carrying advertising boards.     I then helped to put dead persons onto
these boards.   I recall carrying a green board with white writing on

together with football supports into the covered area under the North

Stand, we took the body of white male off the board and put it down

near to a youth who was sat on the floor.      I asked the youth on the
floor to move, he replied "I can't I've bust my leg." We then lay the
body at the side of him.    I then returned on to the pitch near to the

goals, and I then assisted others in carrying a white male on a green

metal frame stretcher into the gym. We laid the           body downnext         to a

line of other bodies in the gym.       I then picked up the stretcher and

carried it with a supporter back onto the pitch. We then put another
white male on to the stretcher who was dead, and          we took him to        the

gym, and laid him by the other bodies.
These are the three main times I know in carried bodies into the gym,

but in the back of my mind I know there were many more times I had

helped to carry bodies into the Gym.
I can recall the following events however I can't say in what sequence

they occured or at what time but I do recall:-
(1) A fan being assaulted in the West Stand after he picked up same

money off the floor.
(2) Liverpool fans going towards the Spion Kop, and stopping than and

saying "Enough is enough."
(3) A line of policemen being across the half-way line.
 (4) A youth on the ground about 15 yards from the Spion Kop on the
ground surrounded by his family and firemen. One fireman looked up at

me as if to say he had 'Gone' but they kept working on him.       I can't
BRAZENER             ADRIAN   JOHN                                      7


describe the lad.

(5) The ambulance ccming onto the pitch and assisting to put a body

in the ambulance.

(6) Talking to Liverpool fans by the North Stand making sure they

were alright.

(7) Walking down to the West Stand looking for my helmet which I

found.

The next I recall is an announcement that the game was abandoned and
that supporters were shortly going to be asked to leave the stadium.

Together with PC HOAD and PC WALTON we decided that we would be more

use outside the ground in Penistone Road, as the Nottingham Forrest

fans were leaving.   It also appeared that we could be of no more use

inside the ground as all the dead and injured persons had been taken

to 3ym. We then made our way into Penistone Road, where we were

askad by Nottingham Forrest supporters how bad the incident was and

how they could get their money back. We remained in this area until

everyone had left the area of Hillsborough Football Stadium.   We heard

of a number of fights, in the park near to Penistone Road, over the

police radio, but each time we arrived there was no sign of a fight.

There came a time when the area around the stadium was quiet and we

were serving no purpose being there.   It was then that we went back

inside the stadium to see if we could be of any help in the gym. When

we got inside the Gym I went to a Senior Police Officer to see if we

could be of any help, he told me to take my men to the North Stand and

have a coffee as there would soon be a de-briefing.   We went to the
North Stand, I asked PC HOAD to take Mr DONNELLY who was now with us

back to the police vehicle as I felt he should not be present.
At the de-briefing the Sergeants were asked to write down a resume of

what they had done and where they were in the West Stand. We were
        BRAZENER             ADRIAN   JOHN


        asked to do it on a P.S.U. sheet, so as I did not have such a form I

       wrote ray resume on a piece of paper. We were then given refreshments
        at NIAGARA Police Social Club. We then returned to our Force

       Headquarters.

        I would like to add that at about 1.30pm (1330) when we returned to

       Hillsborough Football Ground frcm the Railway Station we went inside

       the ground for a short while before going to the Penistone Road, and

       at this time we all commented on the fact that a large proportion of

       Forrest supporters were already in the ground but there were few

       Liverpool supporters in the Lepping Lane end of the ground.

       My dress for the whole of this day was full police uniform over which

        I wore a yellow fluorescent jacket, as did PC's HOAD and WALTON.

        I have been told since this date of various things I did on the pitch,

        like giving heart massage to a number of people, and giving mouth to

       mouth to people and giving first aid treatment to various people but

        I'm afraid I cannot recall doing any of these things, other than what

        I have said in the main body of ray statement.




                                                         A J BRAZENER SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

         TIME:             DATE:   220589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:      P R BARKER
Incident 102      260390 OP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER S2929
                                                                            Station

 Surname           BARKER

 Forenames         ALFRED

 Age                                        Date of birth

 Address           HAMMERTON RD PSTN

 Occupation        POL INS

 Telephone

 IC                Height                   Build

 Hair colour

 Hair type

^^es                                        Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses           Use                      Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated                                                                         Signed


           I am an Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police at present stationed

           at Hammerton Road Police Station.
           I joined the Sheffield City Police in September 1965 (000965) and

           spent my first 9 years as a Constable stationed at West Bar. During

           that time I worked the occasional Football Match at the Sheffield

           Wednesday ground.
           In 1974 (000074) I was promoted to Sergeant and posted to Hanmerton
           Road Sub-Division.     I served there for 8 years, both in uniform and

           Criminal Investigation Department.       I have worked many matches at

           Hillsborough in all capacities both inside and outside the ground.

           During that time I worked several semi-final games.      Since my
           promotion to the rank of Inspector I have worked the football ground

           at Hillsborough both as a Detective Inspector and as a Uniformed

           Inspector.
                                                                 PAGE    2
                                                                 S2929

On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I was detailed for duty at the

ground for the semi-final fixture to be played between Nottingham

Forest and Liverpool. My duties for the day were the supervision of
the 'Police Room', its personnel and the welfare of the prisoners and

their movements.

I commenced duty at 10 am (1000) and attended the briefing held in

the North stand.   The 'Police Room' is situated under the North stand

towards the Penistone Road end. Next to the 'Police Room' is situated

the St Johns Ambulance Brigade first aid rocm.   Both these rooms face

onto a three-sided yard with the Club Gymnasium being opposite the

Police Room and the Sports Reception rooms being to the left, when

looking away frcm the pitch.
The first of the prisoners began to arrive at about midday (1200)

and as time progressed it was obvious that the state of drunkeness of

the prisoners was increasing.
At this stage, I will explain the procedure to be adopted when persons

are detained at the ground.
Those detained under ground regulations:
These people are brought to the Police Room where details of their

detention are relayed to one of the Sergeants on duty and details of

the individual are placed in the detained persons book. The Officer

detaining completes a pro-forma outlining the reasons for detention

and after verifying the identity of the offender, he is ejected from

the ground.
Those arrested for other matters:
These people are brought to the Police Room where the arresting

officer relates his reason for arrest to one of the duty Custody
Sergeants. He may then either order the person to be ejected under

the ground regulations in which case the above procedure applies or

authorise his further detention, in which case his details are
                                                                PAGE    3
                                                                S2929

recorded and he is searched in accordance with the provisions of the

Police and Criminal Evidence Act.   He is then photographed, together

with the arresting officer and detained whilst the officer is
despatched to the Gymnasium to complete the paperwork.   The prisoner

is detained in one of two cell buses which are parked outside the

Police Room in the yard - one bus for each set of supporters. When

sufficient prisoners have been processed to utilise a transit

personnel carrier, they are then transported to either Ecclesfield

(Liverpool) or Hanmerton Road (Nottingham Forest) where they are

further processed, charged and dealt with in accordance with the

instructions for the day.

As the day progressed the stream of prisoners became steady. Most, if
not all, were drunk, abusive and some were violent.   Several

skirmishes occurred within the Police Room but were dealt with firmly

and properly by the staff on duty without my having to intervene.
Because of noise in the Police Room it is not possible to hear all of

the radio transmissions but from those we did hear, it was obvious
that fans to the North of the ground, ie Worral and Oughtibridge were

drunk and disorderly as they approached.   Comments were made amongst

the staff of the Police Room that it was going to be an extremely busy

aftamoon.
In the Police Room, there are two telephones, a Police phone with a

local outside line facility and an internal club phone. At about
kick-off time, I answered one of the phones and a male voice asked me

to 'go into the gymnasium and turn everyone out onto the pitch'. This

I did and as I entered the gymnasium, Chief Inspector Sumner was doing

just that and had obviously received a similar message frcm seme other

source. We emptied the gymnasium and I started back towards the

Police Room. At this stage, I was not at all concerned as this

'calling everyone out' has happened several times when trouble is
                                                                  PAGE     4
                                                                  S2929

anticipated.     Solely out of curiosity I went to the first entry to the

North Stand immediately behind the Police Room and looked at the

pitch.   I saw that there appeared to be a disturbance at the Leppings

Lana end of the pitch and one of the stewards told me that the referee

had stopped the match.     I saw the players heading towards the tunnel.

At the same time I saw a solid lire of Police Officers forming across

the pitch in front of the Leppings Lane terracing and remember

thinking to myself that there were enough Officers there to control

any situation.     I did not have a radio with me at this point and went
back to the Police Room, where I reported what I had seen and told

the staff we were in for a busy afternoon.

At this stage, it was still very busy in the Police Roan with

prisoners filling the place to capacity.     I stood outside the Police

Room, talking to the Force press officer when several people began to
arrive at the First Aid rocm with what initially appeared to be minor

injuries.   The stream of people increased. There was a St Johns

Ambulance parked in the yard immediately outside the Police roan and

this was obstructing people getting to the First Aid roan.     I tried to

find the driver to remove it but very soon people were being brought

on stretchers and simply laid between the Ambulance and the Police

Room, blocking off the access to the First Aid rocm.     By this time,
lots of people were arriving in the yard, some walking, sane being

assisted and some on stretchers.     During this time, prisoners were

still being brought to the Police Room and I was told by someone that

there had been a 'Big Crush' at the Leppings Lane end and that sane

people were dead.
I carried on trying to keep an approach to the First Aid rocm open,

when all of a sudden I was aware that bodies were being brought to the

area, obviously dead, their faces covered and lifeless. The people

bringing them were demanding more stretchers from the First Aid post
                                                                 PAGE      5
                                                                 S2929

but none were available.     People were becoming abusive and aggressive

because we had no stretchers or oxygen equipment.
I decided that the the dead bodies should be placed in the Gymnasium

and was directing all the obvious dead into the Gymnasium and

reclaiming the stretchers and advertising boards for use by the people

demanding more stretchers.

At this stage there was considerable confusion in the area.    People

were asking me what help they could be, Doctors and Nurses, and I was

diracting them towards the injured in the vicinity of the First Aid
room, doing my best to make sure every injured person had someone

taking care of them and that every dead one was being placed in the

gymnasium.   I can remember asking for confirmation that the

Gymnasium would be used as the temporary mortuary and getting it,

but I cannot remember from whom.
There did not appear to be any Senior Medical Staff in the area and

the Doctors and Nurses who had offered their services were asking for

Oxygen and Airways. The only action I could take was to direct them

towards the ambulances that were now arriving. Apart from me and

other members of the Police Rocm, everyone else was returning to the
pitch after dropping off their charge.     I can remember checking the

area for dead in order that we could take them into the Gymnasium and

utilise the stretchers or boards under them. There were people
administering First Aid everywhere in what can only be described as a

sea of bodies.   Keeping the access clear to the gymnasium and the

First Aid Rocm became my prime concern.
As the arrival of bodies in the area eased, we began dealing with
relatives - some of whom became understandably violent and aggressive

when we refused to allow them into the gymnasium to search for people

they had lost.
I began to arrange groups of Police Officers to secure the area frcm
                                                                PAGE    6
                                                                S2929

press men etc. Many more people were now arriving on foot with minor

injuries I can remember organising two trips via Police vans to take
these people to Hospital.   I believe Police Constable 931 Greenway was

the driver on both occasions.

Eventually the dead and injured stopped coming from the pitch and I

secured the yard area by placing a cordon of men across the gates

which lead to Penistone Road and to the pitch.   I had lost all track

of time, during this period.
The next problem we faced in the yard area was Police Officers, many

of whan I knew personally who were in deep shock. Hot drinks were

available and we busied ourselves attempting to assist them but little

could be done at this stage.
Many Police Officers who were involved in the rescue were now caning
to the Police Room, seeking further instructions.   I was aware by this

time that Superintendent BATES had arrived and had begun to take

charge of things within the Gymnasium and the immediate area.

At sane stage it was brought to my notice that the prisoners in the

cell buses had now been detained for sane time and were using the

buses as toilets because we could not escort them to proper toilets or

move the buses. A further problem was that the majority of officers

who had arrested them had been turned out to the pitch and files were

not available.   I also noticed that some of the younger members of the

St Johns Ambulance Brigade were taking refuge from the obvious horrors

at the time, in the front of these buses. We could not get the buses

out of the ground because of the ambulance and emergency traffic.

Clearly it would have been totally inhumane to keep the prisoners

locked up any longer in the buses. Most were fully aware of the

horrors of the situation within their immediate vicinity.

I liaised with Chief Inspector BEAL, informed him of the situation and

after discussion it was agreed that each prisoner should be verbally
                                                                         PAGE     7
                                                                         S2929

        cautioned and released.

         I arranged for this to be done by Sergeant 838 LONG and his

        colleagues.   On returning to the yard, I continued to assist the

        injured, Police colleagues who were obviously in shock and

        ambulancemen who were now bringing obvious dead from other parts of

        the ground.
         I continued my duties in the yard area and was kept busy with
        vehicular and pedestrian traffic, though my main task was to keep the

        area secure from all but those who needed to be there.

        Later in the evening and in the early morning I continued my duties in

        the yard, assisting with the transport and welfare of the relatives,

        who attended at the Gymnasium.   I did this until 5 am (0500) the
         following morning when the last of the relatives had gone.    I was then

        released from duty.



                                                                         SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:
           TIME:              DATE:

 WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

^pFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                      3425
Incident 102      260390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER S2703

                                                                         Station
^feiame           LONG
Forenames         MICHAEL GEORGE
Age                                        Date of birth
Address           HAMMERTON RD PSTN

Occupation        POL PS838
Telephone

IC                Height                   Build
Hair colour

Hair type

                                           Complexion
Facial hair

Glasses           Use                      Accent
Number of Pages

Dated                                                            M G LONG Signed

          I am 40 years of age and joined Sheffield City Police in 1965 (000065)
          as a Cadet.    In 1967 (000067) I became a Police Constable and was

          promoted Sergeant in 1979 (000079). On promotion I was posted to
          Hairenerton Road and have remained there since that time, apart frcm a
          brief attachment to Special Branch.

          I have experience of policing football matches at Hillsborough as

          both a Police Constable and Sergeant.

          Over the past 10 years I have fulfilled all supervisory duties of that

          rank at Hillsborough.   However, I have operated from within the Police
          room for the greatest part.

          My recollection of the 15th April 1989 (150489) are as follows:

          1   My duty for match day was in the police room for the processing of
          any persons arrested.

          2   Also shown as working in the police room for that day were Police
                                                                     PAGE    2
                                                                     S2703

Sergeants 1164 COLLEY and 1127 HARDY, Police Constables 341 HALL,

1403 JONES, 1910 HULLEY and 766 MARSHALL.       In overall ccmmand was
Inspector BARKER.

3     I arrived for duty at 8.00 am (0800) that day.     On arrival at the

ground I saw Police Constables HALL and JONES, Inspector SEWELL,
Police Sergeants 616 GODDARD and 102 FIDDLER.       The last three are my

colleagues within the Area office at Haimterton Road.      I prepared the

police rocm for business and assisted Inspector SEWELL with various
administrative tasks.

4     At 9.10am (0910) I was joined by Police Sergeant COLLEY and Police

Constables 1910 HULLEY and 766 MARSHALL.     Duties continued as outlined
above.

5     At 10.00am (1000) Inspector BARKER paraded for duty along with
Police Sergeant HARDY.    Duties continued as outlined.

6     At 11.55am (1155), the first prisoners arrived.    They were

and             who were arrested for touting.      I assisted in their
process and accepted custody of

7     At 1.20pm (1320), along with Police Sergeant HARDY and Police
Constables HALL and MARSHALL, I went to the mobile kitchen and
obtained a meal. I consumed it in the gym.

8     At 1.40pm (1340), I was informed that more prisoners had arrived

and I went back to the police room, where I assisted with the
prisoners          and

9     From that time a steady in-put of prisoners started arriving and I

can say that I accepted the detention of the following prisoners:
2.05pm (1405) -

2.20pm (1420) -

2.30pm (1430) -               (Nottingham Forest)
2.45pm (1445) -                    (Liverpool)
2.50pm (1450) -                   (Liverpool)
                                                                      PAGE
                                                                      S2703
 2.55pm (1455) -                      (Nottingham Forest)
3.00pm (1500) -                 Nottingham Forest)
3.10pm (1510) -                      (Liverpool)
The procedure carried out was that I would fill in a detention form
and seize the property of the prisoner.     He would then be

photographed with the arresting officer.     The prisoners were then

segregated and detained on different cell buses, pending completion

°f files. The prisoners were then taken to either Hammerton Road

Police Station if they were Nottingham Forest supporters and

Ecclesfield if they were Liverpool supporters.       I recall there being
no let-up in prisoners arriving.     They were all the worse for drink

and the later ones were nearly all dead drunk. There were several
skirmishes in the police room and I remember becoming covered

in blood from one prisoner who had been fighting outside the

ground.   He was spitting blood all over from a mouth injury.     I

remember thinking that I thought it was against the law to come to a
football match the worse for drink.    This mob hadn't given it a

thought. The semi was obviously an excuse for a big 'piss up'.

10   News began trickling in that there was crowd trouble.      This was

about 3.15pm (1515). The prisoners stopped arriving and more

information was filtering through. We tried to get the last of the

prisoners frcm the police room on to the cell buses, but there was
pandemonium ouside and no way through.     I saw bodies and injured

persons lying on the ground, interspersed between the cell buses and

the gymnasium.     I went to the gym and the first obviously dead started

to arrive.   I think I saw several bodies at this time.     I returned to

the police room. All the staff except Police Constable HALL and

Police Sergeant COLLEY had left to give first aid and resuscitation to
the injured outside.    The enormity of the situation was unfolding.

Detective Superintendent MCKAY came into the police room. The police
                                                                   PAGE     4
                                                                   S2703

room has two phones, a police phone with a local outside line and an

internal club phone. The only other phones on that side of the ground

are a pay phone in the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, sports

hall and a private phone behind the desk of the sports hall reception.

I told Superintendent MCKAY what the situation was.     He contacted

Hanmnerton Road for the Major Incident boxes to be brought down to the

ground.    I moved the big desk in the police room to accommodate more

space as Police Officers, St. Johns came in, obviously very shocked.

At about 4.00pm (1600) I talked with Chief Inspector REAL and

Inspector BARKER.     It was decided to release all the persons we had

detained on the cell buses, whatever their condition. With Police

Sergeant COLLEY, I released twenty four prisoners and verbally

cautioned them.     Even though they were going virtually 'scott free', a

number, even amongst all the carnage, wanted to argue and cause

further trouble.     I just couldn't believe their mentality.   One I
remsmber walked past several dead bodies and numerous injured and his
first words were 'What's the score?' Another who had been very

troublesome was released and shown the door.     I went outside several

minutes later and saw him sat on a chair with a St. Johns ambulanceman

comforting him.     I asked what was a matter and the St. Johns man said

he was upset by what he had seen. I found this hard to believe.

I returned to the police room.    There was even more injured people in

there.    I was doing what I could.   Near to the telephones there was a

young man seated on a chair.     I was talking to him trying to establish

his injuries.     I had been talking to him for several minutes, before I

realised he was a Special in uniform, such was his distressed state,

his trousers were in shreds. I wondered what had happended to him to
get in that condition.

Tima was passing and the whole thing unfolding.    Everybody bar Police

Constable HALL had disappeared from the police room. More and more
                                                                           PAGE      5
                                                                           S2703

         calls were ccming in fran both radio and telephone.     I remeber thinking,

         I batter establish myself as the link between the temporary mortuary and

         the outside.   It was about 10.00pm (2200) when communications people
         started to arrive to sort out the phones etc.     British Telecom started

         working, and all that happened was that they managed to put out the
         phone links we had.     I became a runner betoreen the outside and the

         Major Incident room.     I made hundreds of trips into the gym, walking

         amongst the dead.     I talked to Police Sergeant FIDLER and saw loads

         of colleagues I knew, performing most professionally.     I think we got

         sate kind of phone link set up at about 2.00am (0200) in the gym.

         Identifications started and buses with relatives started arriving.

         Social workers were there to greet the buses.     I had been asked to get

         the club to open the lounge in the sports hall for relatives.     I

         contacted them, but it took over an hour for the key to arrive.
        We started to ronove the bodies to the mortuary.      I stayed between

         the police rocm and gym, with Inspector SEWELL and Police Constable

        HALL until this was completed. We left at 5.40am, (0540) leaving only
        ground security present.


                                                                M G LONG SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
^         PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE
WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE
END OF REPORT
                                                                         STATION

               JAMES ELLIS
               COLLEY
ADDRESS        S YORKSHIRE POL
               HAMMERTON RD, SHEFFIELD
AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION: POL PS1164


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 030689                                                J E COLLEY (SIGNED)



          I AM A POLICE SERGEANT IN THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE, PRESENTLY

          STATIONED AT HAMMERTON ROAD POLICE STATION.

          ON SATURDAY THE 15TH OF APRIL 1989 (150489), I COMMENCED DUTY AT THE

          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND MY DUTES ON THAT DAY WERE IN THE
          POLICE ROOM BENEATH THE NORTH STAND, AS ONE OF THREE SERGEANTS

          RESPONSIBLE FOR THE RECEPTION, DOCUMENTATION AND DETENTION OF

          PRISONERS ARRESTED IN CONNECTION WITH THE SEMI FINAL FOOTBALL MATCH.

          THE FIRST FEW HOURS OF THIS DUTY WERE QUIET.
          FROM APPROXIMATELY 1.30 PM (1330) ON THAT DATE A STEADY STREAM OF
          PRISONERS ARRIVED AT THE POLICE ROOM. THESE HAD BEEN ARRESTED MOSTLY

          FOR OFFENCES INVOLVING DRINK. THE VOLUME OF PRISONERS WAS SUCH THAT

          I WOULD DESCRIBE OUR SITUATION AS VERY BUSY AND I WOULD HAVE

          EXPECTED THAT, HAD THE MATCH PROGRESSED NORMALLY, THEN WE WOULD HAVE

          HAD A LARGE NUMBER AT THE END OF THE DAY.     I BASE THAT JUDGEMENT ON

          FOUR YEARS OF REGULARLY PERFORMING THIS DUTY (AND NO OTHER DUTIES) AT

          FOOTBALL MATCHES AT THAT GROUND.
          WHEN THE POLICE ROOM IS BUSY THERE IS A VERY HIGH LEVEL OF NOISE,

          MOSTLY FROM PRISONERS PROTESTING THEIR INNOCENCE, AND FROM THE
COLLEY                 JAMES   E LLIS                                   2


DOCUMENTATION QUESTIONS + ANSWERS.

ON THAT DAY THE NOISE LEVEL WAS SUCH THAT I WAS COMPLETELY UNAWARE OF

ANY RADIO TRAFFIC OR OF ANY OTHER EVENTS EXCEPT WHAT WAS HAPPENING IN
THE POLICE ROOM.

AT ABOUT 3.00 PM (1500) THE FLCW OF PRISONERS ABRUPTLY STOPPED.

I BECAME AWARE OF AN UNUSUALLY HIGH LEVEL OF NOISE FROM ACTIVITY

OOTSIDE THE POLICE ROOM AND WAS INFORMED THAT A MAJOR DISASTER HAD
OCCURRED.

ON LOOKING OUT OF THE POLICE ROOM I SAW A GREAT NUMBER OF PEOPLE LAID

ON STRETCHERS AND HOARDINGS ALLOVER THE AREA BETWEEN THE POLICE ROOM

AND THE GYMNASIUM.

MY FIRST THOUGHTS WERE OF THE MEDIA COVERAGE OF THE HEYSEL STADIUM

DISASTER AND I IMAGINED AN INCIDENT CONFINED TO A SMALL AREA OF THE
GROUND.

AT IHE SAME TIME, I WAS AWARE OF MY RESPONSIBILITIES TOWARDS THE

PRISONERS.    I THEREFORE DECIDED THAT, AS RESCUE WAS UNDER WAY, I WOULD

BE MOST USE IF, I DID NOT GO TOTHE SCENE BUT REMAIN WHERE I WAS AND

APPLY MYSELF TO ASSISTING IN A SECONDARY CAPACITY AND LEAVE THE RESCUE

WORK ITSELF TO THOSE WHO WERE ALREADY THERE.
THE FIRST THING DONE WAS TO RELEASE THE PRISONERS.    THE REASONING

BEHIND THIS WAS THAT DOING SO WOULD FREE THE POLICE ROOM AND ITS STAFF

TO HE USED FOR THE DISASTER.     THOSE PRISONERS STILL AT THE GROUND WERE
RELEASED.    HAVING BEEN VERBALLY CAUTIONED BY THE SERGEANT WHO RET.EASED

THEM.
FROM THAT TIME UNTIL I WENT OFF DUTY AT 7.00 PM (1900) WE BUSIED
OURSELVES DOING THOSE JOBS WE COULD THINK OF WHICH OTHERS WOULD HAVE

DONE THEREBY FREEING THEM FOR DISASTER DUTIES, EG. WE ACCEPTED THE

RADIOS BEING HANDED BACK IN.
WE ALSO RAN MESSAGES FROM THE POLICE ROOM PHONES.
        COLLEY               JAMES   ELLIS


        MY INVOLVEMENT IN THE DISASTER ITSELF WAS NIL.



                                                    J E COLLEY PS1164 SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

         TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                               3433
In c id e n t    102   260390 OP8Q64        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER    S2800

                                                                                S ta tio n

 ^ fe a m e             HARDY
 Forenames                 IAN
Age                                             Date of birth
Address                 S YORKSHIRE POL
                        HAMMERTON RD, SHEFFIELD
Occupation              POL PS1127
Telephone

IC                      Height                  Build
Hair colour

Hair type

m                                              Complexion
Facial hair

Glasses                 Use                    Accent
Number of Pages
Dated                                                                             Signed

                At 9.00 am (0900) Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I caritienced duty

                and attended at Hillsborough Football Stadium where I took up duties

                in the Police Room. My allocated duty for the day being that of
                Custody Sergeant along with Sergeants 838 LONG and 1164 COLLEY.

                Once the Police Room was prepared for prisoner reception there was

                little for the staff to do unless someone was arrested.

                A Police UHF radio is normally in the Police Room and on this day I

                heard several messages from officers on duty outside the ground

                relating to large groups of people on the footpath outside public
                houses drinking.   I particularly remanber one message which named the

                'Royal' Public House, Penistone Road. According to records, the first

                prisoner who was brought to the Police Room had been arrested at 1.40

                pm (1340) for attempting to enter the ground whilst in possession of

                alcohol.

                                                                                             3434
                                                                  PAGE    2
                                                                  S2800 .

From that time onwards, prisoners started arriving at the police room,

initially in ones and twos but, at about 2.15 pm (1415) the number of
prisoners arriving at the Police Room increased dramatically and,

between 2.15 pm (1415) and 3.15 pm (1515) when any attempt to process

any other prisoners was abandoned, 25 prisoners were brought to the

police rocm.   This number does not include those brought to the Police
Room prior to ejection.

These prisoners were from both ends of the ground and so were both

Nottingham Forest and Liverpool fans.

The one thing I did notice about the vast majority of these prisoners

was that, even if they had not been arrested for alcohol related

offences, they had been drinking alcohol, same in very large

quantities and most of them were very verbally abusive and aggressive.
One prisoner assaulted the arresting officer whilst being booked in

by the custody sergeant and had to be physically restrained.   Outside

the police room and to the rear of the North Stand it is usual

practice to have a mobile cell unit parked and for prisoners to be

transferred from the Police Room onto the cell unit and when that is

full the prisoners ware taken to Hammerton Road Police Station for
verification of identities and for other enquiries to be completed.
On this occasion, there were two cell units and one or two Personnel

Carriers parked outside the Police Room for prisoner transportation.

We managed to send a small number of prisoners to Hammerton Road

before the large influx of prisoners but were prevented from sending

any more because of the sheer volume of prisoners arriving at the

Police Rocm.   Shortly before prisoner process was abandoned, I felt we

were approaching the stage where the numbers of prisoners would

overwhelm our facilities, a situation I have never before known.

At about 3.15 pm (1515) a female member of the St John Ambulance

Brigade came into the Police Room, explained that there were large
                                                                 PAGE    3
                                                                 S2800

numbers of casualties outside and requesting adhesive labels for

casualty identification.   Wiese labels were supplied and I then

accompanied this lady outside the police room where I was met by a

scene of pandemonium.   There were people lying all over the floor,
on stretchers and in chairs.

I then went towards the ramp which leads from the pitch to the area

near the Police Room.   This ramp is situated between the North Stand
and the Spion Kop. As I reached the ramp, I was met by numerous

football supporters, many of whom were carrying stretchers or

advertising hoardings being used as stretchers to carry injured people

off the pitch. Along with other officers I directed the apparently

less badly injured to areas which would not obstruct access for
ambulances and I directed the badly injured to the gymnasium.
One man who was brought on a makeshift stretcher appeared very badly

injured and seemed to have stopped breathing.   I accompanied this man

and his friends into the gymnasium where I administered mouth to mouth

resuscitation. A police wcman administered external heart massage.

We kept up this resuscitation attempt for approximately 15 minutes

until told by a doctor (details unknown) that the man was dead. His
body was then placed in the area set aside in the gymnasium for bodies

and I returned to the area outside the gymnasium where I generally

assisted with First Aid both to fans and police officers until I was

asked to take an ambulance with a badly injured fan to hospital.    I

drove the ambulance, accompanied by PC ADAMS ('D' Division) to the
Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

On completion of that duty I returned the ambulance to the waiting

area at Herries Road bus garage and then returned to the stadium.

I then assisted generally in the gymnasium with security, body

labelling and various other duties.

I also assisted Sergeant LONG in administering verbal cautions to all
                                                                          PAGE      4
                                                                          S2800

         those people who had been arrested but had not been transported from

         the ground.    I was released from duty at 10.00 pm (2200) that evening.
         I have worked at Hillsborough Football Stadium regularly for the two

         years I have been posted to 'F' Division, and although I am aware that

         other officers have much more experience of policing the ground, I am

         able to state, that during the times I have been on duty at the ground
         both as Custody Sergeant and on crowd control duties, I have never

         ccma across a more aggressive, abusive and drunken group of prisoners

         as those who were processed on 15th April 1989 (150489).




                                                                I HARDY SIGNED
 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
END OF REPORT




                                                                                        3437
In c id e n t     102   260390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                               STATEMENT NUMBER    S1500

                                                                                  S ta tio n
 ^feiame                 HALL
Forenames                ROBERT TERENCE
A ge                                           Date of birth
Address                 HAMMERTON RD

Occupation              POL PC341
Telephone

IC                      Height                 Build
Hair colour

Hair type

m                                              Complexion
Facial hair

Glasses                 Use                   Accent
Number of Pages

Dated                                                                               Signed

                I am a Police Constable 341 in the South Yorkshire Police
            stationed at Hairmerton Rd.

            At 8am (0800) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I reported at
            Sheffield Wednesday Football ground for duties in the Police Room for

            the Send. Final match Liverpool v Notts Forest.

            Between 8am (0800) & 1.30pm (1330) I was with numerous preparations
            of the gymnasium, checking the stands for security-suspicious
            incidents etc.

            At 1.30pm (1330) I went for a meal break and returned to the Police

            Room about 10 mins later & continued duties in connection with
            prisoner process.

            From this time onwards prisoners were being brought to the Police Room
            in a steady flow. The majority being under the influence of drink.

            After being processed the prisoners were taken frcm the Police Rocm

                                                                                               3438
                                                                  PAGE    2
                                                                  S1500

and placed on the Prison bus situated outside the Police Rocm.

As kick off time approached there were several prisoners waiting to be

processed and was made aware of the match starting due to the increase
in the noise coming from the spectators.

A short time later I was made aware that same sort of incident had

occurred at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and that sane
spectators were dead.

The Police Rocm was very busy at this time, and after all the

prisoners had been processed and were about to be transferred to the

prison buses the Police Room door was opened and I saw that the whole
area outside the Police Roan was covered by injured people being

attended to by St Johns Ambulance personnel Police officers & many
others.

There was no way to get across to the Prison bus and the prisoners
were detained in the cell in the Police Rocm.

I remained in the Police Roan but several other officers went out to
give assistance/help to the injured.

By this time I had been made aware that a large number of people were

dead and the bodies were being taken into the gymnasium which was to

be used as a 'morgue' and that we were now dealing with a major
incident.

Sore time later when a lot of the injured had been taken from outside
the police room to hospital access was then possible to the prison bus

and all of the prisoners from the bus & cell were verbally cautioned
and released.

Some of the prisoners were still under the influence drink and when

the circumstances of the incident were explained to them they showed

no concern but only to ask what the score was and if their team had
won.

Aftar all the prisoners had been released I manned the telephone
                                                                         PAGE      3
                                                                         S1500

         situated in the Police Reran (Which is on the Hanmerton Rd switchboard)

         and was the only means of external communication with the Police Room

         and Gymnasium and carried messages or contacted whoever was required
         on the telephone.

         On numerous occasions I had to go into the Gymnasium to find the

         persons that were being phoned and saw the numerous bodies laid out.

         I remained on duty throughout the night manning this telephone until

         about 5.30am (0530) when all the bodies had been removed to the Medico
        Legal Centre, Watery St.


                                                                       SIGNED
   iTEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
END OF REPORT




                                                                                       3440
                                                                            STATION

                JOHN PHILIP
                JONES
ADDRESS        HAMMERTON RD PSTN
               SHEFFIELD
AGE / DATE OF BIKIH: 34            22031955
OCCUPATION:    POL PC1403


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 080589                                             J P JONES PC1403 (SIGNED)



          I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police at present
          stationed at Hairrnerton Road Police Station.

          At 8.00am (0800) Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I camienced duty

          at the Hillsborough football stadium in connection with the FA Cup

          semi final game between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.       On this

          occasion I was to perform duty in the police room to assist in
          searching, photographing and detention of persons arrested in or near

          to the stadium.

          During the afternoon I did not make a note of the time, I became aware

          that casualties were being carried to the covered area beneath the

          North Stand outside the police/First Aid rooms.       I left the police

          room and tended to a number of young men lying on advertising boards,

          one of whom was unconscious.   I remained with the latter until he was

          placed in an ambulance some time later.

          At 4.00pm (1600) that day I went into the gymnasium where I saw

          numerous deceased persons laid out on the floor.       I was instructed by
          a Superintendent to standby an unattended body and went across to the

          deceased, a white female, who I estimated at that time to be 25-35
        JONES                 JOHN    P H ILIP


        years of age, having dark brown curly hair, of stocky build,

        approximately 5'6" (5'6) tall. A search was made of her clothing in
        an attempt to identify her but no identification was found.        She was

        dressed in the following; yellow/grey coloured Liverpool anorak, red

        Liverpool football shirt, red jogging bottoms, white socks, grey and

       white training shoe on right foot,                               knickers,

       white Liverpool T shirt,            bra.

       The deceased had a mark on her left knee but I was unable to ascertain
        if the mark was old or new.

       The deceased was in possession of the following property;         #14.00

       cash, Liverpool supporters club coach ticket endorsed coach 3 S/F 34

        3, match ticket for Leppings Lane - standing area, one boiled sweet,

       match programme.

       At 4.25pm (1625) that day death was certified by Doctor Roberts,
                               St Helens.         The deceased remained unidentified

       and was allocated body number 18.
       At 4.50am (0450) Sunday 16th April 1989 (160489), the deceased and her

       property were conveyed by ambulance to the mortuary at the Medico-

       Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield.          I understand that the

       deceased has since been identified as Paula Ann SMITH.


                                                           J P JONES PC1403 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:      080589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:       P E SMITH PC1285
In c id e n t     102   260390 QP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                            STATEMENT NUMBER    S2785

                                                                               S ta tio n

 Surname                HULLEY
Forenames               MICHAEL WILLIAM
Age                     21       100           Date of birth
Address                 HAMMERTON RD PSTN

Occupation              POL PC1910
Telephone

IC                      Height                 Build
Hair colour
Hair type

                                               Complexion
Facial hair

Glasses                 Use                    Accent
Number of Pages
Dated                   070689                                                   Signed

                Semi Final at Hillsborough on 15th April 1989 (150489).

                On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) at 9 am (0900) I paraded for duty

                at Hillsborough football ground for the F.A. Cup semi final between

                Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. My duties at the event were to be

                confined in the Police room which is situated beneath the North Stand.
                The Officer in charge of the Police Roam for the event was Inspector

                BARKER. My personal duty was the searching of persons who had been

                arrested in and around the ground who were brought to the Police rocm
                for process.

                In the period prior to the match it was busy in the Police roan and

                before the disaster we dealt with about 30 prisoners. The prisoners

                were mainly Liverpool fans and in the main for drink related offences

                although I remember one lad who had been arrested for obstruction

                (ticket tout). He was only about twenty years old and he had about 20

                                                                                            3443
                                                                  PAGE      2
                                                                  S2785

tickets on him and about #700 in cash.    I recall at one point tearing

on the Police rocm radio a Police Officer who was obviously on duty
outside the ground asking ground control if they knew where a group of
Liverpool fans that were with him could get a drink and I was amazed

when directions were given to local pubs.     I remember thinking that at

one time they would have been directed to the ground and kept there
until the gates opened.

At about 1.30 pm (1330) I went for a meal, chicken and chips.     I

returned to the Police room at about 2.15 pm (1415) where it continued
to be busy.   Frcm this point I can't be sure about times so I'll not

bother quoting any but I remember tearing radio traffic to the effect

that a serious situation was developing, I don't know who said it or

to what part of the ground they were refering to although now I

realize it was obviously Leppings Lane.    I assumed, not unreasonably,
having past experience of Liverpool matches where trouble is expected

that fighting had broken out.   I didn't realize what was in store. A

short while later I heard a commotion outside the Police rocm and

thought that it was probably a load of prisoners coining through.      I

went to the door which gave me a view of the area between the North
Stand and the gymnasium, there was just mayhem with people being

carried on makeshift stretchers and laid on the ground.     I remember

seeing Officers carrying these casualties together with supporters and

I remember seeing injured people not on stretchers but being helped

by others because they were unable to stand on their own.    I went out

and started to help with the injured.    I still didn't know what had

happened.   I remember helping to get an air way into somebody's mouth
after getting him into a recovery position.    I recall at one point

whilst I was helping with an injured lad that I looked up and saw

someone who I think was a doctor put a blanket or something over a

young boy's face and I realized he was dead, I couldn't believe it.
                                                                    PAGE     3
                                                                    S2785

 I think I was then working in a daze.    I recall teaming up with Roy

GREEN, the Officer I work normal shifts with and together we helped carry
people from the area of the gangway that runs between the North Stand

and the Kop.     We sat people up against a wall beneath the North Stand

and I recall looking up and seeing Liverpool fans cm the upper

level of North Stand urinating against a wall, it was then raining

down onto the officers and injured below.     By this time a cordon of

Police Officers were strung across from the groundsman's hut to a point
of the North Stand and in front of them were groups of aggressive

supporters.    I think at this point I believed that supporters were

trying to invade the area at the rear of the North Stand to have a go

at the Police and I felt frightened and threatened.     There were so

many dead and dying and I just couldn't believe it. At one point

I helped to carry a dead lad into the gym and when I went inside the

gym the scenes and the bodies lined up was beyond belief.     I felt

terrible. I remember helping PC Pete SMITH to an ambulance where he

was given oxygen. He was in a very distressed state and I sat in the

ambulance with him for a short time.     Other than this all I can say is

that I helped generally with the injured and the ones who had died.

At some stage I recall being near to the ambulances and I saw the

Forest fans filing from the kop and away from the ground and after

this things seem to quieten down. After things had calmed down I went

back into the Police room and sat down I felt drained and my stomach

was in turmoil. As I was sitting there Ch. Supt. Brian MOLE came in

and asked me if I was ok I remember feeling better for seeing him.       I

stayed in the Police room for a while and then somebody asked me if
I'd go into the gym and record and label property that was being

brought frcm the pitch.   I felt sick when I went in the gym to see all

those people lined up and dead all for a football match.    I was

relieved from this duty after about an hour but I remained at the


                                                                                 3445
                                                                          PAGE     4
                                                                          S2785

         ground and spent some time at one of the gates on Penistone Road where

         the Press had gathered.    Later in the night as the relatives started

         to arrive at the ground I worked together with PC Bob SIMONS outside

         the door which led to the initial photo I.D. area.    It was one of the

         most depressing duties that I ever have or ever want to perform.    I

         eventually went off duty at 5.30 am (0530) Sunday rooming.




                                                              M W HULLEY SIGNED
 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:

^tlESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
END OF REPORT




                                                                                       3446
In c id e n t     102   260390 QP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                               STATEMENT NUMBER    S3026

                                                                                  S ta tio n

^^name                  MARSHALL
 Forenames              MARK FRANCIS
Age                                            Date of birth
Address                 HAMMERTON RD PSTN
                        SHEFFIELD S62ND
Occupation              POL PC766
Telephone

IC                      Height                 Build
Hair colour

Hair type

                                               Complexion
Facial hair
Glasses                 Use                    Accent
Number of Pages

Dated                                                                               Signed

                DUTIES ON SATURDAY, 15TH APRIL 1989, (150489), POLICE ROOM
                I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, I am presently
                stationed at Hamnerton Road Police Station, Sheffield.

                I comnenced duty at 0900 hrs, on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489),

                at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, the Hillsborough Stadium.

                My duties for the day were to assist in the detention searching and

                documentation of persons arrested in or around the ground.    These

                duties were carried out in a purpose built Police Rocm, at the rear of
                the North Stand, opposite the gymnasium.

                On arrival, the Police Room was prepared for the reception of

                prisoners expected during the day.

                Later in the morning I have no record of the exact time prisoners

                began to be brought to the Police Room, by Police Officers.
                Documentation and searching was carried out, and then the prisoners
                                                                   PAGE
                                                                   S3026

detained, eventually to go into two prison buses parked outside.

There was a steady stream of prisoners a large number were under the

influence of alcohol and many difficult to deal with.    The prisoners
were supporters of both clubs.

As the kick off time approached the flow of prisoners began to
increase.

At a time around 1515 hours, I was suddenly aware that no more

prisoners were being brought to the Police Room, and all had been
processed.

I saw Police Sergeant LONG at the door who said, "There are a load of

bodies, out here."    I at first thought that he was referring to more
prisoners, however when none appeared I went to the door.

At the rear of the North Stand, is a hard standing area, between the

Police Room, and the Gymnasium, to my left was the St John Ambulance
room.

Between the Prison Buses an ambulance and other police vehicles, I saw

a large number of persons, lying on the ground, some were on
hoardings.   To my right I saw Police Officers and other persons

running towards the Police room, some were carrying casualties on

hoardings or between them, some were carrying casualties by themselves

I immediatley left the Police Roam with other officers; I went to an

area where some 9 or 10 persons were lying unattended.

Some were conscious others unconscious, a white male in his late 20's
and a white male in his early teens were obviously dead, and had a
blue pallor to their faces.

I attended to the casualties in my vicinity checking to see if there

were signs of consciousness or life.   I placed some in the recvoery

position.    I kept moving round to each casualty checking their
condition.

Gradually persons began arriving to help.   I recall an off duty
                                                                  PAGE    3
                                                                  S3026

ambulance man arriving, I placed him with what I considered the worst

casualty, and as more help arrived continued to do this.

I recall a Police officer giving resuscitation to the youth in his

teens who I believed dead, I assisted, but it was apparent he was

beyond saving.   I realised at this point that Doctors were arriving to

assist, one pronounced the young boy dead, and I assisted to move him

out of sight behind the prison bus. A similar procedure was carried
out with the other person I believed to be dead.

I saw two Doctors again try to revive the young boy with a

resuscitation machine, but I believe they failed.
Mora Casualties were arriving, some obviously dead were now taken
straight into the gymnasium.

I then spoke to a Doctor, who requested assistance in getting the most

urgant casualties to hospital, with another Police officer, I then

began carrying stretchers to ambulances at Penistone Road. There was

obviously a shortage of stretchers, and these were taken from
ambulances still arriving.

I do not recall how many casualties I took to the waiting ambulances

but I would estimate in excess of six. Each stretcher initially had

to be carried over less seriously injured, as so many casualties were
lying in the area.

Eventually walking casualties were taken to waiting ambulances. When
I had assurred myself no other casualties were in the vicinity of

the North Stand and the gymnasium, I reported to the Police Room, and

assisted with the release of prisoners. I then stood by.

Later in the evening I assisted with Comnunications between the

gymnasium and Hammerton Road, and assisted with the preparation for

the attendance of friends and relatives for identification.
Latar still I assisted in the reception of friends and relatives.

At 0415 hrs, Sunday 16th April 1989 (160489), I was stood down from
                                                    PAGE     4
                                                    S3026

         duty.




                                M F MARSHALL PC 766 SIGNED
 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:
WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                 3450
In c id e n t     102   260390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                               STATEMENT NUMBER    S2592

                                                                                  S ta tio n
      lame              LANGDALE
 Forenames              GEORGE MICHAEL
Age                     21 100                 Date of birth
Address                 ROTHERHAM RD TRAFFIC SECTION

Occupation              POL PS526
Telephone

IC                      Height                 Build
Hair colour
Hair type

                                               Complexion
Facial hair

Glasses                 Use                    Accent
Number of Pages

Dated                                                               G M LANGDALE Signed

                At 8am (0800) on Saturday 15th April 89 (150489) I comrtencedduty at
                Claywheels Lane Sheffield in company with PC 701 WHITE.

                The cell bus unit I had been instructed to collect and take into the
                football ground was not available.

                An alternative unit was obtained and moved into the ground.

                I then assisted in the placing of the mobile canteen unit.

                At 9.30am (0930) I was instructed by Inspector SCARF to go to the sub­

                division at Hammerton Road and remain on stand by duty until required.

                At 10am (1000) I reported to the Station Sergeant that the vehicle was
                on stand by outside that station.

                I ramained at that location all day until instructed that we could
                return to Claywheels.

                I want off duty at 8.30pn (2030).
                                           PAGE 2
                                           S2592



                                G LANGDALE SIGNED
 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:
WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
END OF REPORT




                                                    3452
In c id e n t    102   260390 OP8Q64            DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                                 STATEMENT NUMBER   S2656

                                                                                    Station

 l^m am e                 WHITE

 Forenames                ROBERT LESLIE

 Age                      29                       Date of birth

 Address


 Occupation               POL PC701

 Telephone

 IC                       Height                    Build

 Hair colour

 Hair type

•s                                                  Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses                  Use                      Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated                                                                                Signed


                On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), my duties were to collect a cell

                bus from Claywheels Lane, take it to Hammerton Road Police Station

                and standby.       I was accompanied by PS 526 LANGDALE throughout the

                day.
                I remained on duty at Hammerton Road, I heard of the disaster

                and then later assisted with friends and relatives of the deceased at

                Hammerton Road Police Station.
                At no time did I attend at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.




                                                                   R. LESLIE PC701 SIGNED

  STATEMENT TAKEN
            PLACE:
                  TIME:                 DATE:   040689                                         3453
  WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:
In c id e n t    102     260390 QP8064     DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                            STATEMENT NUMBER    S2455

                                                                               S ta tio n

 Surname                 NAYLOR
 Forenames               C
Age                      39                    Date of birth
Address


Occupation               POL PS2514
Telephone

 IC                      Height                Build
Hair colour

Hair type

                                               Complexion
Facial hair

Glasses                  Use                   Accent
Number of Pages

Dated                                                                            Signed


                At 7.00 am (0700) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I commenced

                duties in connection with the F.A. Cup Semi-Final.
                My duty on this date was manning the Cell Bus in company with P.C. 1467
                GOVER.

                At approx 8.00 am (0800) we took up our position between the Police

                Room and the Gymnasium at the ground. We were briefed at the outset

                that we would be accommodating any Liverpool supporters taken as

                prisoners. Just prior to the kick-off the bus was full of prisoners

                most of which were crazed with drink.

                After the kick off when details of the disaster began to emerge,

                injured and dead bodies were stacked at the both sides of the bus.

                Myself and P.C. GOVER gave First Aid to the injured and generally

                assisted the Medical Authorities.
                After about half an hour the casualties were taken into the gymnasium.

                                                                                            3454
                                                                        PAGE 2
                                                                        S2455
         At about 4.00 pn (1600) that date the prisoners were all released from
         the bus with a verbal caution.

         At about 6.00 pn (1800) we left the ground.

         At 7.15 pn (1915), we went off duty at Carcroft Garage.




                                                       C NAYLOR PS2514 SIGNED
 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:    070689
WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

^fclCERS SIGNATURE:
END OF REPORT




                                                                                  3455
In c id e n t    102   260390 QP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                            STATEMENT NUMBER    S2448

                                                                               S ta tio n

 Surname               GOVER

 Forenames             BARRIE

 Age                   53                      Date of birth

 Address               ROAD TRAFFIC DIVISION
                        CARCROFT

 Occupation            POL PC1467

 Telephone

 IC                    Height                  Build

 Hair colour

 Hair type

fL                                             Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses               Use                     Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated                                                                            Signed


                At 7am (0700) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I commenced duty

                at Carcroft in connection with the F.A. Cup Semi-Final at

                Hillsborough .
                My duties for the semi final was manning the Doncaster Cell unit

                together with PS2514 NAYLOR.
                At approx. 8 am (0800), we took position inside the Sheffield

                Wednesday football ground, between the Police Room and the Gymnasium.

                Our duties were to accommodate the Liverpool prisoners.
                Shortly before the kick off, the unit was full of prisoners, most of

                who were drunk.
                Shortly after the kick off at about 3.5 pn (1505), we were informed

                that the match had been stopped. I then saw persons being carried

                on hoardings as make shift stretchers and these persons were placed

                either side of our cell unit and to the front, where they were
                                                                          PAGE 2
                                                                          S2448
        attended to by St Johns Ambulance personnel, Policemen & other

        civilian personnel, including other supporters.

        PS Naylor and myself assisted where possible but we were responsible

        for the prisoners on board our cell unit.

        At about 4 pm (1600), our prisoners were taken into the charge office

        and released with a verbal caution.

        At about 6 pm (1800) we left the ground and at 7.15 (1915), went off

        duty at Carcroft.



                                                          B GCfVER PC1467 SIGNED

          TAKEN
          PLACE
          TIME:             DATE:   070689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE

END OF REPORT




                                                                                   3457
In c id e n t    102      260390 QP8064       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                              STATEMENT NUMBER     S610

                                                                                  Station
 Surname                  SHARPLES
 Forenames                JAMES
Age                                              Date of birth
Address                   MERSEYSIDE POLICE

 Occupation               POL DCC

 Telephone

 IC                       Height                 Build

Hair colour

Hair type
                                                 Complexion

 Facial hair

Glasses                   Use                    Accent

Number of Pages

 Dated                    170489                                         J SHARPLES Signed


                On Saturday, 15th April, 1989 (150489), I attended the Hillsborough
                Ground in order to watch the semi final between Liverpool and Notts

                Forest.    I attended with my wife and daughter, leaving Liverpool at 11

                a.m. (1100) that morning.     I was accompanied by a driver who informed

                me that road works on the M62 would make the journey difficult and as

                such we would take the M56 A616 Woodhead route to the ground.

                We ran into road works at the end of the M56 at Hyde where the A616
                to Sheffield was to be picked up. Traffic was very heavy and forty-

                five minutes passed before we joined the A616.        By this time it was

                12.40 p.m (1240).     Slow moving traffic along the A616 occurred for

                some time and some miles further on at a large roundabout, where if

                my recollection is correct, the M67 joined the A616, there was a
                further traffic tail back leading to another fifteen to twenty minute

                delay. Even allowing for the fact that 25,000 fans approximately were

                                                                                             3458
                                                                    PAGE    2
                                                                    S610

travelling to Hillsborough, I was surprised by the volume of

traffic.     15113 was only one route to Sheffield and acknowledging that

many drivers following the previous year's experience may well have

decided to avoid the M62, there did seem to be an excess of traffic.
At the time I pondered whether many people were attending without

tickets.     Eventually, we travelled over Woodhead on the A616 and some
nine miles from Sheffield were diverted by the police at a junction

which I cannot recall but which strangely seemed after about one

mile, to take us back on to the A616 again.

At that point there were two public houses and signs said eight and a

half miles to Sheffield.     Considerable numbers of Liverpool fans were

having a drink outside the public houses as the weather was fine and

sunny.     From that point on traffic moved relatively quickly and there

were no traffic jams until we arrived at the ground. Throughout the

last three or four miles, every public house had Liverpool fans

consuming alcohol but I observed no drunkenness or hooliganism.
Traffic controls by South Yorkshire Police were in operation and

there were a considerable number of police officers in attendance

along the route. The police operation seemed well organised as there

was no delay at all in approaching the ground.      We arrived at

2.15 p.m. (1415) approximately, having taken three and a quarter hours

to travel the comparatively short distance. (70 miles)

On arriving at the ground there was a traffic light junction and if

my recollection is correct, a road leading to the left which was

Leppings Lane.     There were very large crowds of mainly Liverpool

fans, the atmosphere seemed happy and there were no signs of

hooliganism or drunkenness.     There were plenty of police officers
around and, in fact, we took directions from two of them. We turned

left into Leppings Lane and travelled around the ground on to the

main road which I think is the A61 and turned right to go to the main


                                                                                3459
                                                                 PAGE     3
                                                                 S610
entrance of the club, where we were dropped by the driver as it was

impossible for him to get in the car park at that time because of

congestion.
It is fair to say, that there was no undue congestion, coaches were

dropping Notts Forest fans off and again there were no signs of

drunkenness or hooliganism.    However, the crowds were more thin and

the whole area was much less crowded than the Leppings Lane end. On

walking the short distance to the Directors entrance, I was asked for

spare tickets on two occasions.    There were again a number of mounted

officers and foot patrols in existence.

I entered the ground at approximately 2.25 p.m. (1425) and remained in

a guest lounge with other persons until 2.50 p.m. (1450).

On entering the Directors Box which, to put the geography into

context, placed the Liverpool fans to my left and opposite and the

Notts Forest fans to my right and in the stand I occupied.
At 2.50 p.m. (1450) it was obvious that the Notts Forest portions of

the ground were fully occupied. There still seemed to be space in

the Leppings Lane area on the wings of the standing terrace.     The

centre portion seemed packed. At that stage there was nothing to

suggest that anything was untoward. The teams preceded by Liverpool

came on to the ground. There was a gap of about one minute between

the two teams.   Both teams were obviously greeted with considerable

support from their own fans.    Prior to the kick off I noticed same

swaying in the centre part of the standing terrace at the lappings

Lane end amongst Liverpool fans.    I commented briefly to the

Liverpool Directors sat along side me, that I was surprised at the

swaying with the match being an all ticket game.    Garments were made

by others about forged tickets etc.
Within three or four minutes Liverpool hit the bar and the ball went

inmediately back down towards the Liverpool end. Whilst


                                                                              3460
                                                                  PAGE
                                                                  S610

visually following the game down towards the Lepping Lane end it was

immadiately apparent that there had been a considerable sway of
people in the centre part of the standing terrace. There still

seemed reasonable amounts of movements on the two wings and the

contrast between the centre and the two wings, in terms of density of

people was quite marked.

At that point youths immediately began to climb over the fences and I

assumed that a crowd disorder problem was developing.   It is true

that some individual police officers endeavoured to stop the people
cli-ribing over the fence, as in that first moment, it did appear to be

the case that a crowd invasion of the pitch was occurring. However,

my observations were that the police very quickly, certainly within a

minute or two, began to assist people climbing over the fences.    Some

of the crowd encroached out onto the playing area and a police
officer of some rank, I think Superintendent, approached the referee

to take the players off the pitch.

For the next fifteen to twenty minutes I observed the scene and

throughout that period I have to admit that I still considered it to

be an attempt by youths to climb over the fences and obtain access to

the ground and did not at any moment feel that we were dealing with a

crowd safety problem.
When stretchers appeared and the actions of officers and other people

demonstrated clearly that there were casualties, it then became

apparent that injuries or worse at taken place. However, apart from

people at the Leppings Lane end it was my belief that virtually

everyone else at the ground thought we were dealing with a crowd

disorder problem.
The Notts Forest fans surrounding the Directors Box were angry and

remonstrated strongly about what they saw as hooliganism.   The Notts

Forest contingent situated in the main stand area to my right made a


                                                                          3461
                                                                 PAGE   5
                                                                 S610

chant of 'You'll never get into Europe now' and this continued for

sane time. One angry Liverpool fan ran the length of the pitch and

remonstrated with the Notts Forest fans. His behaviour left a lot to
be desired and was provocative and he was duly arrested.

It then became apparent to all concerned that because of the

stretchers that this was a serious incident and the attitude of the

crowd changed.   They began to applaud the stretcher bearers

comprising, Liverpool fans, stewards and police officers and the

developing ugly atmosphere of seme minutes before swiftly abated.

Some of the Liverpool Directors had left the Directors Box and when I

saw the stretchers which clearly contained fatalities, I immediately

left the Directors Box in order to provide whatever assistance I

could. That was about 3.25 p.m. (1525) to 3.30 p.m. (1530) and I saw

a police woman who informed me that there were at least nine
fatalities.   I gave that information to the various Directors of the

clubs concerned, most of whcm gathered in the board room, although

some of them went on to the pitch in order to assist the two managers

and others.

At 3.40 p.m. (1540) approximately, I informed the control roan
at Merseyside Police of the situation and ordered the opening of a

casualty bureau. At this time the situation on the pitch was that
most of the casualties seemed to have been extracted from the lappings

Lane end and were either receiving medical treatment in situ or were

being carried by make shift stretchers to the Notts Forest end, where

ambulances were gathering and as I now know, the Gymnasium was being

used as a temporary mortuary.   I saw many officers and non-police
officers giving resuscitation and senior officers of Assistant Chief

Constable and Superintendent rank were present at the scene throughout.

Further police officers had arrived by this stage in considerable

numbers, they were placed along the front of the stand facing the


                                                                            3462
                                                                 PAGE      6
                                                                 S610

Diractors box which contained Liverpool fans and a thick line of

police officers was placed across, roughly the half way line, as seme

Liverpool fans opposite wished to remonstrate with Notts Forest fans.

Indeed, small numbers of them had to be held back by the line of

police officers frcm so doing.

Seme Liverpool fans were clearly upset by the police line but they

were necessary and the decision to deploy them was, in my opinion,

entirely correct.
I want to the Police Control Room on a number of occasions over the

next ninety minutes.     The Control Rocm which was situated to the left

of the Directors Box at the end of the stand overlooked the Leppings

Lana standing terrace.    On entering the Control Rocm on all those

occasions there were senior South Yorkshire Police Officers present
of ranks frcm Inspector to Assistant Chief Constable. They clearly

had a grasp of the situation and were exercising control in a calm

and composed manner. A Superintendent, who at the time I did not

know his name, was briefing Assistant Chief Constable Jackson about

the opening of a gate at the rear of Leppings Lane stand. He

explained in my presence that the surge of people which had developed
in the last ten minutes before the kick-off had become so great that
he had become concerned about the safety of the public. He explained

that he had opened the gate and that, in his words, 'A few hundred

fans had entered through that gate on to the terraces.' He also

stated that an attempt was made to stop the game being commenced by

way of a radio message but was unsure as to what had happened.     He

also stated in my presence that on opening the gates and the crowd

entering he heard the roar of the crowd which intimated to him that

the teams had come on to the pitch. He was clearly an officer that

had been dealing with a fraught situation.
Throughout that period I briefed the Directors of the clubs concerned


                                                                               3463
                                                                PAGE
                                                                S610

as to the rising casualty rate and kept liaison with Assistant Chief

Constable JACKSON as well as informing the Force Control Rocm at

Merseyside of the situation.    Shortly after 4 p.m. (1600) and I would

guess about 4.15 p.m. (1615) the Directors indicated that if there

wera fatalities then they did not wish the game to continue.   I went

to the Control Rocm and asked Assistant Chief Constable JACKSON what

was his intentions. He stated that the game was to be abandoned and
instructed an officer, who I think was a Superintendent, to abandon

the match through the public address system. The officer responded

in a very professional competent way. He calmly told the crowd that

there was a major incident involving injuries. He explained to them

that many injured people had still to be removed frcm the crowd.     He
did not mention fatalities.    He asked for the support of the crowd
and then explained to them that in view of the need to give priority

to casualties, that the game had to be abandoned. He asked for their

support and a spontaneous round of applause went around the crowd.

In tny view that officer's contribution to the manner in which the

game was abandoned and then how the fans, in the main, made their way

hare, was outstanding.
By this time it was apparent to me that almost all the casualties had

been removed but there was clearly still large numbers of police

officers and others at the exact scene of the disaster.    I saw only

one ambulance enter the playing area and position itself direct in

front of the barriers at the Leppings Lane end.    I do have a vague
recollection of a second ambulance on the field and I saw a number

of ambulances situated near to the Gymnasium at the Notts Forest end

of the ground.
I did not hear any public address system used for sane considerable

time after the incident had occurred.    It is difficult to put a time

as to when the first transmission took place but I think it would be


                                                                          3464
                                                                  PAGE   8
                                                                  S610

sane thirty to forty minutes after the first signs of trouble. I do

not know who the speaker was and he did not identify himself as either

a police officer or an official of the club. The speaker asked fans

to leave the playing area in order to facilitate the ranoval of the

injured.   I myself understood what he was trying to do but many fans

on the pitch became angry as they assumed that he was suggesting that

they get back into the Leppings Lane area. He made two or three such

appeals over the next few minutes and I have to say it was possible

for him to be misunderstood.    I am not being critical and I know he

was not suggesting that the fans go back on to the terracing at

Leppings Lane but clearly people were gaining that impression.
The next transmission after that, that I heard, was the one announcing

the abandonment of the match.   There may have been other

transmissions as I was in transit from the Directors Box to the Police

Control Roan which I did not hear. During this period and again, I

cannot be sure of the exact time, I saw Fire Brigade Personnel,
together with two machines situated near Leppings Lane end. A fire

officer was certainly at the Police Control point, although I have to
say that there was not much activity by them as I feel the worst of

the incident had occurred before their arrival and there was little

for them to do.
I returned to the Board Rocm sane time after 4.45 p.m (1645) and spoke

at length to the Chairman of the Liverpool Football Club, John SMITH,

I gave him and others a briefing as to what had occurred and
indicated to them that, at that stage, the deaths were at least eighty-

four. That figure had been given to me sane manents before in the

Police Control Roan by an officer of Superintendent rank who stated

that seventy-four bodies were in the Gymnasium and ten bodies were at

Leppings Lane end and were being taken to the Gymnasium.    He stated
that at that stage a Detective Inspector was in charge of the bodies,


                                                                             3465
                                                                 PAGE     9
                                                                 S610

and the head of the C.I.D was present at the ground.

I want to the Gymnasium which was being used as a temporary mortuary.

I spoke to an officer who I think was a Chief Superintendent or a

Superintendent, identified myself and he informed me that there were

eighty-four fatalities.    This was about 5.15 (1715) to 5.30 p.m.
(1730). A number of bodies were in green body bags, the remainder
being covered in seme way, either by blankets or so on. There were a

number of South Yorkshire Police Officers in attendance and property

was being properly accounted for and there was certainly an

organisation and control about the events in the Gymnasium which was

impressive. In the stand next to the Gymnasium I saw many South

Yorkshire uniformed police officers probably totalling seventy or

eighty, who I assumed, were waiting to be debriefed.    Both amongst

them and other officers at the stadium and particularly in the

Gymnasium, there was much distress, however, that was not preventing

them frcm carrying out their duties.
I spoke to Assistant Chief Constable JACKSON about 5.45 p.m. (1745)

and informed him that I was leaving for Merseyside in order to attend

the Casualty Bureau there. At that stage, players and directors had

left or were leaving.     The South Yorkshire operation was clearly in

full swing and there was nothing further I could do. We left the

ground by way of the A61.     Junctions were manned by officers and the

traffic moved easily and I attended Merseyside Police Casualty Bureau

at Smithdown Lane Traffic Headquarters Liverpool later that evening

where I carried out duties in the force area.
I watched the media treatment of the incident developing over

succeeding hours and the first day or two and I am aware of the

various allegations that are being made.
My observations are snap-shots and can clearly only form a very small

fragment of what occurred during those hours. My timings are somewhat


                                                                              3466
                                                                 PAGE     10
                                                                 S610

vague but can perhaps be substantiated by comparison with other

statements and certainly my two calls to the Merseyside Police

Control Room and the timings should be capable of confirmation. When

I laft Liverpool that morning, I was very surprised by the time the

journey took. None of the difficulties of travel occurred within ten

milas of the ground. All the delays were on the M56 and A616 many

milas frcm Sheffield.   When approaching the ground the traffic control

operation seemed to me to be running very smoothly.    In fact, we drove

straight to the ground and turned into Leppings Lane without

hinderance, albeit, the crowds were dense. Throughout the last miles
of niy journey to the ground it was clear that South Yorkshire Police

wera running a major operation.   I saw coaches being stopped and

searched for alcohol, officers were stood at road junctions and

advising drivers where they could park.   Parking seemed controlled and

well directed.

Arriving at Leppings Lane it was clear that there were many late

arrivals, either caused by traffic congestion or because people had

gone to public houses to drink.   I first observed Liverpool fans

drinking at public houses on the A616 at two public houses which are

situated along side traffic signs which say, eight and a half miles to

Sheffield.   Throughout the journey down frcm that point I saw many

fans drinkings outside public houses, although I hasten to add there

was no signs of misbehaviour or hooliganism.
At 2.15 (1415) approximately, when we went down Leppings Lane, there

wera dense crowds but they were all well behaved.     I saw many police

officers and, in fact, a number of small side streets off Leppings

Lana had barriers across them preventing access and were manned by

police officers. I saw mounted officers in the area in front of the

Leppings Lane stand.    I have attended football matches all my life and

have worked in football grounds at Manchester United and Bolton


                                                                               3467
                                                                  PAGE   11
                                                                  S610

Wanderers.   I have been present in an operational supervisory capacity

at other grounds.   On ray arrival at Hillsborough, although it was

apparent to me that there were late arrivals, I had no other

impression than that a well organised smoothly running police

operation was taking place.

At the ground when the incident occurred, there was clearly a

misunderstanding from everyone, apart from those at the Leppings Lane

end. The police officers did not push people back off the

fencing into the ground for as long as has been suggested.   Certainly
for about a minute the officers were clearly worried by the youths

climbing over the fence but it was apparent to me that their response

changed very quickly. Although I remained convinced for seme twenty

minutes that there had been a crowd disorder problem, I assumed that

when police officers were lifting and assisting fans over the fence,

that it was the disorder that was making the police help them out

because they were concerned as to their safety. At no stage during

that twenty minutes did I think there was a tragedy in the making or
that people were losing their lives.   It was not easily visible to the

rest of the ground that people were receiving resuscitation as now I

know they were because of the large number of fans on the pitch as

well as the police and other officials.
There were angry fans on the pitch who did make threatening gestures

to Notts Forest fans and the police.   I did not see any police

officers attacked and their distress and anger in the circumstances is

now understandable.   Throughout that period there was a co-operative

approach by fans, officials, police and ambulance personnel and what
came across was a controlled operation arising out of the original
chaos.   I did see senior South Yorkshire officers on the field and any

suggestion that there was no one in charge or endeavouring to bring

order out of chaos is unfair.


                                                                              3468
                                                                  PAGE    12
                                                                  S610

On my first visit to the Police Control Room the exact time of which I

cannot recall, it was probably around about 3.40 p.m. (1540).     I saw

from the high vantage point of the Police Control Room the operation

going on. Even though the vantage point is a good one it was not very

clear as to the scale of the problem, the crowds were still dense and

in the morass of people, even from the Police Control Rocm,

observations were difficult.

The atmosphere within the Control Room was composed and professional

and senior officers up to Assistant Chief Constable level were present
throughout.   Instructions were being issued and the paraphernalia of a

major incident was being obtained.   On no occasion did I see panic or

confusion amongst the police officers despite being clearly shocked,

they seemed to know what they were doing.

On thinking over the issues since the incident and this is merely
opinion, it is ray view that such tragedies do not occur as a result of
one single incident.   The traffic delays which led to the late

arrival at the ground, coupled with the footballs fans' culture of

going for a drink and arriving at the ground just minutes before the

kick-off, together with the resulting crush and the decision to open

the gate, together with the arrival on the pitch of the teams and in
the first minutes of the game the hitting of the bar by Liverpool, in

ray view all ccme together in one tragic set of circumstances.

Liverpool fans are used to attending Anfield, where in the last twenty

minutes, one thousand fans per minute can enter the Kop, they are

marshalled into lines and are well used to it and I have no doubt that

there would be a similar expectation in the minds of many Liverpool

fans attending Hilsborough on Saturday.
I repeat, that ray thoughts, observations and involvement are only

snap-shots of the overall incident but they may prove useful.




                                                                               3469
                                                    PAGE     13
                                                    S610


                                         J SHARPLES SIGNED
 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   170489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                  3470
                                                                         STATION

                JAMES
                SHARPLES
ADDRESS:        POLICE HEADQUARTERS, MERSEYSIDE.


ACT! / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:    POLICE OFFICER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 200390                                               J SHARPLES (SIGNED)



           I am Chief Constable of Merseyside Police and have had policing
           experience at a number of football grounds throughout ray service.

           These grounds include Manchester United, Bolton and the two Bristol

           Clubs.
           On Saturday, 15th April, 1989 (150489) I attended Hillsborough

           Foctball Ground in company with ray wife and daughter in order to watch

           the F.A. Cup semi final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
           I have reiterated in ray notes orginally presented to the lord Justice

           Taylor enquiry ray observations on various matters which I saw in

           travelling to the ground. These notes were made 24 hours after the

           event.
           I attach a copy of this statement.   I merely state what ray perception

           was at that time and that ray observations were that a well organised

           smoothly running police operation was talcing place similar to many

           others I have seen and participated in over many years.

           I entered the directors' box at Hillsborough at 2.50 p.m. (1450) that

           afternoon.   In order to put ray position on the ground into context

           that placed the Liverpool fans to ray left in the lappings Lane
SHARPLES              JAMES                                                2


enclosure and the Notts Forest fans to ray right.

Present in the directors' box was Assistant Chief Constable W. JACKSON

of South Yorkshire Police.    I know Mr. JACKSON well having worked with

hinr in Greater Manchester Police.
We exchanged pleasantries and I sat down with Liverpool directors.
Mr. Jackson was sat scroe 3 or 4 rows behind me and slightly to my

right.   He was located near to the steps which led down from the box

into the directors' roans and changing area.

Prior to the kick off I noticed seme swaying in the centre part of the

standing terrace at the Leppings Lane end amongst Liverpool fans. At

that time I did not feel any apprehension although I was suprised in

an all ticket game that it was occurring.

The game commenced and sane minutes later youths began to climb over

the fences and I assumed like others that a crowd disorder problem was

developing.   I looked around for Mr. Jackson but noticed he had

obviously left to deal with the situation.     This was certainly within
a irinute or so of the problem commencing.    I remember making a comment

to any wife that "Wally has got a problem."

For the next 15-20 minutes I observed the scene and I have to admit

did not realise that a major tragedy had occurred.
I still assumed crowd disorder but when stretchers appeared I realised

that something worse had happened.

I left the box at 3.25 p.m. (1525) to 3.30 p.m. (1530) to offer
assistance and was informed by a policewoman that deaths had occurred.

I distinctly recall a conversation with a Superintendent in the

corridor leading to the directors' rooms and also a conversation with

Mr. Jackson who briefed me further.    I am not sure what time this was

but I then made a call to Merseyside Police control room informing

them of the situation and ordering the opening of casualty bureau and
SH2RPLES             JAMES                                               3


that was approximately 3.40 p.m. (1540).

I am again not sure of the time but I walked down the tunnel onto the

pitch.   I clearly recollect doing that because I remember a distraught
policewoman in the tunnel.

At that time I saw senior officers on the pitch near to the scene

including Mr. Jackson.

Frcm 4.00 p.m. (1600) to 5.30 p.m. (1730) I visited the Police Control

Rocm on a number of occasions. On entering there were always senior

South Yorkshire Police Officers present of ranks from Inspector to

Assistant Chief Constable Mr. Jackson.
Throughout that time they clearly had a grasp of the situation and

wera exercising control in a calm controlled manner.

During that period it is fair to say that amongst everyone there was

confusion and doubt as to the cause of the incident.    I was involved

in various conversations with directors, press, other guests of the

Club including M.P. 's and various scenario were being put forward.

I cnly remember one conversation concerning the opening of gates at

the Leppings Lane end. This conversation was shortly before I left

the ground at 5.45 p.m. (1745) and would probably have been between

5.00 p.m. (1700) and 5.30 p.m. (1730). At that time Mr. Jackson was
on the 'phone to Mr. Peter Wright, Chief Constable, South Yorkshire

Police. This occurred in the police control rocm.      Present were
senior officers of Superintendent and Chief Superintendent rank.

Having seen pictures of officers in the media since the event I am

certain that Superintendent MARSHALL and Chief Superintendent
DUCKENFIELD were there and that the conversation was between Mr.

Jackson and Mr. DUCKENFIELD.
Mr. Jackson was questioning Mr. DuekenfieId about what had occurred

and was relaying the information to Mr. Wright.   The questioning was
SHARPLES               JAMES                                              4


detailed and covered virtually all the circumstances leading up to the

disaster.    It also related to the opening of the gates.
I have no doubt that this was the first time that Mr. Jackson and all

concerned were examining and discussing the sequence of events in such

detail.    There was surprise and supplementary questioning from Mr.

Jackson and others which demonstrated that.I am not surprised that

such questioning had not occurred earlier.    The period frcm 3.00 p.m.

(1500) to 5.00 p.m. (1700) can only be described as fraught and

frantic.
The paraphernalia of a major disorder had to be attended to and the

gaire was only subsequently abandoned if my memory is correct at about

4.15 p.m. (1615).
On my visits to the control room the logistics of the incident and the

delicate question of how and when to cancel the game were paramount.

It has to be pointed out that many in the ground were unaware of the

gravity of the tradegy and still thought some disorder had occurred.
There had been some animosity between fans during the earlier part of

the incident.    Therefore the potential for disorder was still an issue.

During that period it is my perception that the "how" and "why" of the

disaster were not at the forefront of people's minds and in the

circumstances that was understandable.
I am aware that accusations have been made against other officers and

I have no evidence or information to assist other than what is in my

notas.
In the case of Mr. Jackson however I can say that he undeiably

endsavoured to deal with the events of that afternoon in a
professional manner.    In the control rocm he was present and involved

in the activities.
At no time did I hear him suggesting to anyone that the tragedy had
        SHARPLES             JAMES                                              5


        been caused by fans "storming" gates. As stated the issue of what

        had occurred was not at the time paramount. When briefing Mr. Wright

        it was clear to me that he and others were piecing together the

        sequence of events for the first time. There was in my presence no

        attampt by anyone to alter, amend, or distribute facts as to what had
       occurred.

       They were all deeply shaken officers endeavouring to carry out their

       duties.

                                                          J SHARPLES SIGNED

         TAKEN
         PLACE

         TIME             DATE:
WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE




m




#
                                                                                    3475
In c id e n t    102   260390 QP8064        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER    S1058

                                                                                S ta tio n

 Surname                HADFIELD
 Forenames              R

 Age                                           Date of birth
Address


 Occupation             POL CC
 Telephone

 IC                     Height                 Build
 Hair colour

Hair type

                                               Complexion
Facial hair
Glasses                 Use                    Accent
Number of Pages 3

Dated                   210489                                                     Signed


                On Saturday, 15 April 1989, (150489), I attended the football fixture

                at Hillsborough involving Nottingham Forest Football Club and
                Liverpool.    I was off duty, in plain clothes, and was accompanied by

                my son who is aged 24 and two colleagues.



                We travelled to Sheffield by private car which I parked near to

                Hammerton Road Pol Stn.   We walked from there to the football ground

                and at about 2.20pm (1420) walked by the Leppings Lane Stand from the
                western end towards the side of the ground allocated to the

                Nottingham supporters.    I therefore walked by the turnstiles were

                subsequently a disaster took place.     At about 2.15pm (1415) the road

                leading to the turnstiles was very crowded indeed, and there were

                mounted officers amongst the crowds trying to get to the turnstiles.
                I would describe the scene as very crowded and congested but this, in

                                                                                             3476
                                                                 PAGE     2
                                                                 S1058

itsalf, did not cause me any alarm.   What did strike me however, is

that on the periphery of that congested area were hundreds of

supporters who I would describe as boisterous.     There were certainly

some who were worse for drink.    It was also very noticeable that

there were many people who had no tickets and I was asked on at least

a dozen occasions if I had any tickets for sale.     I did not get the
impression that the officers at the turnstiles entrance were unable to

control the entrance, although it was very apparent that there was

dense congestion.   I walked alongside the river down to the main road

and turned left towards the side of the ground allocated to the

Nottingham Forest supporters.    I made my way through the entrance
into the South Stand, Gangway 5, Row Y.   I reached my seat, which was

at the very back of the stand, at about 2.35pm (1435).


I inmediately noticed that the Liverpool supporters in the Leppings

Lana Stand were extremely dense and crowded immediately behind the

goal.   This was made more noticeably so as the two extremities of

that stand were relatively quiet and there were certainly open spaces

and it was very apparent that the crowd needed to be dispersed more in
that stand.



As it neared 3.00pm (1500) I was conscious that some spectators from

the centre part of the Leppings Lane Stand were being bodily lifted

into the air and into the seated stand above them.    My first

impression was that these people were unlawfully gaining access to the

seated area.   It was equally apparent, however, that the area from
which they were escaping was extremely tightly packed and that the

side areas which I referred to earlier had by then filled.



The game commenced at 3.00pm (1500) but I found that my attention was
                                                                 PAGE      3
                                                                 S1058

still drawn to that stand where it was obvious that there was a

problem and I noticed that police officers were beginning to stand on

the perimeter wall facing the crowd and spectators were trying to

climb over the barrier fence.      It was very clear, even from where I

was, that this action was not motivated by either fighting or an

attanpt at a pitch invasion.      I say this because in my experience the

bahaviour of the crowd around would have been different.     Suddenly

the area at the back of the goal was filled with spectators and police

and I assume that it was at that point that a gate had been opened and

there was an irnnediate incursion on to the playing area which, again,

was quite apparently not a deliberate pitch invasion and I saw a

senior officer run towards the centre of the field and gain the

attention of the referee.      The game ended and the pitch incursion

increased.   At no time did I feel that this was a pitch invasion or

an attempt by Liverpool supporters to stop the game or antagonise the

Nottingham supporters or even fight amongst thanselves.     Fran that

point onwards it was difficult to maintain a clear view of what had
taken place behind the goal.     My seat was approximately 50 yards from

the scene and there quickly became so many people involved and police
officers that it was difficult to see any detail.



There followed a period of twenty minutes or so when the pitch

incursion grew and it was obvious that seme people had been injured.
There were undoubtedly seme spectators who were behaving in a

disorderly manner and one particular individual gained the attention

of the entire stadium by approaching the opposite end of the ground
and gesticulating at the crowd.     He was arrested and that arrest

caused spontaneous applause from the crowd.


I feel I can add little further in terms of individual conduct which
                                                                  PAGE    4
                                                                  S1058

will not be adequately described in the television photographs which

were taken.       I have considerable experience in handling football

crowds having served earlier in Greater Manchester and policed the

First Division grounds in that area, and having been the Assistant

Chief Constable (Operations) in Derbyshire and policed matches there

which have been the subject of Football League Inquiries due to crowd

disorder involving clubs like Chelsea and Leeds.      I would not wish to

comment on the manner in which the policing arrangements unfolded as I

have insufficient knowledge of what was being transmitted as

information to those on duty, save to make the following general

observations:



.1.   In a very short period of time there were ample police officers

      on the playing area to deal with any incidents which may have

      unfolded.     I would assume their number to have been well in

      excess of 200.      A considerable amount of their effort was

      clearly centred upon preventing the pitch incursion moving
      towards the Nottingham end.     On at least two occasions they

      prevented small waves of supporters so doing.



2.    I left the ground, as it was apparent there had been a serious

      incident, at about 3.30pm (1530).     I particularly felt that seme

      form of public announcement should have been made.     There may be

      factors which prevented this but the Nottingham supporters

      immediately close to me were incensed by what they clearly

      interpreted as a pitch invasion and seme form of information to

      than would have altered the temperature of the remaining

      spectators who were not involved.



3.    In terms of the allocation of sections of the ground to the two
                                                                         PAGE     5
                                                                         S1058

                Clubs, I feel that it was correct in policing terms to allocate

                the stands to Nottingham which were most accessible from a
                southern approach on the Ml.




         R HADFIELD

         Chief Constable

         21 April 1989




                                                             R HADFIELD SIGNED
 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:   210489
WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
END OF REPORT




                                                                                      3480
                                                                         STATION

               DONALD
               DENTON
ADDRESS:       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE HQ,
               SNIG HILL, SHEFFILED

AGE / DATE DF BIRTH: 21 100
OCCUPATION:    POL CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT

Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by roe, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.

DATED: 260490                                                 D DENTON (SIGNED)



           I an presently head of Management Services for South Yorkshire

           Police.
           The Central Registry of all Policy files comes within the

           responsibilities of my department.
           I have shown to Det Chief Supt FOSTER a Headquarters' Central

           Registry Policy file bearing the number P22/02/08 delaing with Major

           football matches.   This file contains documentation frcm 1974 (000074)

           onwards and coincides with the formation of South Yorkshire Police.

           Suea policy files are available at Headquarters for all Senior
           Officers and any other interested parties and in the focal point of

           all policy decisions on the given subject.   This policy document is

           retained at Headquarters and not sent to Divisions.   The content of

           this Central Registry file often contains information sent frcm

           outside Divisions of the force. However, Headquarter Policy decisions

           mad3 are placed into this file and copies are sent to the Division

           whi-h will have its own Divisional file and working papers.

           The Headquarters file P22/02/08 contains the minutes of the 1981

           (003081) de-brief following the incident at Hillsborough at the 1981



                                                                                     3480   A
       DENION                  DONALD                                        2


        (003081) Semi Final.
       The Police officers who attended that 1981 (000081) de-brief would
       hava been each given a copy of the minutes for information and one

       copy would have been placed onto the 'F' Division Policy file relating

       to the policing of football at Hillsborough.

                                                           D DENTON SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME:             DATE:    260490

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE    M POSTER

®FICEBS SI3WIURE:        D CH SUPT 6 9 3 0 M FOSTER




                                                                                 3480   B
