    West Midlands Police




       REPORT
& DOCUMENT SCHEDULES




 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


         Part III
                   PART III



When West Midlands Police were engaged to assist

Lord Justice Taylor, in the gathering of evidence

for the Judicial Inquiry into the Hillsborough

Disaster, steps were immediately taken to trace and

obtain all visual evidence pertinent to that

Inquiry.



Visual Evidence is of paramount importance to the

criminal investigation.



South Yorkshire Police recorded both video and still

photographic evidence on the day; which was later

made available to West Midlands Police.




The Sheffield Wednesday Football Club also recorded

video evidence which was also handed to West

Midlands Police.



The match was well attended by the media who made

both video and photographic records of the events of

that day.   Numerous representatives of the media

were approached by West Midlands Police and, with

 their consent, material recorded by them, or on




                                                      69
their behalf was examined and where relevant was

taken into Police possession.   However, at this time

formal approval under the Police and Criminal

Evidence Act has not been obtained.



Similarly some supporters who attended the match

came forward and offered amateur photographs taken.




West Midlands Police themselves originated both

video and still photographic recordings; these being

’post disaster’, but relevant to the Judicial,

Coroner’s and Criminal Inquiries.     Additionally a

’compilation’ of video recordings was made from

existing material concentrating on the most

important scenes.   This compilation was prepared in

conjunction with Treasury Solicitors supporting

Counsel to Lord Justice Taylor.



Wherever possible a statement was recorded from the

person handing over the material.     Continuity is

not, however, complete in all cases since the person

handing over the material is not necessarily the

person originating that material; the media

frequently using agencies or freelance photographers

or cameramen.



To assist in the examination of some of the video

material the technical services of the Home Office
Research Department at Sandridge, Hertfordshire were

utilised.



Their extensive range of equipment enabled officers

to analyse the material to a high degree.




For the purpose of both continuity and ease of

reference the visual evidence is dealt with under

two headings,   (1) Video Material and (2) Still

Photographic material.   These are then divided into

three categories




(a)   Prior to and during Disaster.

(b)   Post Disaster.

(c)   Coverage of 1988 FA Cup Semi Final for

      comparison purposes.




It should be noted that material in relation to

categories (a) and (b) sometimes overlaps.




A summary of the material produced follows.    However

each exhibit is subject to individual detailed

schedules, which together with an index, are

enclosed.
VIDEO MATERIAL



PRIOR TO AND DURING DISASTER

South Yorkshire Police




Video material provided by South Yorkshire Police

static cameras, consists of both monochrome and

colour recordings.




South Yorkshire Police have 5 fully remote

controlled cameras situated at the Hillsborough

Ground.   Each camera can pan-tilt through 360

degrees and has a ’zoom’ facility.




The cameras are controlled from the Police control

box which is situated at the South West corner of

the ground, adjacent to the western end of the South

Stand.    The camera positions are as follows




One on the upper south west corner of the West

Stand.

Two on the top of the South Stand, one about centre

point and the other to the eastern end of the stand

at the top.

One at the top, rear, of the roof of the Spion Kop.

One at the south west corner of the ground, mounted

on high near the score-board and close to the Police

Control Box.
Part II       The plan of the ground identifies these camera

Doc.No. 107   positions and they are referred to in Part II of the

              police report.




              Within the Police Control Box are seven TV monitors,

              five are dedicated to each of the CCTV cameras and

              the remaining two are connected to special time-

              lapse video recorders.   The time-lapse recorders

              allow material to be recorded for an extended period

              by a reduction of the ’frames per second’.    Material

              recorded in time-lapse mode makes for difficult

              viewing.   In order to improve the viewing quality

              West Midlands Police have re-copied this particular

              material on identical time-lapse recorders.




              The camera operator in the Police Control Box can

              switch from camera to camera, by means of a passive

              switch within the control room, so that the officer

              in charge can record the scene being displayed on

              any one of the five cameras.   The remaining two

              monitors are used so that the operator can check

              which of the 5 cameras are being recorded at any

              given time.



              Recordings include the date and time superimposed on

              the picture in the bottom left hand corner and is

              set by the operator on commencement of recording.




                                                                       73
                  Generally the recordings are of poor picture

                  quality.




                  Within the Police Control Box, there is also a

                  telephone line which is on the Sheffield Wednesday

                  Football Club internal telephone system.     The Police

                  also have their own separate telephone lines

                  installed.     The Police Control Box was also in radio

                  contact with a constable in the Club Control.




                  There is no facility for officers in the Police

                  Control Box to view the Sheffield Wednesday Football

                  Club cameras.




                  In addition to recordings from the CCTV cameras

                  South Yorkshire Police also made video recordings

                  from a Hand Held Portable Camera.     Recordings made

                  with this camera are in colour and of good picture

                  quality.     Although the time is not superimposed on

                  the picture,    (as in the case of the CCTV recordings)

                  the camera operator does give periodic time checks

                  on the audio channel of the recording.




                  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club




Doc.Nos 114-127   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club have their own

Pages 753-773     visual monitoring system which consists of a number

                  of static CCTV cameras, situated at strategic points




                                                                            74
               around the ground, connected to monitors at the Club

               Control Room.   These are in black and white.

Part 1

Doc.Page 298   A plan showing the locations of the CCTV cameras is

               produced in Part I of the police report.




               Being a static system, the cameras are in a fixed

               position and are trained on a particular location.




               On 15th April 1989 the cameras were positioned to

               view the turnstile entrances and the players’

               entrance to the field.



               Within the Club CCTV room, situated in the South

               Stand near the players entrance there is a bank of

               television screens; nineteen monitor the Club’s CCTV

               cameras and one monitors the Police CCTV System.




               This screen can be used to view the picture from any

               one of the five Police cameras.   However, the choice

               of picture can only be instigated by personnel in

               the Police Control Box.




               Sixteen of the screens are connected to Video

               Cassette Recorders giving the facility to record the

               film being relayed from the appropriate club camera.




                                                                      75
The remaining three club monitors, as well as the

monitor for the police camera, do not have the

recording facility.



On 15th April 1989 one of the nineteen static

cameras was not in commission.    This was because

ground alterations had obstructed the view from the

camera.    This particular camera would normally have

viewed turnstiles 9-16.



Material from this source is of poor picture

quality.    There is no time or date displayed.




It is normal club practice for video cassette tapes

to be re-used after each recording.    It will be

noted that at the commencement of some of the club

tapes material appertaining to football matches

played at Hillsborough, prior to 15th April 1989, is

shown.     Presumably, this is because the operator has

not ensured that the cassette has been fully

re-wound prior to the fresh recording.




The Club Control is in radio and telephone contact

with the Police Control Box.
                  It is appropriate, at this point, to mention that

                  two of the Video Cassette Tapes possibly in use at

                  the Club Control Room on 15th April 1989, were

                  missing.   They are not believed to depict anything

                  relevant to the disaster.




                  Of the Sheffield Wednesday Club material it is

                  considered that, in terms of the Criminal Inquiry,

                  the only Video Tapes of relevance relate to the

                  opening of Gates ’A ’ and ’C . ’




                  BBC TV




Doc.Nos 128-136   The BBC were present at the match and recorded

Pages 774-794     events on nine cameras positioned as follows:-




                  Cameras 1-3

                  On rostrum in South Stand.

                  Camera 4

                  On perimeter track approximately eight yards to the

                  left of the players tunnel.

                  Camera 5

                  Level with the eighteen yard line at the West End of

                  the ground.

                  Camera 6

                  In a similar position to camera 5 at the Spion Kop

                  end of the ground.




                                                                         77
                   Camera 7

                   At the rear of the West stand.

                   Camera 8

                   A hand held camera operating between the Spion Kop

                   to the players* tunnel.

Part II

Doc.Page No. 739   A plan showing these camera locations is produced in

                   Part II of the police report.




                   Camera 9 (Hand-held)

                   At the West End of the ground.




                   The BBC video recordings are of very good picture

                   quality.   The film is in colour with sound.




                   The material was supplied by BBC in a ’package*

                   which means that in some cases film from various

                   cameras has been recorded on one tape.




                   With the exception of a short section of film on one

                   tape the material is superimposed with a display in

                   the top right hand corner of the screen giving the

                   accurate time that the footage was recorded.




                   It is as well to explain this display since all

                   references to BBC material rely on it.   Reading from

                   left to right, as you view the display, the figure

                   on the extreme left is the hour, the next figure the




                                                                           78
                       minutes and the next the seconds.   The final figure,

                       on the extreme right, refers to the film frame

                       number.




                       As far as the first eight cameras are concerned they

Part II                were all under the control of the BBC producer John

St.Page 1105-1109      Edmund SHREWSBURY who viewed pictures from the

                       cameras on monitors in a mobile control room.    It

                       was the producer’s role to decide which pictures are

                       transmitted to the BBC Television Centre.   However,

                       regardless of this all material was recorded.

Part II
St.Pages   1110-1118   Four BBC TV commentators were present.   They were
Part III
St.Pages   1134-1138   John Walker MOTSON. Desmond LYNAM. Jimmy HILL and
Part III
St.Pages   1129-1133   Gerald SINSTADT.
Part III
St.Pages   1139-1144

                       The producer and commentators were in audio contact

                       with each other.   Commentary made by them and

                       discussions with their producer are audible.




                       Camera 9 - the hand held - was not under the control

                       of the producer and was operating independently.




                       POST DISASTER

                       South Yorkshire Police




Doc.Nos 137.138.139    This material was recorded on the hand held camera

Pages 795-798          operated by South Yorkshire Police officers.
                   Vis - News (Skv TV)



Doc. No 140        This is news coverage in colour.   It is considered

Page 799           of little relevance to this criminal investigation.




                   TV-AM




Doc. No 141        This is news coverage, in colour, and includes

Page 800           interviews.




                   West Midlands Police




Doc. Nos 142-143   For the purposes of the Judicial Inquiry a

Pages 801-803      ’compilation tape* was prepared.   This consisted

                   of relevant extracts,   selected from all the video

                   material.




                   A video recording was also prepared to give a visual

                   presentation of the layout of the Sheffield

                   Wednesday Ground.




                                                                          80
                  COVERAGE OF 1988 FA CUP SEMI FINAL

                  South Yorkshire Police




Doc.Nos 145-146   This was material recorded from police CCTV

Pages 806-812     cameras.   Previous comments in relation to its

                  quality, time lapse recording, etc apply.




                  BBC TV




Doc.Nos 147-148   The BBC also recorded the 1988 match and the

Pages 813-815     material includes shots of Leppings Lane Terraces,

                  It shows the time the recording was made.




                  STILL PHOTOGRAPHIC MATERIAL



                  PRIOR TO AND DURING DISASTER

                  South Yorkshire Police




Doc.Nos 149-161   A series of still colour photographs were taken by

Pages 816-840     South Yorkshire Police officers for normal

                  intelligence gathering purposes.




                  The photographs are of good quality and are

                  presented in albums in chronological order.

                  Superimposed on each print is the date and time each

                  photograph was taken; this appears in the bottom

                  right-hand corner of the photograph, the first

                  figure (on the extreme left) being the date, ie




                                                                       *1
                  15th, the second figure the hour and the third the

                  minutes.




                  It should be noted that the times shown on the

                  photographs are set by the individual camera

                  operator and are not synchronised, nor are they

                  verified.




                  Press/Amateur Sources




                  Over 1800 still photographs were handed to West

                  Midlands Police in the course of this investigation.




Doc.No 162        A selection of these photographs has been prepared.

Pages 841-843     Included in this album are five copies of Polaroid

                  photographs which were taken of the deceased.     They

                  were used for identification purposes.




                  POST DISASTER

                  South Yorkshire Police




Doc.Nos 163-171   Photographic albums on this aspect follow the

Pages 844-857     previous albums.   They all display the date and

                  time, with the exception of ’VST* coded photographs.




                                                                           82
                  West Midlands Police



Doc.Nos 172-177   West Midlands Police officers took a number of still

Pages 858-865     photographs to give a visual presentation of

                  relevant parts of the Hillsborough Ground.




                                                                         83
   West Midlands Police




   WITNESS LIST
  (ALPHABETICAL)




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


        Part III
                      WITNESSES

                       PART III

                     ALPHABETICAL




                                    PAGE ( S )




HILL       Jimmy                    1129 - 1133

LYNAM      Desmond                  1134 - 1138

SINSTADT   Gerald                   1139 - 1144
                                                                          STATION

NAME:              JIMMY
                   HILL

ADDRESS:


     / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     BROADCASTER COMMENTATOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


^ T E D : 070589                                               W T Hill (SIGNED)



           I am a self employed broadcaster and part of ray ccnmitment is towards

           the BBC as a soccer analyst.

         On Saturday, 15th April, 1989 I was engaged by BBC to cover the F.A.

         Cup semi-final between Liverpool Football Club and Nottingham Forest

         Football Club at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield.     My remit

         was report on the match for BBC Match of the Day which was to go out

           in the evening - I was fronting the summary of the game with Desmond

         LINEHAM.      I was not facing any live broadcast during the game and was

         thus looking forward to watching it and then preparing a summary for

           the evening broadcast of Match of the Day.

           I travelled to the Hillsborough Stadium by taxi and arrived there

           about 1350 hours.   There was a lot of traffic about on the way to the

           stadium which made traffic flow slow but at the ground things were

           pretty quiet - I entered the stadium complex by way of the Ieppings

           Lane entrance and spoke to a few supporters and stewards on ray way in

           but it was all pretty quiet and ray impression was of a normal F.A.

           Cup semi-final build-up.At the ground I buried myself in the Guest

           Lounge I met and spoke to
HILL                  JIMMY                                              2

Laurie tfcMenamie amongst others .About 1445 to 1450 the BBC went live

and by that time I was on the

television Gantree above South Stand and the players' tunnel, I recall

remarking to Des LINEHAM that ALL WE HAD GOT TO DO WAS ENJOY THE MATCH

and to me everything was normal with a good build-up to this semi­

final.   I don't recall seeing any disorder or having any misgivings

about any organisational aspect of match preparations up until the

time of kick-off at 15.00 hours.

At 1500 hours the game started and soon after that I saw sane spillage

of fans onto the pitch away to my left at the West Stand/Leppings

Lane end behind what was the Liverpool goal.    It was at this time

that I looked critically at the Leppings Lane end terraces and I

thought to myself   "MY GOD THEY ARE CROWDED"   That was the centre

sections of these terraces - simultaneously I noticed and commented on

the wings of Leppings Lane end terraces being very sparsely occupied.

I saw a policeman run onto the pitch and speak to the referee who

stopped the game and I saw the team go off the pitch very quickly and

orderly straight afterwards.    I turned my attention to my left again

and to the West Stand/Leppings Lane Terraces end and I saw a high

concentration of police officers and others but my view of what was

happening was screened by the presence of police and by whatever it

was being concentrated down behind the terrace walls and fencing at

that end.

I saw the figure of a man prostrate on the ground to the left of the

goal-posts - he was having his chest pounded and I realised then that

what was happening was pretty serious. I reported through to

John SHREWSBURY what I was seeing and I recall saying "WE HAVE DEATH

ON OUR HANDS" or something like that to him and his response was

"DON'T SAY THAT".
HILL                 JIMMY                                               3


About 1515 I realised fully that something enormous was happening -

sometime afterwards I was handed a microphone by John MDTSQN and I did

a little bit of broadcasting, about a minute or a minute-and-a

half, it will be on the cassette footage.   It was a factual broadcast

about play and the fact it had been stopped.   I felt I was seeing

great danger developing of a possible second catastrophy - Nottingham

Forest fans were still behind their barriers at the Spion Kop end and

they were chanting at Liverpool fans who were all over the pitch.      The

Liverpool fans were excited some probably hysterical in the knowledge

of what was happening at their end of the ground and the Nottingham

Forest fans were chanting at them blaming them for the interruption on

play unaware of the gravity of what had happened at the lappings Lane

end.   The Liverpool fans were frantic and I saw them being inflamed by

the Nottingham Forest chanting.   There was a rush of Liverpool

supporters towards the Spion Kop and the leading few were actually

rugby tackled by policemen to prevent them reaching the Spion Kop

terraces and then a cordon formed across the pitch, a cordon of

policemen, to keep the fans apart - but the chanting went on.     My

thoughts then were "WHY DOESN'T SOMEONE TELL THEM" THAT IS THE

NOTTINGHAM SUPPORTERS - "WHAT IS HAPPENING" I thought that a simple

broadcast message would stop the chanting and would calm the Liverpool

supporters who were on the pitch.

I went down the stairs to try and get a message broadcast to achieve

the calming of the crowd but I couldn't identify anyone or anywhere to

get it done.   I feel it was perfectly feasible to say something to

stop the crowd even something as simple as "LADIES AND GENTLEMEN

PLEASE BE CALM" but it didn't happen and the confusion and disorder

went on.   In the minutes and hours that followed the time dimensions

of what had happened emerged slowly, painfully slowly I felt but I had
HILL                    JIMMY                                               4


no specific evidence to offer about it.       I felt frustrated at the

quality of ccmmunciations in general on the ground.       The public

address system was inadequate but that isn't novel to Hillsborough, of

course it is inadequate at many grounds but nontheless it was poor at

Hillsborough, and coupled with the length of time it seemed to take to

get any kind of message broadcast the two factors seemed to' feed the

confusion.     My overiding perception of what happened is that no one

took any initiative to tell the crowds of supporters what was

happening and thus stop the chanting.      If a message had got across I

feel convinced it would have defused the high emotions and chanting

immediately.     It is very difficult to assess what was going on and my

own ideas of times are not too clear but what was happening certainly

fell down on the quality of communications on the ground.

Anyone, in my view, can see what happenned was a horrible co-incidence

of events where some of the contributary factors were decisions that

were made in isolation but in good faith and here I refer to the

imbalance of ticket allocation between Liverpool and Nottingham

Forest.   The allowing in of non ticket holders so they can be

supervised properly by police and the tradition that has built up

around this where non-ticket holders travel fully expecting in the

final event to be allowed into a ground - not just Hillsborough -

rather than be locked out and left to roam free.       I believe that a

large contingent of Liverpool supporters were held up at the railway

station by police and were late getting to the ground and when they

were allowed in there was no direction to the wings - that is to Pens

1 and 2, and 6 and 7, in which there was room for them.       Everyone

let in seemed to be allowed to just crush into Pens 3 and 4 which were

full to capacity already.       But I would emphasise that in my analysis

the decisions that were made were made with the best of intentions in
        HILL                 JIMMY                                               5


        the light of the circumstances prevailing at the time it seems.   I am

        led to believe for instance, and this is from what I've heard since,

        that the police computer suggested that capacity existed for 8,000

        more and that that information contributed to the influx, well if this

        is so then there should have been some direction as to where those

        8,000 should go and no come back to the "wing' pens of the Leppings

        Lane end having capacity for them.




                                                            W T Hill SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:     070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:    Supt W R Chidley 7703

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                     1133
                                                                          STATION

NAME:         DESMOND MICHAEL
               LYNAM

ADDRESS:      BBC, KENSINGTON HSE, RICHMDND WAY
               LONDON W14

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 46                    ~

OCCUPATION:    BROADCASTER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


^pED: 040589                                                    D LYNAM (SIGNED)



        I am employed by the B.B.C. as a broadcaster.      I have been in the

        business of broadcasting and sports reporting for 22 years.

        On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I was with the B.B.C. at

        Hillsborough for the Semi final between Liverpool and Nottingham

        Forest.

        I was sitting in the T.V. gantry in the South Stand, I took up my

        position at about 2.15pm (1415).

        Hie first I noticed of any problem was about two minutes into the

        match when I saw that a few fans had spilled onto the pitch.      I was

        surprised because of the fencing, at how they got there.      I nudged

        Jimmy HILL, who was next to me, and he seemed not to notice it as

        we made some brief corrments, to the effect that we hoped it was

        not going to be anything stupid.       It looked pretty inocuous, so I

        turned to watch the play on my right, the Nottingham Forest end.

        I continued to watch the play, until about one minute before the

        policeman stopped the match.    Because there were so many fans

        climbing over the fence onto the pitch, I realised the match would

        have to be stopped.     I saw the match stopped.
LYNAM                DESMOND   MICHAEL                                   2

I remained on the gantry tut as the minutes progressed and more

fans spilt onto the pitch, I became irritated that no public

announcement had been made to the fans to explain what was going

on.   Both Jimmy HILL and me discussed this lack and we were both

annoyed that no such announcement had been made.

At this stage, in their ignorance, the Nottingham Forest fans were

taunting the Liverpool fans.

The crowd spillage was getting worse both onto the pitch and the tier

above in the West Side.   It was so bad I was convinced the match was

going to be abandoned.    I saw people in the West Stand above the

terraces, literally hauling people out of the terraces.   These were

indication that there was some confusion, because whilst some

supporters were getting out of the terraces, some policemen were

signalling people to get back.

Jimmy HILL was very annoyed, and I was annoyed that still no

announcement had been made to the fans.    Jimmy HILL left the gantry

to go to some official at the club to tell the fans what was going on.

It was about this time, about 15 to twenty past three (1515 to 1520),

before that I realised anything was seriously wrong.    I saw a

policeman on the pitch attempting to rescusitate a man on the ground.

There were some minor instances of disorder on the pitch, which

necessitated a line of policemen being on the pitch.

I was now instructed by my producer on my earpiece to go onto the

pitch to find out what was going on.

I go onto the pitch via the players tunnel, I see and talk to several

football officials, the referee Ray LEWIS, the Chairman of Nottingham

Forest Maurice ROWORTH and the Chairman of Liverpool John SMITH.     I

also spoke to Mr KELLY, Chief Executive of the F.A.    I asked if they

could ccmnent and they said that they could not because they did not
LYNAM                 DESJOND   MICHAEL                                    3


know what was going on.

By now I was being approached by quite a few Liverpool Supporters who

were pleading with me to get something done.    Seme were abusive,

going on about ticket allocation and conditions in the West Stand and

others were visibly upset and obviously relieved.     I was asked by the

producer if I could contribute a minute live report to clarify the

situation.   We decided to do it out of vision, that means a sound

report but the viewers would see a general picture of the ground.

This was really to prevent some fans who were becoming aggressive

from having a camera put on them.    Two or three minutes after, I

interviewed a man of about thirty years of age, who was more

rational and had a small boy with him.    He explained to me that

people were being crushed and broke down during the interview.       I

asked him to tell the boy's mother who might have been viewing, to

tell us who the boy was and what was his name was.    He became too

distressed and only got the Christian name out.

The pitch was now invaded with a couple of thousand on the pitch, and

still at this stage the only indication that I had that people were

dying was from some people who had lost some of their self control

and one doubted Whether what you heard was correct.

Whilst I had been on the pitch, I was now at the entrance to the

players tunnel and my view of the whole pitch was restricted.

I was then instructed by my producer to return to Iondon.     So I left

the players tunnel and went to the rear of the police control rocm on

my way out and I saw some weeping fans and one or two being given the

Kiss of Life by the Police.     I saw a Policeman who said to words the

effect that there were about twenty bodies around the back and I

should go there.   This was my first confirmation that there was death.

I then left the ground to return to London with Jimmy HILL.
LYNAM                DESMOND   MICHAEL


The first point I want to make is that there was a lack of public

announcements informing the fans what was going on.    If an

announcement along the lines of "fans have been hurt, don't shout,

please be patient, we will sort it out".    This would have helped.    I

heard no announcement from the P.A. system until I was on the pitch.

That message was inaudible to me.

Seme Police Officers on the pitch and on the track side did not sean

to know what was going on.   Their actions were not co-ordinated.

Seme were helping people out of the stand and others were telling

them to stay in.   I formed the impression that Police ccmnumcation

was less than adequate.   Once they knew what was going on, and this

was about the time I was leaving the ground, I think it was about 3.

45pn (1545) then police then behaved exemplary.

It is to my knowledge from years of attending football matches large

numbers of Liverpool supporters attend all ticket matches without

tickets.   They either obtain tickets from outside the ground or frcm

tout.   The police normally take account of this.   The situation iraist

have been identical to the previous year.    My main worry about the

day was the loss of control of fans outside the ground.

I have long held the belief that ground fencing without an automatic

system to collapse it could lead to a disaster.

                                 D LYNAM
        LYNAM              DESMOND   MICHAEL


                                               D LYNAM SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:   040589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     B A MASON SUPT5810
                                                                         STATION

NAME              GERALD MORRIS
                  SINSTADT

ADDRESS


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 59

OCCUPATION:       REPORTER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


       : 040589                                                          (SIGNED)



          I am a freelance broadcaster and on Saturday, 15 April, 1989 was

          engaged by BBC - GRANDSTAND with a brief to report on the football

          Association Cup Semi Final match between Liverpool and Nottingham

          Forest which was being held at Hillsborough Football Ground,

          Sheffield.    I was briefed to carmentate on the match for GRANDSTAND

          and to conduct interviews for Match of The Day after the match.

          On this day I arrived near the ground at Sheffield in my own car

          about 12 noon but was unable to park near the ground and so I

          parked in a side road nearby.

          I arrived at the ground about noon by way of the Leppings Lane end

          and went to the scanner which is the control vehicle where I saw John

          Shrewsbury and then spent 3/4 of an hour in his company and that

          of John Watson, Lorrie Mstfonaurie, Desmond Lineham in the guest

          lounge.    Later I went to the Press Room and ultimately into the press

          box where I made my preparations     for my commentary of the game which

          was due to kick off at 1500 hours.

          As far as I was concerned what I saw was a normal build up of crowd

          to a cup semi-final.    I recall noticing and ccrrmentating on the
SINSTADT             GERALD   MORRIS                                       2


centre-sections of the Leppings Lane end of the ground where

Liverpool supporters were, being full to capacity but that the other

sections carried spacious areas that were supporter free - I mean by

this really large spaces which was surprising in what was an all

ticket-sell-out match.

My role in the scheme of things was to be linked with GRANDSTAND and

give than news as it happened from the ground and then respond to

their requests to broadcast live on Grandstand.      I watched the kick-

off and was concentrating on the game, I recall a near-miss shot at

the Kop-end when Peter BEARDSLEY shot at goal and hit the wood work

of the goalmouth of Nottingham Forest.    Hie ball went back into play

and it was seme short time - a minute or so after that that I saw a

policeman in a flat hat run onto the pitch waving his arms at the

referee who was by this time back in Liverpools' half of the field.

Hie referee blew-up and stopped play.     I saw that there were groups

of supporters on the pitch down at the Leppings Lane end and the

referee was running around and gesticulating to players on the field

to take the teams off but it wasnt easy for him because of supporters

spilling onto the pitch and, presumably, because of the noise.

Soon after this I was called upon by Grandstand for an input and I

gave a 1 1/2 minute - slot carmentary which was basically informative

to the effect that the game had been stopped after 6 minutes and that

the teams had been taken off the pitch.     I conmented that supporters

vrere on the pitch and made reference to the controversy over

allocation of tickets to favour Nottingham Forest, my input was taken

and John Wotson took over from me.At this time I had no idea of

casualties and in all honesty was

firmly of the impression that a surge had produced fainting and the

like.   I recall seeing a male figure prostrate to the left of the
SINSTADT                GERALD MORRIS                                      3


goal at the Leppings Lane end and seeing the figure being given mouth

to mouth resusitation which I thought at the time was dramatic but he

moved after the resusitation and was taken away.   Again I had no

conception of the seriousness or enormity of what had happened and I

continued to have no knowledge until soon after I was directed down

to the tunnel to see Desmond LINEHAM and Jimmy HILL and that must

have been about half-an-hour after the teams were taken off.     I did a

broadcast from the tunnel, again it was a broadcast in general

terms similar to the original broadcast of one-and-a-half minutes

that have already described.    It was soon after this broad cast that

I was told of there having been deaths. I was wired up of course with

recording equipment and I was in contact with John Shrewsbury by way

of an earpiece. John Shrewsbury told us of deaths and discussed a

further broadcast structured "NOT TO ALARM PEOPLE BUT TO INFORM PEOPLE

THAT THERE HAD BEEN CASUALTIES" in the event we didn'tdo that

particular broadcast.    I remained in the tunnel and I was being

approached throughout this time by groups of fans in various states of

excitement if not hysteria in seme cases but generally what they

wanted to do was demonstrate that they had tickets with counterfoils

attached that indicated they had got into the ground without having

had their tickets checked.About 1615 I was told down my earpiece that

the switchboard at the BBC was besieged with calls from people who

had seen pictures relayed from the ground and I was asked to establish

a contact number to give the callers, for them to access police on a

casualty centre.   I must emphasise that I still didn't know just how

serious things were down at the Leppings Lane end - I could see a lot

of activity on the pitch which included advertising boardings being

t o m down and used as make shift stretchers for casualties.    In

response to the request from BBC for seme contact number I want
SINSTADT               GERALD MORRIS                                      4


in search of a police officer and found one who took me to a

Sergeant who was in charge of communications or led me to believe

that he was in charge of coranunications - this man promised to let

me know any contact number as soon as he had it - in the event he

did come back to me with a number after about half-an-hour and I

coranunicated this back to BBC.

I interviewed Kenny DALGLISH of Liverpool, Graham Kenny of the FA and

Maurice FOWARTH in the interview for Grandstand but the general

impression I have of events is that information was very slow in

emerging.   I took it upon myself to query when seme form of official

statement might be issued and to this end I spoke to a police officer

in plain clothes who I presumed was a Public Relations Officer - he

was in his late thirties I imagine but I can't recall much more about

him.   He promised to check with a Senior Police Officer and ccme back

to me but never did.

I was being pressured by BBC for seme sort of statement from police

and I made my way to the Gym where a host of us were told there was to

be a press conference at the Police Headquarters at 1900 hours.     I

felt this was the Mountain going to Mohammed in that dozens of media

people were milling about at the ground seeking information and we

were summonned to a conference away at the police Headquarters but we

made our way there - the Press conference was chaired by Mr Wright,

Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and the figures were announced and

the conferences was opened to questions from the floor.     Mr WRIGHT gave

individual interviews in his office after the conference.    About 2000

hours I did an interview for Television with Mr WRIGHT and then it

gradually wound down from there.   I had an insert into Match of the

Day at 2300 hours but about 15 minutes or so before that the

Minister for Sport came to the ground.
SINSTADT              GERALD    MORRIS                                     5


As far as my perceptions are concerned I have been to a lot of games

of football both in this country and abroad - I am surprised that

there wasn't any filtering of fans taking place away fron the ground

to prevent access of non-ticket holders to the proximity of the

ground and to prevent drinking or drunken supporters getting there.

In retrospect I wonder that something like this hasn't happened before

where no filtering has taken place you can't ignore

the identity card delete it is my belief that police don't like the

identity card system that is proposed because at the moment non­

ticket holders can be allowed in and supervised rather than be

allowed to roam the perimeter of a ground - with the identity card

scheme it will be an offence to allow non-card holders onto a

football ground.   I can't help but think that by allowing non-ticket

holders into a game the police have created a climate where supporters

without tickets travel to games expecting to get into the game rather

than be locked-out and allowed to cause disruption outside the

ground.    In recording this I am not wishing to be critical of police

activity, they are probably pursuing the best course for supervising

the non-ticket holding travelling fans.      What has happened I feel is

that it has become general knowledge that fans are let in rather than

locked-out and fans who do not hold tickets now travel to grounds

expecting this to happen.      I am left with a lasting impression too

that it was an awful long time before anything was coranunicated to

the public on the ground about what was happening, it seemed to me

that no-one took responsibility for that.
        SINSTADT          GERALD   MORRIS




                                            G M Sinstadt SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   040589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
    West Midlands Police




D O C U M E N T SECTION

     (109 —     177 )




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


         Part III
                                    DOCUMENTS

                                       AND

                                    SCHEDULES

                                   INTRODUCTION




Each video tape is given its own document number.   The document list contains

brief description of the content of each video.




A video schedule is then produced which further describes the source of the

video tape, and then describes the content of each video tape in a more

detailed format.



The photograph albums produced are each given a separate document number and

each individual photograph is then numbered within the album.
                           DOCUMENT LIST

                              VIDEO

                             MATERIAL

                   PRIORTO AND DURING DISASTER


      SCHEDULE PAGE NO*S       DESCRIPTION

109       740 - 741            Contains recordings from five separate
                               locations, at regular intervals.
                               Material is of relevance.

110       742 - 747            2 part film, of various locations,
                               contains very relevant material.

111       748 - 749            Recordings inside ground post disaster.

112       750 - 751            Recordings inside ground post disaster.

113          752               Footage inside and outsideground,     prior
                               to and during match.

114          753               Gate A and Turnstiles 1-10 Leppings
                               Lane, relevant.

115       754 - 759            Gate C, Turnstiles A-G Leppings Lane.
                               Material very relevant.

116       760 - 761            Car park and turnstiles rear south
                               stand.

117          762               Turnstiles and Gate ’H* South Stand.

118       763 - 764            Turnstiles and car park South Stand.

119          765               Footage of Turnstiles 37-42 Spion Kop
                               end.

120          766               Penistone Road turnstiles.

121          767               Penistone Road turnstiles.

122          768               Penistone Road turnstiles.

123          769               Penistone Road turnstiles.

124          770               Penistone Road turnstiles.

125          771               Penistone Road turnstiles.

126          772               Penistone Road turnstiles.

127          773               Penistone Road turnstiles.

          774 - 775            Footage from inside ground very
                                relevant.
      SCHEDULE PAGE NO(S)   DESCRIPTION


129       776 - 778         As previous, but later into incident.

130       779 - 781         2 parts, the second more relevant;
                            lacking detail.

131          782            Inside stadium little of relevance.

132          783            Pitch level camera; often obscured.

133       784 - 785         20 minutes of relevant material.

134       786 - 788         Overhead view of incident.    All relevant
                            material.

135       789 - 790         Film containing footage from two
                            separate cameras.

136       791 - 794         4 part film of incident by BBC portable
                            crews.

                            POST DISASTER

137          795            Footage in ground and Temporary
                            Mortuary.

138       796 - 797         Leppings Lane terraces.

139          798            Leppings Lane turnstiles and gates.

140          799            Aftermatch news coverage.

141          800            Aftermatch news coverage.

142       801 - 802         Compilation tape.

143          803            Inside and outside stadium.

                            1988 COVERAGE

144       804 - 805         1988 FA Cup Semi-Final.

145       806 - 808         3 part coverage of above.

146       809 - 812         1988 FA Cup Semi-Final.

          813 - 814         1988 FA Cup Semi-Final.

             815            1988 FA Cup Semi-Final.
                     STILL PHOTOGRAPHIC MATERIAL


                PRIOR TO AND DURING THE DISASTER


      SCHEDULE PAGE NO(S)       DESCRIPTION

149      816    - 817           Relevant prints of the supporters inside
                                 and outside the ground.

150      818    - 819           Prints showing the pitch and terracing
                                 at critical time.

151      820    - 821           Prints showing build up of supporters
                                 outside ground and police parade.

152            822              Prints showing inside and outside
                                Leppings Lane end of ground.

153      823    - 824           Prints showing Leppings Lane terrace and
                                 West Stand.

154      825    - 826           Views of Leppings Lane end and inside
                                 ground.

155      827    - 828           Leppings Lane terraces particularly pens
                                 3 and 4.

156      829 -       830        Views of Leppings Lane terraces
                                 particularly pens 3 and 4.

157      831 -       832        Views of pitch and Leppings Lane
                                 terraces.

158      833 - 834              View of pitch and Leppings Lane
                                 terraces.

159      835 -        836       Views   of casualties on pitch.

160      837 -        838       Views   of casualties on pitch.

161      839 -        840       Views   of casualties on pitch.

162      841 -        843       Sample of Press photographs during
                                relevant time.

                                 POST DISASTER

          844 - 845             Views of terracing, pitch and Leppings
                                 Lane entrance after the disaster.

               846              Views of inside the ground after    the
                                 disaster.
      SCHEDULE PAGE NO(S)   DESCRIPTION

165          847            Views of perimeter of ground after the
                            disaster.

166      848 - 849          General views inside ground post
                             disaster.

167          850            General views inside and outside ground
                             post disaster.

168      851 - 852          Views of pitch post disaster.

169         853             Views of pitch post disaster.

170      854 - 855          General views inside ground taken    16
                             April 1989.

171      856 - 857          General views inside ground taken    16
                             April 1989.

172         858             Views of Leppings Lane area including
                             turnstiles A-G and Gates - A, B and C.

173      859 - 861          General views Leppings Lane, including
                             turnstiles, tunnel, terraces and Police
                             Control Box.

174         862             Aerial photographs of Hillsborough
                             ground.

175         863             Views of inside of Sheffield Wednesday
                             Football Club Control Room.

176         864             Views of inside and from Police Control
                             Box.

177          865            Views of Leppings Lane terrace.
                                       VIDEO
                                                               i DPP DOC
                                                               1----------------

                              SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 109

Source:    South Yorkshire Police                   West Midlands Police Ref: TB1

                                    TIME AND DATE

                Commences     11.59.51 Hours        15th April 1989
                Terminates    15.04.08 Hours        15th April 1989

                                      CONTENT

                Throughout the duration of the film at intervals of
                approximately one minute camera switches from the following
                locations with no incidents of any note:

11.59.51        View of Leppings Lane from stadium.
                View of Penistone Road North from stadium.
                Pitch and Team benches.

1406.06          Leppings Lane and Turnstiles A-G Compound,      crowds
                 increasing, but flowing freely.


1410.49         Police van with emergency lights displayed driving into area
                near gate C.


1429.51         Compound at Turnstiles A-G. Leppings Lane completely
                compact with crowds. Area from street also compact.  Police
                horses visible at that gateway.


1433.20          Leppings Lane, area heaving with people.



1434.54          Leppings Lane crowd surge backwards from Turnstile A-G.



1458.55          Views inside Ground and Pens at Leppings Lane, Pen 6 has
                 large spaces available in crowd.


1459.19          Supporters climbing fence directly behind goals, Leppings
                 Lane.


1459.25          Pen 1 spaces available in crowd.


1500.00          Gate 1 opened to allow small amount of supporters into pen.



1502.35          More supporters spilling onto pitch from Pens 3 and 4
                 directly behind goal post. Police officers seen to make
                                              Document No.   ]   0 9 C O N T ’D



1503.15   Supporters collapsing onto pitch.


1504.08   Film finishes.




                                                                    741
                                        VIDEO
                                                                   DPP DOC1' o
                                Sr.HKDTTI.K DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 110

Source:    South Yorkshire Police                  West Midlands Police Ref: TB2
                                                   Part 1 and Part 2

                                    TIME AND DATE

                Commences     11.59.52 Hours     15th April 1989
                Terminates    15.34.50 Hours     15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT
PART 1

11.59.52        The tape commences and shows views of Leppings Lane, Penistone
                Road North, the Pitch and the players team benches, Leppings Lane
                turnstiles and the turnstiles in Penistone Road North.

                Each view is shown for a matter of seconds only before the camera
                switches to the next and continues to do so in rotation.

12.22.10        View of rear of South Stand and service road, followed by views
                of pitch Penistone Road North, empty Leppings Lane terraces, and
                Leppings Lane turnstiles.

12.25.30        Sequence as at 11.59.52 continues including views of empty West
                Stand.

1259            Film continues to show views of Leppings Lane, Penistone Road
                North, the Leppings Lane turnstiles and Penistone Road North
                turnstiles with a steady flow of supporters arriving.  The West
                Stand and North West Upper Terrace, with supporters in
                attendance.

1400
PART 2
14.00.40        Tape continues with views of Exit ’V ’ in the Spion Kop and
                continues with views of Leppings Lane Turnstiles, the West Stand,
                Penistone Road North and the Spion Kop.


14.18.39       View of Leppings Lane end terraces, plenty of room in the pen in
               view, insufficient detail to identify which pen.


14.35.22       View of area directly in front of turnstiles A - G in Leppings
                Lane end showing large number of people packed together with
                mounted Policemen leaning over and talking to one of the crowd.


14.39.08       Shows shot of supporters pushing towards turnstile from left of
                shot. Mounted sergeant attempting to ease crowd back.


14.39.31        Youth being carried by officer into ground via Gate C.

14.41.36        Distant shot showing crowds outside turnstiles and in Leppings
                Lane.
                                                                                   7 4 2
                                                          Document No.    110    CONT’D



14.42.36    Distant shot of supporters climbing onto Turnstile Block.


14.42.44    Close up shot of supporters climbing onto Turnstile Block, above
             Gate B .


14.4 3.15   Views over to area of 1 - 1 6   Turnstiles.


14.43.41    Overall views turnstiles area.    Leppings Lane very crowded.


14.44.12    Views of A - G and all Leppings Lane.


14.44.19    All Leppings Lane Perimeter gates shut.


14.44.23    Youths climbing over B gate.


14.45.06    General views of A - G, Leppings Lane, Gate   C.


14.46.08    10 supporters on roof of A - G Turnstiles.


14.46.17    More supporters supporters on roof of A - G Turnstile      Block.
             View of Gate C and outside Leppings Lane.


14.46.32    Youths start to jump down off roof.


14.47.02    Slight problems at turnstiles, very slow flow      through A - G .
             Perimeter Gates still appear closed.


14.47.12    Closer view of closed Perimeter gates.


14.47.25    Close up of closed Perimeter gates.


14.47.20    Stream of supporters pouring over roof.


14.48.00    Gates open - "Ejection."


14.48.13    Pouring through Gate C into compound.


14.48.25    Policeman trying to stop flow through Gate C.


14.48.26    Police horse into shot.


                                                                                  743
                                                           Document No. 1 1 0   CONT'D



14.48.32   Police horse at Gate C.


14.48.45   Gates appear closed.    Supporters moving away from gates and
            policemen.


14.48.48   Rear view of A - G.    Youths going through hole in wall towards
            Pens 6 - 7 .


14.48.54   Back on gate and outside area.


14.49.00   Horse outside Gate C controlling crowd.


14.49.48   Perimeter gates closed.


14.49.58   Good view of Leppings Lane, large number of spectators backed up
            Leppings Lane away from Ground.


14.50.59   Area immediately outside A - G , heavy but not bursting room to
            the left. Large number outside perimeter gates, which are still
            closed. Very slow flow through turnstiles.


14.51.50   3 Mounted officers outside Gate C perimeter gates.


14.52.00   Close up of Police and crowd close up outside Gate C.


14.52.12   Right hand of Perimeter of outer fence area A - G    open,
            supporters coming through, area packed.


14.52.20   Gate closed, large numbers climbing the wall.


14.52.24   Gate C open crowd pouring through perimeter gates    shut.


14.52.40   Supporters moving around from front of A - G.
            Coming in via Gate C.


14.52.57   Perimeter fence still secure people climbing over    it.
            Entrance to Gate C flow controlled.


14.53.00   Crowd swaying outside perimeter gates.
           Further outside perimeter gates, large number of people,
           mounted coming in left to right breaking crowd.


14.53.20    Supporters climbing both perimeter walls and fence.

                                                                                744
                                                              Document No. |   10   CONT’ D



14.53.40   Second Gate left to right opens and supporters enter area in
           front of A - G.


14.53.44   Left hand perimeter gates open.


14.54.01   Pens L - R, behind A - G .


14.54.03   Outside Turnstiles 1 - 1 6 ,   heavy crowd pressure.


14.54.10   Close up back of 1 - 8 Turnstiles and Gate A.


14.54.17   Outside of 1 - 16, very full of crowd all perimeter gates open.
            Police inspector on roof of 1 - 16, also PC on roof above Gate B.


14.54.30   Youths on roofs above 1 - 16.      Crowd outside swaying.


14.54.55   Leppings Lane Gate A side.     Mounted officers.


14.55.17   Overall view of rear of A - G and 1 - 1 6 also up Leppings Lane.
           Ground side of A - G full of people.    Spectators going through
           hole in wall. Perimeter gates outside A - G open.
            Gate C still open.


14.55.35   Large number at rear of Gate A.


14.56.29   Crowd at rear of A - G, people still climbing up outside fences.


14.56.32   Area outside A - G and up to perimeter gates clearer; Leppings
            Lane, Police holding back crowd, the far side of perimeter fence.


14.57.31   View of inside and outside A - G     Turnstiles still flowing through
            gates.


14.57.50   View of Rear of A - G and 1 - 1 6 .
            Rear of A - G full, congested.     Some people going through hole in
            walls.


14.58.09   Supporters now coming through Gate A area.


14.58.23   Lines of police supervising flow of supporters via Gate A.




                                                                                    745
                                                            Document No. 1 1 0    CONT’D



14.58.55     Gate C has been closed.


15.00.18     Overall view of A - G and outside area, Police cordon in situ:
             not many behind turnstiles.


15.02.11     Close up of perimeter gates by wall between A - G    and 1 - 1 6 .


15.02.39     Overall view; rear of turnstiles and Leppings Lane relatively
             clear.


15.02.53     Film swings inside ground.    Terrace West Stand.


15.02.58     Photographers by fence.


15.03.00     Close up on Pens 3 - 4 , Police by fence.
             Man in bib (Steward?) on fence.


15.03.26     Gate 4 open.   Supporters climbing over fence and perimeter track.



15.03.25     Steady flow over fence onto pitch from inside pen.
until

15.06.20     Supporters on fence starting to pull people out of pen.
continuous   Cordon of police along pitch. General scenes of people climbing
             out of pen, focused mainly on pitch.


15.09.47     Police at fence.


Continuous   People climbing out of pen.


15.16.10     Ambulance arrives.


15.19.57     Senior police officer on fence with loud hailer.



15.22.08     Police inside pen entering via open gate.



15.25.42     Changes to long range view of goal area West Stand, congested
             with spectators.


15.27.37     People arriving with hoardings.
                                            Document No. 1 10   CONT’D



People starting to remove bodies on hoardings.


Ambulance leaves front of Stand.


Film stops.




                                                                747
                                          VIDEO
                                                                     DPP DOC1"
                                   SCHKnm.E DESCRIPTION

                                      DOCUMENT 111

Source:    South Yorkshire Police                  West Midlands Police Ref; TB3

                                      TIME AND DATE

               Commences      15.35.08   Hours     15th April 1989
               Terminates     17.22.51   Hours     15th April 1989

                                         CONTENT


15.35.08       Scene of Leppings Lane    end including goalmouth, terraces and
               advertising hoardings.    Large numbers of people on pitch and
               around goalmouth.


15.35.43       Netting being removed from goals at Leppings Lane end.


15.36.51       Ambulance in goalmouth.


15.37.11       Ambulance driven off from goalmouth and out of shot.


15.40.57        Supporters carrying person on stretcher made of what appears to
                be advertising hoarding.


15.46.23        Group of approximately 8 firemen walking along fencing between
                pens 3 and 4. In pen 3, from direction of Tunnel and onto pitch.



15.51.03        Group of approximately. 5 Firemen walking along fencing between
                Pens 3 and 4, in Pen 3 from tunnel and onto pitch.


15.54.10        Supporters being lowered by others from the West Stand into Pen
                3.


15.57.27        Large numbers of supporters on pitch making their way towards the
                North Stand.


15.57.50        Supporters starting to stack advertising hoardings on pitch in
                front of Leppings Lane end.


15.59.42        Scene of Penistone Road North outside ground showing police
                vehicles and small number of supporters, and ambulances with
                flashing emergency lights.  Supporters leaving ground at a slow
                but steady pace.


16.15.25        Larger number of supporters starting to leave ground via
                Penistone Road North.
                                            Document No. 1 1 1   CONT’D



Ambulance leaving ground with flashing emergency lights via
Penistone Road North.


Large numbers of supporters leaving ground via Penistone Road
North and spilling onto roadway blocking same due to sheer
numbers.


Scene of supporters leaving ground via Penistone Road North.


Four ambulances parked in Penistone Road North.


View of pitch in front of Leppings Lane end taken from that end.
Advertising hoardings piled up in front of fencing. Only persons
on pitch are police officers and persons clearing debris.


End of tape.




                                                                  749
                                       VIDEO
                                                              DPP DOC112
                                SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 112

Source:    South Yorkshire Police               West Midlands Police Re f ; TB4

                                    TIME AND DATE

               Commences      15.34.50 Hours    15th April 1989
               Terminates     17.22.48 Hours    15th April 1989

                                      CONTENT

15.34.50       View of North Stand and pitch showing supporters on pitch.
               Police officers and supporters carrying persons on
               stretchers/advertising hoardings. Other supporters carrying
               advertising hoardings towards Leppings Lane End.


15.35.33       View of corner of pitch. North stand at Spion Kop showing
               Ambulances, one coming and one going off pitch.


15.35.53       Firemen and supporters giving heart massage and mouth to mouth to
               supporter lying on pitch near to corner of Spion Kop and North
               Stand.


15.36.33       A number of supporters running across pitch towards Spion Kop,
               approximately 25, engaged by a number of Police officers.


15.37.45       Police cordon forming up across pitch just outside penalty area
               Spion Kop end.


15.39.40       Police cordon formed up near to centre line.


15.40.05       View of Leppings Lane end including part of terraces, goals and
               pitch.  Supporters piling up advertising hoardings on pitch.



15.40.59       View of Gate 4 behind goals at Leppings lane and showing terraces
               with spaces and dividing fence between pens 3 and 4.


15.42.10        Scene of pitch, Leppings Lane end showing large number of
                supporters on pitch between police cordon and terraces.


15.57.35        Supporters on pitch walking across pitch towards North Stand.



16.02.05        Police officers on pitch in front of Leppings Lane Terraces
                looking and moving towards corner of pitch. Leppings Lane end at
                South Stand supporters. Also moving in that direction. Reason
                unknown and not apparent on tape.


                                                                                  750
                                                             Document   No41 2   CONT’D   j

16.15.4    7   View of supporters leaving ground Penistone Road North.


16.20.45       Large numbers of supporters leaving ground via Penistone Road
                North blocking roadway due to sheer numbers.


16.24.31       View   of pitch, showing police officers and debris being cleared.


16.29.09       View of North Stand showing it clear apart from a few supporters
                and police officers.


16.29.20       View of terraces at Leppings Lane end showing them predominantly
                clear of people.


16.31.47       View of Leppings Lane end turnstiles and roadway showing
                supporters leaving ground.


16.34.48       View of pitch showing small groups of supporters and police
                officers.


16.35.23       View   Leppings Lane end terraces.


16.37.08       View of terraces and West Stand including tunnel entrance, almost
               clear.


16.38.15       View of Leppings Lane turnstiles and roadway including a number
                of fire engines, ambulances and police vehicles.


17.22.48       Tape   finishes.




                                                                                 751
                                            VIDEO

                                 sr.Frenm.K DESCRIPTION

                                     DOCUMENT 113

Source:   South Yorkshire Police                    West Midlands Police Ref: VRM1

                                     TIME AND DATE

              Commences        1145 Hours            15th April 1989
              Terminates       1506 Hours            15th April 1989

                                        CONTENT

              Times shown are commentary times given by the operator of a hand
              held police CCTV camera.
              NB: 3 minutes 25 seconds into film, film shows no recording for
              10.43 seconds between 1231 and 1424 (commentary times).


               Shot from above tyre fitting bay facing West Stand and Leppings
               Lane Terraces.


              View of South Stand players entrance general view of turnstiles.


               Penistone Road facing the Spion Kop and entrances,


               Leppings Lane roundabout junction Penistone Road/Penistone Road
               North view along Halifax Road, p a n >on route.


               Halifax Road supporters arriving drinking beer from cans and pint
               glasses.


               North Stand view of of Spion Kop.


               Disorderly Nottingham Forest supporters in the Spion Kop.


               View of West terrace Lepping Lane supporters climbing onto pitch
               from pens three and four.


               Gate 5 open supporters flowing through onto the pitch.


               Game stopped.     View of pens 3 and 4,




                                                                                     7 5 2
                                      VIDEO
                                                                DPP DOC” 4
                                                          I________________________

                              SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                  DOCUMENT 114

Source:   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club       West Midlands Police Ref: RJH1

                                  TIME AND DATE

           Time Not Known                     15th April 1989

                                     CONTENT

           Club camera static overlooking paddock area turnstiles 1 - 1 0    and
           Gate A. Stewards present Gate A.


           Initial view showing police inside ground turnstile area very few
           spectators entering ground. Poor quality picture.


           Persons enter ground via Gate A.


           Further entry of people via Gate A.      Spectators entering ground
           not being searched.


           Officers move across to gate with steward.


            Increased flow of people through turnstile area.


           Movement of officers across screen - right to left.


           Increased activity Paddock area spectators talking with police and
           pointing outside turnstiles block.


           Gate A open, large Number of spectators enter ground.
           Poor quality footage.


            Gate A apparently closed flow of people ceases.


            Turnstile area now relatively clear of spectators.


            Small number of people now leaving ground via Gate A.


            Increased numbers now leaving via Gate A.


            Tape ends.


                                                                                   753
                                       VIDEO
                                                                DPP DOC " 5
                                                                          —   -------

                               SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                   DOCUMENT 115

Source:   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club      West Midlands Police Ref: RJH2

                                   TIME AND DATE

           Time Not Known                     15th April 1989

                                      CONTENT

           CLUB CAMERA OVERLOOKING GATE C. STATIC.

           View of Gate C and Turnstile block A - G. Very quiet. Small number
           of people entering ground via turnstile block.
           Stewards present at Gate C. Police inside ground at turnstiles.


           4 people enter ground via Gate C escorted by steward.


           Steward from Gate C collects programme seller from inside ground
           takes him to Gate C and sells programme to people through open Gate
           C.


           Supporter with striped shirt and denim type jacket enters ground via
           Gate C.


           Further supporter enters via opened Gate C.


           Man leaves ground via open Gate C.


           Two police officers leave ground via open Gate C.


           Two spectators enter via Gate C.


           Spectators enters ground via open Gate C.      Escorted by steward.


           Two police officers take up position outside Gate C.


           Two persons enter via Gate C escorted by police officer.


            Two persons enter ground via Gate C.


            Steady flow of supporters now entering ground.      Increased activity
            outside ground.


                                                                                  754
                                              Document No. 1 1 5    CONT’D




Further spectators enter via Gate C.
                                i



Further 5 persons enter ground via Gate C following apparent
discussion with stewards on gate.


Person having entered ground via turnstile, ejected by police via
Gate C .


Three persons enter ground via Gate C.


Further man enters ground via Gate C.


Gate C now closed by stewards who are now inside ground.


Ejection of supporter via Gate C having entered via turnstile for
right of picture.


Supporter very similar to one as above in previous entry, timed
1.26.08, enters ground via Gate C.


Build up of people outside Gate C.


Ejection of supporter - having entered by turnstile on far left of
picture. Gate C.


Ejection of supporter via Gate C - Again having entered by turnstile
on far left of picture.


2 persons ejected via Gate C.


Supporter seen climbing onto turnstile block Leppings Lane side.


Second supporter climbing onto turnstile block.


Ejection of man via Gate C.1.41.39


Supporter on turnstile block about to jump down.


Supporter off turnstile block ejected via Gate C.


Supporter ejected via Gate C.                               ' 7 5
                                              1 Document No. 1 1 5   CONT




Supporter seen climbing on turnstile block.


Two supporters ejected via Gate C.


Three persons ejected via Gate C.
Increased flow of spectators through turnstiles.
Significant build of persons outside turnstiles.


Missile thrown at mounted sergeant outside ground.


Collapsed person being carried into ground by police via Gate C.


Further supporters seen climbing onto turnstile block.


Arrested supporter escorted into ground via Gate C by police
officer.


Supporter ejected via Gate C.


Two mounted officers arrive outside turnstile block.


Supporter   ejected via Gate C.


Supporter   ejected via Gate C.


Supporter   ejected via Gate C.


Supporter standing on top of turnstile block.
People arguing with police inside turnstile area.


Large numbers of people outside ground.   Slow flow of persons
through turnstiles.


Supporter on top of turnstile block.


More supporters on top of turnstile block.


Approximately 12 - 15 supporters on top of turnstile block.


Supporter being ejected via Gate C, supporters on top of turnstile
climbing down.
                                                  Document No. j ] 5   CONT'D




More supporters climbing onto the top of the turnstile block and
dropping down inside ground.


Supporter being ejected via Gate C.


Supporter being ejected via Gate C.     Supporters still on top of
turnstile block.


Surge of crowd from outside into ground via Gate C.


Gate blocked by mounted officers.


Supporter climbs wall nearest camera.


Build up of people outside Gate C.    Supporter climbing on top of
turnstile block.


People inside ground beckon people outside to enter via Gate C.


Surge of people enter via Gate C.


People at the front of the turnstile entrance make their way round
and enter via Gate C.


People continue to enter ground via Gate C.


Flow of people into ground all but ceases.


Gates closed by police officers.


Supporters climbing down into ground over turnstile block.


Gate C opened police and stewards present.


Number of people allowed into ground via Gate C.


People entering ground via Gate C. Supporters still on top of
turnstile block.   People still entering ground via turnstile block.
                                               Document No. ] ] 5     CONT




Police officers leave area of turnstiles.


Police officers from outside ground enter via Gate C apparently
making way towards playing area.


Contingent of mounted officers make their way towards front of
turnstile block outside ground. People still entering ground via
turnstiles.


Centre turnstile doors closed.


Gate C opened to allow two people out.


Left hand turnstile door closed.


Individual people leaving ground via Gate C.


People making their way back to turnstile area from stadium area.


People leaving ground via Gate C.


Ambulance arrives at Gate C.


Person carried out of ground and placed into ambulance.


Person assisted out of ground - female.


More people run into turnstile area and leave via Gate C.     Large
contingent of police arrive Gate C.


Further casualty carried to Gate C.
Police make their way towards playing area.


Injured person assisted from ground.


Further injured person assisted from ground.


Second ambulance arrived Gate C.


Further person assisted from ground to waiting ambulance.
                                               Document No. j 1 5   CONT’U




Another apparent casualty arrives turnstile area.

Two apparent casualties assisted from ground.


Constant stream of apparent casualties being brought into
turnstile area and leaving ground via Gate C.

More police officers arrive Gate C.


Fire tender arrives Leppings Lane outside turnstiles.


Third Ambulance arrives Gate C.


Steady stream of spectators leaving ground via Gate C.


Fourth ambulance arrives Gate C.


Casualties still being taken out via Gate C.     Firemen assisting.


Casualty receiving heart massage by police turnstile area.


Ambulance arrives outside Gate C.


Two further ambulances arrives Gate C.


Further ambulance arrives outside Gate C.


Stretcher with casualty leaves Gate C.


Turnstile area now comparatively free of people.


Further ambulance arrive outside Gate C.


Further ambulances arrive outside Gate C.


Tape Ends.


GENERAL COMMENTS

Poor quality tape with poor definition.
However shows good coverage of scenes at Gate C.
                                                                DPP D O C "6
                                         VIDEO

                                  SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                     DOCUMENT 116

Source:   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club          West Midlands Police Ref: RJH3

                                     TIME AND DATE

           Time Unknown                       15th April 1989

                                        CONTENT

           View of car park at rear of South Stand.


           Two police officers on Post, turnstiles at rear of South Stand.


           Supporters arriving.


           Police officers place barriers leading to turnstiles.


           Three police officers form cordon preventing access along driveway
           to Leppings Lane.


           Two mounted officers along driveway towards Leppings Lane.


           Two more mounted officers towards Leppings Lane.


           Barriers moved to position across driveway leading to Leppings Lane.


           Hand held camera crew at rear of South Stand.


           Greater flow of supporters from Leppings Lane direction.


           Fire Service arrive at rear of South Stand.


           Ambulances arrive.


           Casualty/body brought out from rear of South Stand.


           Second body/injury brought out.


           Second fire crew arrive.
                                              Document No. 1 1 6   GONT’D




Third body/injury stretchered out.


Large numbers of police along drive towards Leppings Lane.


Large numbers of ambulances arriving and departing.


End.




                                                                   761
                                                                DPP D O C " 7
                                         VIDEO

                                SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                     DOCUMENT 117

Source:   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club         West Midlands Police Ref; RJH4

                                     TIME AND DATE

           Time Unknown                       15th April 1989

                                        CONTENT

           View of turnstiles 26-26A and H gate rear of South Stand.


           Stewards on Post.


           Police on Post.


           Steady flow of supporters arriving.


           Turnstiles closed.


           Increased police/official activity.


           Fire tender arrives.


           Concertina H Gates opened.


            Crowds begin to leave.


            End.




                                                                                     7 6 2
                                                                OPP DOC1,8
                                        VIDEO

                               SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                     DOCUMENT 118

Source:   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club          West Midlands Police Ref: RJH5

                                     TIME AND DATE

           Time Unknown                       15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT

           Static camera overlooking turnstiles 29 - 36 and official car park
           rear of South Stand.


           Initial view showing people outside turnstiles 29 - 36 and official
           car park.


           Mounted police arrive to assist in controlling crowd.


           Players coach arrives, drops off players.


           Second coaches arrives.


           Area relatively quiet clear of football supporters.


           Fire brigade arrive turnstile block.


           Fire brigade and 3 tenders drive off towards West Stand.        Increased
           police activity in area.


           Ambulance drives past turnstiles towards Spion Kop.


           Further ambulance passes turnstiles towards Spion Kop.


           Steady flow of people walking past turnstiles from direction of West
           Stand towards Spion Kop.


           Further ambulance arrives outside turnstile block.        Travelling
           towards West Stand.


           Further ambulance arrives outside turnstile block.


            Steady stream of ambulances driving past turnstile block from West
            Stand towards Spion Kop.                                           7
                                               Document No. 1 1 8    CONT’D




Further ambulance arrives travelling towards West Stand.


Static camera overlooking turnstiles 29 - 36 and official car park
rear of South Stand.


Tape ends.


GENERAL COMMENTS

Reasonable quality tape showing activity outside turnstile block.




                                                                    764
                                       VIDEO

                               SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                   DOCUMENT 119

Source:   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club       West Midlands Police Ref: RJH6

                                   TIME AND DATE

           Time Unknown                       15th April 1989

                                      CONTENT

           Static camera Spion Kop driveway outside turnstiles 37 - 42.


           Initial view of turnstile block and stairs.
           Different day, different game, Nottingham Forest.


           Relevant coverage of Liverpool match begins showing same view as
           above with stewards in position by turnstile block.


           Steady flow of supporters through turnstiles.


           Heavy flow of people through turnstiles.


           Tape ends.


           GENERAL COMMENTS

           Nothing relevant.




                                                                                   7 65
                                                           DPP DOC120
                                        VIDEO

                                 SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 120

Source:   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club        West Midlands Police Ref: RJH7.

                                    TIME AND DATE

                  Time Unknown                      15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT

           Pictures show match day some time before 15 April 1989


           Start showing Penistone Road turnstiles 15 April 1989, supporters
           arriving.


           End.




                                                                                 766
                                                            ii
                                                                 OPP DOC'2'
                                                                 -   - ■   -   - _______



                                         VIDEO

                                  SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                     DOCUMENT 121

Source:   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club         West Midlands Police Ref: RJH8

                                     TIME AND DATE

                  Time Unknown                       15th April 1989

                                        CONTENT

           View of turnstiles in Penistone Road at the rear of the Spion Kop.


           Supporters arriving.


           Turnstiles closed.


           End.




                                                                                           767
                                                           DPP DOC122
                                        VIDEO

                                 SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                     DOCUMENT 122

Source:   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club         West Midlands Police Ref: RJH9

                                    TIME AND DATE

                  Time Unknown                      15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT

           View of Turnstiles Penistone Road 56 - 72.
           Nothing of evidential value.


           Turnstiles closed.


           End.




                                                                                 768
                                                             DPP DOC ,23
                                        VIDEO

                                 SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 123

Source:   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club         West Midlands Police Ref; RJH10

                                    TIME AND DATE

                  Time Unknown                      15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT

           View of turnstiles 61 - 64, Penistone Road
           Supporters arriving, steady flow.
           Nothing of evidential value.


           Turnstiles closed.


           End.




                                                                                      769
                                                              OPP O O C 124
                                        VIDEO

                                 SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 124

Source:   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club        West Midlands Police Ref: RJH11

                                    TIME AND DATE

                  Time Unknown                      15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT

           View of Penistone Road turnstiles 55 - 72.


           View showing previous match day to 15 April 1989.


            Start of footage of 15 April 1989.      Turnstiles closed.


           GENERAL COMMENTS

           Nothing on tape of any evidential use.




                                                                                770
                                        VIDEO

                                 SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 125

Source:   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club        West Midlands Police Ref: RJH12

                                    TIME AND DATE

                  Time Unknown                      15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT

           View of Penistone Road turnstiles 73-76.


           For duration of film have views of supporters entering and leaving
           area turnstile 73-76.

           No incidents of any evidential value occur.
                                                            DPP DOC126
                                        VIDEO

                                 SCHEnnT.K DESCRIPTION

                                     DOCUMENT 126

Source:   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club      West Midlands Police Ref: RJH13

                                    TIME AND DATE

                  Time Unknown                   15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT

           Film of Penistone Road, turnstiles 77 to 88.

           For duration of film, views of Nottingham Forest supporters arriving
           at the ground.


            GENERAL COMMENTS

           Nothing of any evidential value.




                                                                               772
                                                              DPP DOC127
                                         VIDEO

                                 SCHKPI1LE DESCRIPTION

                                     DOCUMENT 127

Source;   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club         West Midlands Police Ref: RJH14

                                    TIME AND DATE

                  Time Unknown                      15th April 1989

                                        CONTENT

           View of turnstiles from Club camera of Penistone Road area
           turnstiles 84-88.


           Stewards on Post, supporters arriving.


           Police eject/arrest two supporters.


           Two police officers on Post.


           Increased police activity.

           Film ends.




                                                                                 773
                                                                DPP DOC
                                         VIDEO

                                SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 128

           Source:   BBC TV                       West Midlands Police Ref: MAPI

                                    TIME AND DATE

           Commences 14.38.21 Hours                   15th April 1989
           Terminates 15.38.16 Hours                  15th April 1989

                                        CONTENT

           Film Starts.

14.38.21   General footage of both ends of ground, supporters on terraces.

14.40.09   Pens 3 and 4, crowd pushing around playing with a beach ball.

14.41.40   More 3 and 4 crowd scenes.

14.45.18   General views of West Stand.

14.46.41   Views of all terraces pens in West Stand.

Until      Jostling in Pens 3 and 4.

14.49.56   Large gap in crowd in Pens 3 and 4.

14.53.00   Both long range and close up.

14.53.11   More shots of full pens 3 and 4 followed by        views of Nottingham
           Forest supporters.

14.55.00   Both teams onto pitch.

14.55.46   Surging in Pens 3 and 4.

14.57.00   Coverage of match, occasional views of stands.

14.59.30   Match starts.

           Football coverage.

15.00.39   Crowd coming over the fence from pens 3 and 4whilst football match
           is being filmed. Steady flow of spectators.

Until

15.01.18

15.02.06   More problems at the fence of pens 3 and 4.

15.04.08   Close up filming of 3 and 4, fence gate open.

15.05.33   Police on pitch, match stopped. Police line in goal area,          Close
           ups and long range of West Stand.
                                                                                      774
15.07.05   Supporters climbing into upper seating.
                                                             Document No.   12 8   CONT’D




Onwards     Followed by good close up fences, pens and pitch.    Shows crush
            scenes in Pens 3 and 4.

15.09.50    Stretcher on pitch.

15.10.00    Long range/close up of West Stand.    Very good quality footage.

15.12.36    Apparently dead body being passed around in Pen 3.

15.15.40    Ambulance on pitch.

15.17.15.   Pile of bodies by Gate 3.

15.18.00    General view of ground.

15.18.29    Close up Gate 3, then back out.

15.19.26    Fence smashed opened.     Close up.

15.20.00    Focusing more on pitch areas, general scenes, body removed by police
            and supporters.

15.22.20    Close up of heart massage etcetera on pitch long range of goal area.

15.25.00    General long range shots, removal of bodies on stretchers.

15.27.57    Pile of bodies on pitch near Gate 3.

15.30.00    General scene of pitch.

15.36.00    Net removed from goal West Stand.

15.37.00    Disorder on pitch, Spion Kop end followed by police cordon being
            inserted.

15.38.16    Filming stops.


            GENERAL COMMENTS

            A good quality film showing much relevant material.




                                                                                    775
                                     VIDEO

                           SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                               DOCUMENT 129
              f
            Source:   BBC TV                     West Midlands Police Ref: MAP2

                               TIME AND DATE

            Commences 15.37.47                 15th April 1989
            Terminates 16.37.42                15th April 1989

                                  CONTENT

15.37.47    Scene of aftermath - suppoters, police, photographers and
             others on the pitch.

15.38.40    Cordon of police across pitch Spion Kop end of ground, short
             distance from goal line.

15.39.20    Cordon of police moving en masse from Spion Kop end to centre
             line.

15.39.14    Body being carried on stretcher/boards by supporters across
             pitch.

15.39.40    Ambulance being driven   across pitch.

15.42.00    Police cordon still in    situ.

15.46.00    Brian Clough and Kenny Dalglish on pitch talking with        a
             Superintendent.

15.48.20    Police cordon still in    situ -   single man cordon   at this stage.

15.49.14.   Firemen running acrosspitch through       policecordon.

15.50.40    Group of firemen, police officers and suppoters standing and
             kneeling around a person lying on sheeting laid on pitch.
             Person being given heart massage and mouth to mouth
             resuscitation.

15.51.44    Supporter being restrained by another supporter whilst he is
             venting his anger towards police officers.

15.52.58    Man believed to be Chairman of Nottingham Forest walking along
             Spion Kop and applauding supporters of Nottingham Forest
             Football Club.

15.55.59    Football supporter in red football shirt sitting against goal
             post at Spion Kop end in distressed state being seen to by
             police inspector and two others, not apparently physically only
             emotionally upset.

15.56.38    Police cordon still in situ.

15.57.41    Single manned police cordon still in situ across pitch.

15.58.30    Supporters on pitch slowly making their way across pitch,               776
            towards North Stand. Police cordon still in situ.
                                                      Document No. | ? 9    CONT’D




15.58.     Advertising hoardings being removed from goalmouth at Leppings
            Lane end by police officers and supporters.

15.59.48   Police dog handlers and dogs on pitch at SpionKop end.

16.00.10   Police single man cordon still in situ.

16.01.28   Pitch clearer, majority of supporters on pitch near to North
            Stand and Leppings Lane end.

16.01.53   View of Leppings Lane end from camera No 7 situated at that
            end. Police officers clearing supporters from that end.

16.02.41   Supporter showing completed entry ticket including stub to
            camera.

16.02.45   Group of police officers having ’words’ apparently after some
            sort of disturbance and one man being led away (arrested?)
            by police officer. Group of about 20 supporters involved. Man
            led away could possibly be a photographer, he is carrying a
            bag.

16.03.05   Full ticket and stub shown to camera.

16.09.20   Large group of supporters and police officers   on pitch at
            Leppings Lane end.

16.10.06   Single man police cordon still across pitch, near to centre
            line.

16.11.35   Scene of supporters, climbed on grilling and shouting at others
            off screen to move back. Match still in progress, ie must be
            commencement of new film.
            Scene of supporters shouting at others in Leppings Lane end.

16.12.09   Man collapsing on pitch directly in front of camera and being
            attended to by two other people. Man holding spectacles in
            right hand. Scenes from sports unit camera of Leppings Lane
            end at time of disaster.

16.13.11   Gate 2 at Leppings Lane end being held open by a police officer
            and supporters being pulled out.

16.14.30   Scene taken at corner of Pen 3 showing supporters crushed and
            one with hands above head apparently alright. Others also
            alright but crushed together.

16.15.27   Female crushed against fence, two rings right hand, middle and
            ring finger, blue denim jacket, Liverpool scarf.

16.15.56   White male large hooked nose, red top, crushed against fence.

16.16.07   Group of five people including white female crushed against
            fence.

16.16.18   Elderly white male helped from Pen 3 into Pen 2 by supporters.

16.17.00   Scene of pitch at Leppings Lane end obviously well after          J J J
            incident.
                                Document No. 1 2 9   CONT’D




Supporters leaving Spion Kop.

End of video.




                                                        77 8
                                                                   DPP DOC130
                                          VIDEO

                                   SCHKnm.K DESCRIPTION

                                       DOCUMENT 130

              Source:   BBC TV                    West Midlands Police Ref: MAP3

                                      TIME AND DATE

              Commences     14.59.40 Hours            15th April   1989
              Terminates    16.41.44 Hours            15th April   1989
              NB: Not in Chronological Order

                                         CONTENT

16.37.30      Initial scenes ground empty showing views of empty pens, Leppings
              Lane Stand.


16.37.32      Small number of spectators on pitch, clearing debris.


16.37.56.23         Chief Superintendent on pitch talking to police woman.


16.38.29.10         View of police officers’ helmets on pitch.


16.38.48.07         View of pen 3 with police officers, spectators and firemen.



16.40.24.08         Officers collecting items of clothing from pens 3 and 4.



16.41.44            Police officers, stewards, sorting through the clothing on
                    pitch  - clothing being bagged up.


16.42.01            View of   Police Control Room.


16.42.46            View of collapsed crowd barrier - pen 3.



16.49.35            View of Football Association Secretary.

16.49.41            End of tape.


14.59.25            Start of new tape.    Players on pitch about to kick off.



15.00.30            View of packed Leppings Lane stand and supporters climbing over
                    dividing barriers.


15.00.40            Supporters starting to spill onto ash track from pens 3 and 4.


                                                                                   779
                                                       Docum ent No. j 3 0   CONT’D




15.04.11   View of heavily congested Leppings Lane standi      More supporters
            on perimeter track.


15.05.25   Officer runs onto pitch.


15.05.34   Game abandoned on advice of police.


15.05.39   Spectators from Leppings Lane stand.


15.05.48   Distant shot of Leppings Lane stand.   Large numbers of police
            converging on area.

15.06.20   Distant shot showing densely packed terraces pens 3 and 4.


15.06.53   Closer shots of terracing showing people being pulled to upper
            stand.


15.07.04   People being pulled up to upper stand next to ’Presto’ yellow
           hoarding.


15.07.54   View of people sitting on pitch, receiving attention from police
            officers.


15.08.06   Large numbers of people climbing perimeter fencing attempting to
            assist people from terracing.


15.11.07   People leaving   terraces via centre tunnel of Leppings Lane stand.


15.11.40   View of police officers attempting to pull down perimeter fencing
            in attempt to rescue people.


15.12.55   View of spectator lying on pitch. Grey top, blue tee shirt, blue
            jeans, white coloured training shoes.


15.13.00   View of two other persons receiving treatment.

15.13.17   View of area in front of Liverpool goal. Number of persons
            sitting on pitch receiving attention. One youth wearing green
            and white top, blue jeans, gesturing towards opposing fans.


15.13.33   View of people   lying on pitch in front of goal.


15.14.53   View ofyouth wearing brown top and track suit type bottoms
            receiving assistance from police officers.                           780
                                                         Document No. 1 3 0    CONT’D




15.16.22       Ambulance arrives on scene. Number of people coining onto pitch
                collapsing and receiving treatment.


15.18.11       Further police resources enter pitch from Spion Kop end.


15.20.30       First ambulance at scene.


15.21.24       Man being carried onto pitch by three uniformed officers.


15.21.41       View of four men obviously arguing on pitch, one wearing a blue
                top, blue jeans, red, white and blue anorak, blue jeans, light
                coloured shirt, moustache and is smoking. Fourth one wearing
                jacket, leather jacket.


15.21.51       View of person receiving heart massage on pitch.


(1) 15.26.36   Shot of gate being opened far left of Liverpool goal.      Fireman
               entering pen.


15.27.53       Hoardings being carried to and from Leppings Lane goal area for
                use as stretchers.


15.32.27       Flow of hoardings continues.


15.33          Ambulance leave ground.


15.37.06       Liverpool supporters running across pitch to Spion Kop.


15.42.00       Moving up towards centre line.


15.47.09       Tape Ends.


               GENERAL COMMENTS

               Gives good all round picture of events but lacking in detail.




                                                                                    781
                                                               DPP DOC >3i
                                         VIDEO

                                SnHKDTIT.E   DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 131

           Source;   BBC TV                       West Midlands Police Ref; MAP4

                                    TIME AND DATE

           Commences       15.46.41 Hours            15th April 1989
           Terminates      16.33.48 Hours            15th April 1989

                                        CONTENT

15.46.41   Scene of large number of people on pitch, camera looking towards
           Leppings Lane end.


15.47.38   Police cordon on pitch across pitch and near to centre line.


15.48.57   View of pen 3 empty.    The area behind the goal is quite congested.


15.54.44   General view of spectators using hoardings as stretchers - distant
           view.


15.56.27   Large group of people in Leppings Lane half of the ground looking
           towards South Stand and applauding.


15.57.50   Police cordon still in situ.


15.58.09   Crowd of people in Leppings Lane half of the ground making their way
           towards the North Stand.


15.59.44   View of Spion Kop with police dogs and handlers on pitch in front of
           stand.


16.01.38   View of pen 3 - fairly empty.


16.02.06   Close-up scene of Leppings Lane end.        Large numbers of police and
           fans in view.


16.20.00   Crowd starting to disperse and leave ground.


1626.43    Dispersal of police cordon.


16.33.48   End of video.


                                                                                     78 2
                                                               DPP DOC            132

                                        VIDEO

                                 SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 132

           Source:   BBC TV                      West Midlands Police Ref: MAP5

                                    TIME AND DATE

           Commences     14.59.25 Hours            15th April 1989
           Terminates    15.59.19 Hours            15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT

                 BBC recording from camera 4 situated on touch line at halfway
                 line.

Start 1459 25    Football coverage.


1500.36          Supporters on pitch being led to other pens.


1502             Supporters at rear of goal and beginning to climb fences from
                 pens.


1504.15          Large numbers of supporters climbing fence onto pitch and being
                 pulled into stands above pens.


1504.51          Crossbar hit.


1505.25          Game stopped.


1507.20          Supporters being pulled into West Stand from pens 3 and 4.


1509.24          Views of supporters sitting and lying on floor.


1515.36          St Johns Ambulance on pitch.


1529.06          Supporters using as stretchers, general scenes of injured being
                 carried off hoardings.


1542             Police cordon.


1559.19          End.




                                                                                    783
                                                                  DPP DOC 133
                                            VIDEO

                                  SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                         DOCUMENT 133

           Source:   BBC TV                          West Midlands Police Ref: MAP6

                                     TIME AND DATE

           Commences        1558 Hours                  15th April 1989
           Terminates       1640 Hours                  15th April 1989

                                           CONTENT

           BBC recordings from cameras 4,8,2 and preview Mix.             1.   Camera 4
           taken at ground level from half way line.


1558       Film starts fans and police on pitch.


1601       Police cordon on pitch - movement of supporters beyond              cordon.


1604       Supporters shows tickets to camera men, stubs on them not removed.


1611       Film finish.
                  2. Camera 8 - two positions, ground level at end opposite
                  Leppings Lane from 1522 in tunnel entrance.


1455       Film starts -

1500       Match in play.


1502 and   Movement of supporters around track behind goal.
1503

1505       Supporters spilling onto pitch from pens, and into pen 5 - match
            abandoned.


1506       Supporters climbing over fencing - police cordon covering goal                area.


1508       Supporters being pulled from pens into stands above.


1509       Footage second tier of supporters climbing from pens 3              and 4.


1510       ’Ginger fan’


1512.59.23 Body? (wearing red top with white collar) carried across pitch from
           pens by two police officers
                                                    Document No) ^   CONT’D




1513   Supporters still being pulled into stands.

1515   Ambulance to pitch.


1516   Gate 5 open.


1521   Film finish.


       3. Camera 2 and preview mix (5/6) taken from narrow angle on
       gantry (2) and in line with the 18 yard line, camera 5 nearest to
       Leppings Lane.


1631   Film starts - pitch and ground cleared.


1640   Film finishes.
                                                             DPP DOC134
                                                                 . . . — ..   ... -   - I.       —   '•   ........ .............


                                      VIDEO

                               SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                   DOCUMENT 134

           Source:   BBC TV                    West Midlands Police R e f : MAP7

                                  TIME AND DATE

           Commences     14.59.16 Hours           15th April 1989
           Terminates    15.59.38 Hours           15th April 1989

                                     CONTENT

14.59.16   Brian Clough taking up his seat in the South Stand.


15.05.25   Football match stopped by referee at request of a police
           superintendent, supporters seen spilling onto pitch.


15.06.05   Supporters in white top and blue jeans prostrate on ground behind
           goal being attended to by St Johns ambulanceman.


15.06.11   Supporter in blue jeans, no top, prostrate and adjacent to goal posts
           receiving attention from police officer and supporters, breathing
           heavily.


15.09.05   Supporter in white and green top with ginger hair receiving attention
           from police officers and fans. Placed onto stretcher and taken away
           out of camera shot.


15.10.24   Ladder being placed against fencing in Leppings Lane end by police
           officers.


15.10.35   Supporter rugby-tacked to ground by police officer.


15.11.08   Supporter in red and white top and blue jeans lying prostrate on
           ground behind goal. Only left hand moving.


15.11.51   Gate 4 open and supporters walking through.


15.12.50   Number of supporters lying/sitting on pitch some being attended to
           others not.


15.15.41   Ambulance appears in camera shot and makes its way to directly behind
           the goal at the Leppings Lane end.


15.17.08   Scene of a group of supporters ’crushed’ together at fencing near to
           gate from Pen 3.                                                                  ’                   7ft)
                                                      Document No.   ]   34   CONT’D




15.18.10   Group of supporters pulling down fencing at Leppings Lane end.


15.18.14   Group of police officers carrying a supporter away from Leppings
            Lane end.  Supporter is apparently only wearing underpants.


15.18.59   Supporter in white top throwing a punch at a police officer and
            being taken out of camera shot.


15.19.16   Supporter being carried out of shot by police officers.


15.19.25   Supporters at Gate 3 being helped out by police officers. Many
            apparently unable to move, some apparently dead, one in
            particular wearing black/dark trousers,
            (possibly NA 53), another wearing blue jeans and white top, and
            another with light green top/jacket, white shirt, blue jeans and
           white socks or pumps. Another wearing light blue top with dark
           motif, blue jeans                                        wrist
           watch with black strap (possibly NA 21).


15.22.07   Large group of supporters lying prostrate on pitch and being
            attended to by police officers, fans and St Johns ambulance
            crew. Many supporters receiving heart massage and mouth to mouth
            resuscitation.


15.27.57   Scene of supporters being taken out of Pen 3, through gate by
            police officers. Ambulance adjacent to gate and behind goal.


15.29.10   Supporters being carried away on advertising hoardings.


15.31.23   View of gate to Pen 3.   Three prostrate and apparently dead
            people adjacent.


15.32.40   Police officers carrying away apparently dead people.


15.37.02   Large numbers of supporters and police officers running towards
            Spion Kop.


15.38.05   Advertising hoardings being piled up by supporters in goal mouth
            at Leppings Lane end.


15.38.33   Single man police cordon forming up on edge of penalty area Spion
            Kop end, across pitch.


15.39.43   Police cordon formed up across pitch along centre line.
            Ambulance breaking through cordon and passing group of firemen,
            Police and supporters lifting person on advertising hoarding. J Q J
                                           Document No. 1 3 4   CONT’D




View of Spion Kop.


Pile of advertising hoardings on pitch adjacent to goal Leppings
Lane end.


Chairman of Nottingham Forest Football Club walking along Spion
Kop applauding supporters.


Police officer comforting supporter obviously in a distressed
condition.


Supporters making their way towards the North Stand from the
direction of the South Stand.


End of video tape.




                                                                7 8 8
                                        VIDEO

                                SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 135

          Source:   BBC TV                       West Midlands Police Ref; MAP8

                                    TIME AND DATE

          Commences        16.02.34 Hours           15th April 1989
          Terminates       15.10.50 Hours           15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT

          BBC Film taken by camera 7 situated in slung rostrum in west stand.


          Start general scenes of the hoardings being piled up near to pen 4.


1602.34   Photographer attacked by supporters near to pen 1.


1603      General scenes of police and supporters on pitch following incident.


1605      Scenes of pens 3 and 4 from above showing bent barrier and debris
          near to fence at front of pens.


1623.42   Pitch being cleared, supporters leaving ground.


1634.04   End.


          Cameras 5/6 situated touch line south stand side of pitch.


14.49     Surging in Pens 3 and 4.


14.50     Close-up of Pens 3 and 4.


14.58     Football coverage.


1505      Match stopped.


          Close ups of Pens 3 and 4, injured on pitch.


1507,30   Close-up of the rear of Pen 3.


1508.20   General scenes of supporters climbing onto pitch and into West Stand.

                                                                                  789
                                                            Document No. 1 3 5   CONT’D




1510.50   Close up of fence scenes and goal mouth scenes.


1515.41   St Johns ambulance on the pitch.




                                                                                 790
                                                             DPP DOC
                                        VIDEO

                                 SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 136

          Source;   BBC TV                       West Midlands Police Ref: MAP9

                                    TIME AND DATE

          Commences    15.03.30 Hours              15th April 1989
          Terminates   16.07    Hours              15th April 1989
          NB: Also shows untimed sequences.

                                       CONTENT

          BBC RECORDINGS FROM BBC SPORT SUE (SPORTS UNIT ELECTRONIC) AND BBC
          LEEDS ENG. UNIT.

          1.   BBC SUE Reel 1.

1503.30   Film starts.


1503      Match in play.


1503.48   Views from inside Pens 6 and 7.


1504      Supporters start to spill onto track, line of police heading towards
           Leppings Lane pens.


1505      Supporters climbing out of pens onto pitch.        Police and St Johns
          Ambulance personnel assisting.


1505      Gate 3 open.     Supporters making way through     onto pitch. Gate 2 also
           open.


1507      Severe crowding around gate to Pen 3.        Police officers assisting
          supporters out.


1508      Severe crush at fencing in Pen 3.        Young female wearing denim jacket
          and football scarf squashed.


1509      Supporters lifting others from Pen 3 to pen 2.


1510.02   Inspector organising a serial to assist at fence.


1512      Views next to gate to Pen 3.     Officers assisting supporters    over
           fence.


1512.01   Police and supporters trying to rip down fencing.                        791
                                                     Document No. 1 3 6   CONT’D

1514      Supporters lying on ground attended by officers. One supporter
          wearing red top, white motif, light blue jeans, white trainers,
          (blue stripes), receiving mouth to mouth resuscitation and
          cardiac massage).


          BBC RECORDINGS FROM BBC SPORT SUE (SPORTS UNIT ELECTRONIC) AND
          BBC LEEDS ENG. UNIT.

          1.   BBC SUE Reel 1.


1516      Crowds on pitch and bodies being tended.


1516 58   Film finish.


          BBC SUE Unit Reel 2.


1546 42   Film start - Scenes on pitch of Brian Clough, police and other
          officials.


1547      One irate supporter showing ticket.


1604      Large group of supporters accumulate showing tickets.


1607      Film ends.


          BBC Leeds Eng. Unit Reel 1.


          Footage of arrival Nottingham Forest supporters.


          Footage and confiscated items taken from the Nottingham Forest
          supporters including cans, and cans outside ground.


          Further view of cans including beer.


          Nottingham Forest supporter drinking from a can, contents not
          identified. Enters ground with same.


          Footage of Liverpool supporters outside ground awaiting entry,
          mounted police at scene.  Supporters crushed and squashed
          together at this stage.


          Supporters surging from street through gate into turnstile A - G
          entrance area with South Stand indicated to the right ofLeppings
          Lane.
                                            Document No. | 3 6   CONT’D




Crowds packed at entrances and in street.


Superintendent Marshall amongst crowd in Leppings Lane.


Further footage of crowds at entrance turnstiles A - G, and in
street Leppings Lane end. Crowd increased in size and more
compact, mounted officers attempting to relieve pressure.


Small group of supporters jumping about knocking into other
people.


Entrance area at turnstiles completely packed.


Police inspector on wall giving directions. View Gate C closed.
Inspector passes young boy from outside turnstiles to officers at
Gate C.


Police officers attempting to close perimeter gate.


Supporters climbing up wall out of crowd to area above turnstile
16.


Perimeter gate closed.


Mounted police apparently attempting to prevent further people
entering A - G turnstile compound by blocking gate from street,
crowd forcing towards gate. One supporter climbing fence into
compound.


Severe crushing in street towards compound gate against police
horses.


Crowd surge through gate into compound area.     Altercation between
supporters and a mounted and foot officer.


Superintendent Marshall in crowd in compound.


Inside ground - footage showing Pens 3 and 4, gates 3 and 4 open,
supporters climbing and being assisted by police over fences to
pitch.


Person wearing dark trousers and; white trainers being tended by
police.

                                                                 7 9 3
                                         Document No. 1 3 6   CONT’D




Person being tended by three officers.


Inside pen young boy wearing only jeans being tended with cardiac
massage and mouth to mouth resuscitation (possibly NA83) also
still bodies at right of this boy. Training shoes with
noticeable sole.

Male - late 30’s wearing grey leather jacket being tended by
police. NA67 Raymond Chapman.


Two males tended by police.


Male wearing red crew neck thick knit jumper, jeans and light
coloured trainers. Match NA 4 David Rimmer.


Injured being conveyed by supporters on advertising hoardings.


Dead/injured stretchered off. (NA 6).


Film ends.


BBC Leeds Eng. Unit Reel Two.


Escort ambulances.


In the ground.


Film finishes.




                                                                 7 9 4
                                                            DPP DOC 137
                                        VIDEO

                                 SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 137

Source:   South Yorkshire Police                 West Midlands Police Ref; VRM2

                                    TIME AND DATE

                  Time Unknown                       15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT

           Times shown are commentary times given by the operator, of a hand
           held police CCTV camera.


           Supporter on pitch making obscene gestures towards the Nottingham
           Forest supporters.


           West Stand and Leppings Lane terraces long range shots CCTV crew
           threatened by supporter on pitch. Cease filming.

           Gymnasium/Temporary Mortuary general scenes.


           General scenes.


           General scenes.


           General scenes.


            Bodies bagged, 45 dead at this stage.


            General scenes, officer allocated to each body.


            General scenes.   Numerical order in body bags.




                                                                                  7 9 5
                                                                           c
                                        VIDEO

                                 SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 138

Source:   South Yorkshire Police                West Midlands Police Ref; VRM3

                                    TIME AND DATE

                  Time Unknown                      15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT

           View of Leppings Lane end including West Stand after incident and
           after spectators had left ground CCTV operators P C ’s            and




           More detailed view of Leppings Lane end including damage to fittings
           ie barriers, fences etc.


           View of gate 4 into Pen 4 including close up of bolt and locking
           system.


           Close-up view of gate 5 into sterile area including locking system.


           View through goal posts up tunnel at back of Pens 3 and 4, including
           fencing with grill removed.


            Close-up view of bent crash barrier immediately behind gate 3.


            Close-up view of locking system of gate 3.


            Closer view of broken barrier in pen 3.


            View of security fence showing bowing and buckling of same.


            View of length of blue barrier on pitch in front of Leppings Lane
            end.


            View of gate 2 including locking system.


            View of gate 1 including locking system, padlock and chain.




                                                                                 7 9 6
                                           Document No. | 3 8   CONT’D




View of West Stand from North Stand side to South Stand side.


View from tunnel at back of Pens 3 and 4 looking towards pitch.


View of scarf used to tie back security fencing bent back by
supporters.


View of wrist watch on terraces stopped at 3.08 pm.




End of tape.




                                                                  797
                                        VIDEO

                                 SCHKPin.K DESCRIPTION

                                     DOCUMENT 139

Source;   South Yorkshire Police                 West Midlands Police Ref: VRM4

                                    TIME AND DATE

                  Time Unknown                       15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT

           Time shown is commentary time given by operator of police hand held
           CCTV camera.


1908       General view of Lepping Lane end of ground from centre of pitch
           through tunnel that leads from turnstiles into Pens 3 and 4.


1914       View from Gate C Pen of gangway to tunnel which leads to Pens 3 and
           4. Close ups of double doors in tunnel.


           View from tunnel towards turnstiles and Gate C end.


           View of Gate B.


           View of joining gates to rear of A - G turnstiles.


           View of Gate A and pan of area.




                                                                                  798
                                                              DPP DOC >40
                                          VIDEO

                                 SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 140

Source:   VIS News (Sky TV)                        West Midlands Police Ref: PSS1

                                    TIME AND DATE

                  Time Unknown                         15th April 1989

                                         CONTENT

           First 28 seconds are of cameraman’s family.         No relevance.

           Shot of spectators making their way from the ground.
           Police directing traffic etc.
           Ambulance, Fire Brigade vehicles outside ground.
           Penistone Road North Spion Kop.

           Casualty on stretcher beneath North Stand.
           Possibly NA.78 - police present.

           Graham KELLY inside ground.
           Interview with Press.

            Shot of firemen on pitch Leppings Lane Stand.
            Showing hoardings on pitch and broken barrier Pen 3.

            Shot of South Stand showing Sheffield Wednesday Football Club’s
            clock 17.19 hours and television gantrys.

            Broken crush barrier Pen 3 and footage of fencing removed and
            damaged, including supporters scarves and hats on ground.

            Film edited at this point.

            Film restarts beneath North Stand.        Police present.

            Turnstile blocks Spion Kop Penistone Road.

            Scenes outside ground, believed South Stand side.

            General scenes of aftermath both of outside and inside ground.

            Tape ends.


            GENERAL COMMENTS

            Good quality film with general scenes of aftermath.




                                                                                    799
                                                    DPP DOC
                             VIDEO

                      SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                         DOCUMENT 141

Source:   TV AM                       West Midlands Police Ref: JB1

                         TIME AND DATE

       Time Unknown                       15th April 1989

                            CONTENT

Bodies in road rear of South Stand.

Irate supporters in car park.

Police cordon and interviews of supporters and Press
reporter.

General scenes empty Leppings Lane stand.

Interview of Football Association Secretary, Graham KELLY.

Interview of supporter regarding opening of the gate (Stephen
MITTON)

End.




                                                                      8 0 0
                                          VIDEO

                                  SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                     DOCUMENT 142

Source:   West Midlands Police               West Midlands Police Ref: MRE/2

                                     TIME AND DATE

                  Various Times                      15th April 1989

                                         CONTENT

ORIGINAL WEST     TIME PERIOD                 REMARKS
MIDLANDS POLICE
TAPE REF NO


MRE1                        -                 Scene of Leppings Lane end.     Stadium
                                              empty.

TB1 Part 3        14.02.37 - 14.02.56         Leppings Lane and turnstiles A - G
                                              compound.

VRM1              14.24.00 Approx time        Liverpool supporters approach
                                              stadium via Halifax Road.

TB1 Part 3        14.2900 - 14.35.20          Leppings Lane and turnstiles A - G
                                              compound.

MAP 9             Incorrect database time     Leppings Lane outside turnstile A - (
                                              compound.

TB2 Part 4        14.39.17 - 14.39.33         Leppings Lane outside turnstile A - i
                                              compound.

MAPI              14.40.10 - 14.40.52         Scenes inside stadium.

MAP 9             00.10.22 - 00.12.39         Leppings Lane and turnstiles A - G
                                              compound.

MAPI              14.44.49 - 14.47.17         Scenes inside stadium.

MAPI              14.47.24 - 14.48.05         Scenes inside stadium.

MAPI              14.48.20 - 14.48.24         Scenes inside stadium.

MAPI              14.48.35 - 14.49.00         Scenes inside stadium.

TB2 Part 4        14.40.07 - 14.50.00         Ejection of supporter via Gate C:
                                              time lapse.

RJH2              Approx. 14.39 - 14.49       Ejection of supporter via Gate C:
                                              time lapse.

MAPI              14.49.27 - 14.51.58         Scenes inside stadium.

TB2 Part 4        14.49.34 - 15.00.00         Opening of Gate C time lapse.

RJH2              Approx. 14.51 - 15.00       Opening of Gate C time lapse.
                                                          Document No. 1 4 2    CONT’D



                                                                PART 2 STARTS

MAPI         14.52.00   -   14.55.56   Scenes   inside stadium.

TBl Part 3   14.59.03 -     14.59.29   Scenes   inside stadium..

MAPI         14.59.28   -   14.59.41   Kick-off of football match.

TBl Part 3   14.59.52   -   15.00.22   Scenes   inside stadium.

TBl Part 3   15.01.54 -     15.03.15   Scenes   inside stadium..

MAP8         15.03.48 -     15.04.22   Scenes   inside stadim.

MAP 9        15.03.39 -     15.05.30   Scenes   inside stadium.

MAPI         15.05.23   -   15.10.00   Match abandoned.

MAP 9        15.05.30   -   15.15.34   Scenes inside stadium from ground
                                       level.

MAP8         15.05.26 - 15.10.16       Scenes inside stadium from ground
                                       level.

MAP 7        15.10.16 - 15.10.30       Ladder being placed against perimeter
                                       fence.

MAPI         15.10.34 - 15.15.40       Edited by MAP7 at 15.11.00 until
                                       15.11.38.

MAP 7        15.15.40 - 15.38.14       Edited by MAPI at 15.18.28 until
                                       15.18.38.

                                       Edited by MAPI at 15.20.41 until
                                       15.20.48

                                       Edited by MAPI at 15.26.28 until
                                       15.26.55

                                       Edited by MAPI at 15.38.14 until
                                       15.38.39

MAP 3        15.39.07   -   15.39.48   Scenes of   aftermath.

MAP 3        15.41.13   -   15.41.23   Scenes of   aftermath.

MAP 3        15.46.47   -   15.47.02   Scenes of   aftermath.

MAP 3        16.37.40 -     16.44.07   Scene showing terraces clearing.

VRM3                                   Scenes of stadium and in particular
                                       Leppings Lane terraces showing damage
                                       caused.




                                                                                8 0 2
INQ13-10                                   VIDEO

                                   SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                       DOCUMENT 143

Source:    West Midlands Police                    West Midlands Police Ref; MRE/6

                                       TIME AND DATE

                                  Time and Date Unknown

                                          CONTENT

             Leppings Lane.

             Leppings Lane turnstiles and Perimeter Fence.

             Opening of Gate C to give view of tunnel and concourse.

            Gate C and rear of Turnstile A-G.

             Concourse leading to Pens 6 and 7.

            View of concourse and tunnel.

             Pen 3.

             Pen 4.

             Leppings Lane Terrace - view from West Stand seating, with barriers
             removed from Pen 3.

             Police Control Box.

             Concourse leading to Pens 1 and 2.

             Reverse view of above.

             Police Control Box.

             Close up of Police Control Box and views from Control Box of
             Leppings Lane Terrace.

             360° View of ground taken from centre of pitch - starting at
             Police Control Box.

             View of West Stand.

             Leppings Lane Terrace - Close up of pens and perimeter gates.

             Close up of perimeter fences Leppings Lane Terrace showing damage.

             Inside Pen 3.

             Gates at rear of radial fences.

             Tape Ends.

                                                                                     8 0 3
                                                                         DPP DOC144
                                                   VIDEO

                                           SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                               DOCUMENT 144

           Source:    TV AM                                 West Midlands Police Ref: TB5/1

                                               TIME AND DATE

           Commences        10.07.50              9th April 1988
           Terminates       18.01.00              9th April 1988

                                                  CONTENT

                     Tape consists of alternate shots inside stadium,
                     Penistone Road North and Leppings Lane turnstiles.

A   Start
    10.07.50         Shots of empty ground.


    10.08.20         Police briefing.


                     Shot of turnstiles at Leppings Lane.

                     Shot of turnstiles at Leppings Lane.


    11 . 00.00       Small number of supporters outside ground.


    11.07.16         (End of TB5/1A/1 U-Matic copy).


    11.37.00         Supporters arriving at Penistone Road and Leppings Lane
                     gates.


    12 .00.00        Supporters entering Pens 3 and 4.


    12.06.00         Supporters entering ground.


    12.07.18         Pens     3        and4LeppingsLaneend.


    12.07.43         Pens     3        and4LeppingsLaneend.


    12.13.06         Pens     3        and4LeppingsLaneend.


    12.34.40         Pens     3        and4LeppingsLaneend filling up.


    12.38.00         Supporters arriving Leppings Lane.

                                                                                              8 0 4
                                                             Document No. 1 4 4   CONT’D




12.39.15   Barrier Pen 3.


12.46.06   Pens 3 and 4 filling up.


12.46.21   Pens 3 and 4 filling up.


12.49.20   Supporters gathering Leppings Lane end.


12.53.00   Supporters outside Penistone Road entrance.


12.55.14   Supporters at tunnel between Pens 3 and      4.


13.00.00   Pens 3 and 4 filling up.


13.03.00   Large crowds arriving outside ground.


13.04.40   Crowds arriving Leppings   Lane turnstile.


13.05.45   Crowds arriving Leppings   Lane turnstile.


13.06.37   Crowds arriving Leppings   Lane turnstile.


13.06.40   End.




                                                                                  8 0 5
                                            VIDEO

                                    SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                        DOCUMENT 145

      Source;   South Yorkshire Police               West Midlands Police Ref: TB5/2

                                        TIME AND DATE

                Commences       09.31.55 Hours          9th April 1988
                Terminates      12.35.25 Hours          9th April 1988

                                           CONTENT
PART ONE

09.31.55        Film starts empty ground.


                Camera alternates between several views of inside and
                outside the ground, including Penistone Road, Leppings Lane and
                the North Stand at Spion Kop.


09.56.00        Police officers parading.


  .
10 10.00        Police officers parading in North Stand.


11.24.14        Mounted officers arrive at Leppings Lane.


12 . 00.00      Spectators appearing on Leppings Lane Terrace.


12.35.25        Film finishes.

PART TWO

12.39.50         Film starts.

                 Film moves from inside to outside ground repeatedly from
                 Leppings Lane Terrace, Leppings Lane turnstiles, Spion Kop
                 Terrace, Penistone Road and North Stand seats.

                 Shows steady flow of spectators outside ground and
                 terrace starting to fill up.


14.00.00         Inside Lepping Lane Terrace.

                 Film remains on each section for 2 seconds, Leppings Lane
Until            Turnstiles followed by Herries Road North, West Stand Terrace and
                 Spion Kop Terrace.

14.10.00         As above large crowds gathering in most external areas.

Until            All perimeter gates Leppings Lane closed except one.

                                                                                       806
                                                              Document No.   ]   45   CONT’D




14.20.00   As above, Pens 3 and 4 occupied by large numbers, large
            number of supporters outside Leppings Lane, steady flow
            through turnstiles.

Until      As before:- West   Stand Terrace filling progressively,

14.30.00   Large crowds entering via Leppings Lane.


14.38.00   Switches to inside ground West Stand.


14.40.00   Back to switching around inside and outside ground.


14.42.00   Footage   of Pens 3 and 4 by tunnel.


14.46.00   Back to   switching around.


14.48.00   Camera views as above.


14.49.53   Back to original switching around. Leppings Lane busy but not
            large crowds, flowing well and controlled.


14.52.00   Nottingham Forest supporter in Spion Kop.


14.53.30   Back to   original switching around.


14.56.00   Teams on pitch.    Switching   around continues.


15.00.06   Leppings Lane turnstiles small crowd outside.
            Switching around continues.


15.01.10   Leppings Lane outside - quiet.


15.05.39   Film now concentrates on inside of ground.
            Spion Kop Terrace.


15.12.57   Film of West Stand, seats and terrace.


15.14.00   Back to switching around.      Outside of ground deserted.


15.18.00   Concentrating on Spion Kop terracing.



                                                                                      8 0 7
                                                          Document No. 1 4 5    CONT’D




15.31.37     Film finishes.


PART THREE

15.31.39     Film starts.  Spion Kop area of ground.   Virtually all footage is
             area of tunnel of Spion Kop Stand.


16.53.00     Crowds leaving ground.   Camera switching from inside to outside
             ground.


18.01.00     Film stops.




                                                                                8 0 8
                                           VIDEO

                                  SCPCTm.K DESCRIPTION

                                      DOCUMENT 146

           Source:   South Yorkshire Police        West Midlands Police Ref: TB5/3

                                     TIME AND DATE

                Commences     13.07.00 Hours         9th April 1988
                Terminates    16.04.00 Hours         9th April 1988

                                        CONTENT

13.07.00       Film starts.


                Alternating views of Leppings Lane turnstiles, Spion Kop and
                Penistone Road.


13.07.18       Leppings Lane turnstiles build up of supporters.


                Alternate shots of Leppings Lane terrace, Spion Kop and
                Leppings Lane, including Leppings Lane terrace showing
                police officers at rear near to the tunnel.

                Leppings Lane, supporters being escorted to turnstiles by
                mounted officers.


13.17.54       View of build up of supporters at turnstiles Leppings Lane.


13.17.56       Alternating views of turnstiles, Leppings Lane, Penistone
                Road, Leppings Lane terrace and Spion Kop.


13.33.35        Pens 3 and 4 quite full,      1, 2, 6 and 7 are empty.


13.35.12        Dividing gates at rear of Pens 3 and 4 open.


13.36           Alternating views of Leppings Lane turnstiles, Penistone Road,
                Leppings Lane terrace and Spion Kop. Including view of
                inside turnstiles A-G - Leppings Lane.


13.49.19       Large group of supporters being escorted along Leppings Lane
                towards turnstiles.


13.54.05        Large build up of supporters at Leppings Lane turnstiles.


14.01.02        Pens 3 and 4 very crowded.

                                                                                     8 0 9
                                                           Document No.   ]   46    CONT’D




14.12.20   Views of the outside of turnstiles A - G - Leppings Lane.
            Steady flow of supporters.


14.18.16   Pens 3 and 4 very crowded.


14.27.14   View of turnstiles A - G, Leppings Lane end.
            Large crowds outside turnstiles and into Leppings Lane,
            heavily congested with supporters.


14.27.15   Shot of turnstiles Penistone Road, Spion Kop end of the
            ground.


14.27.28   Shot of turnstiles Leppings Lane end.    Steady flow of
            supporters into turnstile area.


14.30.57   Repeat shots of Pens 1, 2 and crowded Pen 3. Turnstiles
            Leppings Lane end and Spion Kop, Penistone Road area and          the
            traffic flow.


14.32.18   Shot of Pens 1 and 2, West Stand, supporter standing on
           crush barriers.


14.33.23   As above supporter still on barrier.


14.36.10   Shots of Pen 1 West Stand - Liverpoolsupporters.


14.37.39   Static shot Pen 2 West Stand.


14.38.54   Shot of Pen 2 and 3, supporters pushing    and jumping up and
            down apparently chanting.


14.39.11   Shot   of heavily crowded Pen3 and supporters   in Pen 2.


14.40.20   Shot   of gate 3 West Stand.


14.40.57   Further shot of Gate 3 West     Stand.


14.41.50   Shot   of Pens 3 and 4 heavily crowded West Stand.


14.43.42    Shot of West Stand showing upper tier and supporters on
            terraces of the West Stand standing on walls.


                                                                                   81 0
                                                         Document No. 1 4 6   CONT’D




14.45.48    Supporters jumping up and down in the West Stand terraces.


14.4 7.37   Turnstiles Leppings Lane end, easy flow of spectators.


14.50.21    West Stand supporters being pulled up to upper tier of stand
             from terraces.

14.59.50    Leppings Lane turnstiles relatively quiet.


14.59.56    Shot of packed terracing West Stand Pens 2,3 and 4 -
             Liverpool supporters.


15.00.36    Crowd surging Pen 1 - West Stand.


15.01.41    Shot of whole terracing West Stand - Liverpool
             supporters.


15.02.07    Surging of supporters Pen 3.


15.02.13    Leppings Lane turnstiles relatively quiet.
             Police cordon Leppings Lane and views of mounted officers.


15.02.45    Surging supporters Pen 3 - Liverpool supporters.


15.04.52    Movement of supporters, West Stand terrace, pushing forward,
             Pen 2.


15.05.39    Distant shot as above, creating ’swirling’ effect within
             Pen.


15.08.30    Movement of supporters in Pen 2, causing supporters to fall to
             ground, assisted back to their feet by other supporters.


15.11.02    Pen 2 - fan being pulled up to second tier of Stand.


15.12.31    Supporters celebrating West Stand, apparently after Liverpool
             scored.


15.54.24    Shots of West Stand, supporters climbing and being pulled
             up to second tier.

            Continues to 15.57 when police officer removes one
            offender.

                                                                              31 1
                                            Document No. ] 4 6   CONT’D




Tape ends.


GENERAL COMMENTS

Some good quality footage of West Stand area.
                                          VIDEO

                                 SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 147

           Source:   BBC TV                       West Midlands Police Ref; JG1

                                    TIME AND DATE

           Commences    14.48.16 Hours            9th April 1988
           Terminates   15.48.08 Hours            9th April 1988

                                         CONTENT

14 48 16   Shot of tunnel and pitch.

14 48 50   Shot of Leppings Lane end Pens     4 to    3.

14 49 35   Shot of tunnel.

14 49 56   Shot of the Spion Kop.

14 50 00   Shot ofLeppings Lane.

14 50 50   Shot of the Pitch.

14 51 10   Players announced over speaker system.

14 51 44   Shot of the Tunnel.

14 52 00   Shot of female supporters.

14 52 29   Shot of the Tunnel.

14 53 00   Shot of supporters North Stand and the Spion Kop.

14 54 50   Shot of the South Stand.

14 54 18   Shot of Liverpool players on the        Pitch.

14 54      Shot of Leppings Lane end.

14 54 57   Shot of Nottingham Forest players on the Pitch.

14 55 20   Shot of the players warming up.

14 57      Shot of Leppings Lane stand in background.

14 59 57   Kick off followed by scenes of the match.

15 05 04   Background shot of Pens 4 and 5.         Scenes of match.

15 08 04   Shot showing Leppings Lane in background.         Scenes of match.

15 08 24   Background shot showing Leppings Lane scenes of match.




                                                                                  8 1 3
                                                               Document No.   147   CONT'D




15 10   10 View of Spion Kop scenes of match.

15 14   50 Background shot of Pen 4.     Scenes of match.

15 19   33 Shot showing Pens 4 and 5 in background.       Scenes of match.

15 23   10 Shots of Leppings Lane end.     Scenes of match.

15 32   30 Shot showing Pen 3 in background scenes of match.

15 32   30 Shot showing Pen 3 in background.     Scenes of match.

15 41   28 Shot showing Leppings Lane in background. Scenes       of match.

15 41   54 Shots of Leppings Lane.     Scenes of match.

15 43   20 Area behind goal.   Leppings Lane end.    Scenesof match.

15 44   40 Shot of Pens 4,5 and 6.     Scenes of match.

15 47   20 Half time.

15 48   08 End.




                                                                                    814
                                                                     isj>   n f%
                                                                                   148
                                         VIDEO

                                  SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                      DOCUMENT 148

    Source:   BBC TV                              West Midlands Police Ref: JG2

                                     TIME AND DATE

                 Commences        1557.30 Hours     9th April 1988
                 Terminates       1648.18 Hours     9th April 1988

                                        CONTENT

15 57 30         Scenes of match.

16 04 56         Distant shot of area behind goal showing supporters
                 celebrating.

16 08 30         Shots of Pen 3.    Scenes of match.

16 08 35         Pan across goal mouth area.       Scenes of match.

16 12 01         Pen 4 in background.    Scenes of match.

16 16 01         Background shots of Pens 5 to 4 near perimeter fence
                 Scenes of match.

16 30 08         View of pens near goal.     Scenes of match.

16 37 29         View of Pen 3.

16 40 57         Views of Pen 3.     Scenes of match.

16 41 05         Shot of Pen 3.     Scenes of match.

16 41 18         Scenes of Pen 4.     Scenes of match.

16 44 17         Final whistle.     Players leave pitch.

16 46 35         Pitch invasion.

16 48 18         End.




                                                                                    815
                                                               DPP DOC149
                                       PHOTOGRAPH

                                  sr.Hrcnnr.E DESCRIPTION

                                      DOCUMENT 149

Source;     South Yorkshire Police               West Midlands Police Ref; DB16

                                      TIME AND DATE

                Commences     1224 Hours           15th April 1989
                Terminates    1446 Hours           15th April 1989

                                         CONTENT

Print No        GENERAL SHOTS OF NOTTINGHAM FOREST SUPPORTERS EN ROUTE TO GROUND

    1.          Supporters at junction of Herries Road South and Penistone Road.

    2.          Supporters being searched prior to entry to turnstiles.

    3.          Supporters en route to ground.

    4.          Supporters en route to ground.

    5.          Supporters en route to ground.

    6.          Supporters en route to ground.

    7.          Supporters en route to ground.

    8.          Supporters en route to ground.

    9.          Cars parked in side roads.

   10.          Cars parked in side roads.

   11.          Shot outside ground Spion Kop end, supporters en route to ground.

   12.          Nottingham Forest supporters drinking from cans in car hire car
                 park.

   13   .       Nottingham Forest supporters drinking from cans in car hire car
                 park, displaying ’Union Jack.’

   14.          Supporters en route to the ground.

   15.          Nottingham Forest supporters entering turnstiles Spion     Kop end.

   16   .       Nottingham Forest supporters entering turnstiles Spion     Kop end.

   17.          Nottingham Forest supporters outside ground.

   18.          Mobile canteen.

   19   .       Spion Kop end full of Nottingham Forest supporters.

   20.          Spion Kop end full of Nottingham Forest supporters.

   21.          Spion Kop end full of Nottingham Forest supporters showing        Gate
                 6.                                                                O 1
                                                        Document No.   \   49   CONT’D




Print No   GENERAL SHOTS OF NOTTINGHAM FOREST SUPPORTERS EN ROUTE TO GROUND

    22.    Spion Kop end full of Nottingham Forest supporters.

    23.    Open area between Spion Kop and   North Stand.

    24.    Open area between Spion Kop and   North Stand.

   25.     View of supporters seated area.

   26.     View of supporters seated area.

   27.     View of supporters seated area.

   28.     View of TV camera locations above Stand.

   29.     View of West Stand Liverpool supporters in Pen   4, gate closed.

    30.    Shot of Pen 3 and 4 West Stand Liverpool supporters.

    31.    Shot of West Stand Liverpool supporters Pen 4,   showing entrance
            to tunnel.

    32.    Second tier of West Stand above tunnel Liverpool supporters.

    33.    Shot of second tier West Stand Liverpool supporters.

    34.    As above showing advertising hoarding above centre tunnel West
           Stand.
                                        PHOTOGRAPH

                                SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                      DOCUMENT 150

Source:    South Yorkshire Police               West Midlands Police Ref: DB17

                                      TIME AND DATE

               Commences     1452 Hours            15th April 1989
               Terminates    1536 Hours            15th April 1989

                                         CONTENT

PRINT NO
      1

      2     Spion

      3     Spion

      4     Spion

      5.    Spion

      6.    Spion

      7.    Crowd

      8.    Crowd

      9.    Crowd

     10.    Crowd

     11.    Crowd

     12.    Crowd

     13.    Crowd

     14.    View i

     15.    Wider

     16.    Wider

     17.    Man f
            scenes in the foreground.

     18.   View of terrace; rear in     focus - West Stand seated.

     19.   Scene by goal and fence.

     20.   Scene by goal and fence.

     21. Man lying on pitch being given help.

     22.    Obscured view of fencing.                                      .     8 1 8
                                                         Document No. 1 5 0     CONT’D




 PRINT NO

23.   Crowd by goal.


24.   View of pitch with players and senior police officer.

25.   Wide range of terrace; fence line;    climbing into West   Stand and gate.

26.   Wide range of terrace; fence line;    climbing into West   Stand and gate.

27.   Boy being carried on perimeter track by police towards the South
      Stand.

28.   View of crush by fence.

29.   View of fence line,   police in action - NOT at a gate.

30.   Police officer injured on pitch.

31.   Police officer injured on pitch.

32.   Youth being resuscitated by police.

33.   Youth being given additional treatment.

34.   Pile of police helmets.

35.   View of pitch with two stretcher parties.

36.   Wide view of pitch,   bodies in foreground,   alive and dead.

37.   Wide view of pitch,   bodies in foreground,   alive and dead (Different
      angle).
                                     PHOTOGRAPH

                                SCHEDTILE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 151

Source;    South Yorkshire Police                West Midlands Police Ref: MWL10

                                    TIME AND DATE

              Commences      1000 Hours          15th April 1989
              Terminates     1457 Hours          15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT

PRINT NO

    1      Police officers parade North Stand near Spion Kop.

    2      Distant view of parade North Stand.

    3      Further view of above.

    4.     Close up view of parade North Stand.

    6.     Penistone Road turnstiles rear Spion Kop.      Mounted officers.

    7.     Penistone Road turnstiles rear Spion Kop.      Mounted officers.

    8.     Close up of Spion Kop turnstiles, officers searching supporters.

    9.     Close up of Spion Kop turnstiles, officers searching supporters.

   10.     Supporters and police, Leppings Lane.

   11.     Supporters and police, Leppings Lane.

   12.     Close up of supporters and police, Leppings Lane.

   13.     View of supporters and police Leppings Lane, different angle.

   14.     Police and supporters Leppings Lane.

   15.      Supporters and police, en route to ground.

   16.     View of ground from the rear of Leppings Lane stands.

   17.     View of ground from the rear of Leppings Lane stands.

   18.     View of outside ground Leppings Lane gangways UVWX in view.

   19.      Outside ground Leppings Lane South Stand indicated to right.

   20.      Outside ground Leppings Lane South Stand indicated to right.

   21.      Leppings Lane supporters walking towards A-G turnstiles.

   22.      Close up of Leppings Lane supporters walking towards A-G turnstiles.

   23.      Closer view of Leppings Lane supporters walking towards A-G
            turnstiles.
                                                        Document No.   151   CONT’D

PRINT NO

24.   Closer view of Leppings Lane supporters walking towards A-G
      turnstiles.

25.   Closer view of Leppings Lane supporters walking towards A-G
      turnstiles.

26.   Supporters queuing at turnstiles A-G gate B closed.

27.   Close up of above, young lad climbing wall near Gate B.

28.   Close up of same boy climbing backdown wall.

29.   Close view supporters at turnstiles.

30.   Compound area of turnstiles A-G taken near to Gate C crowds congested
      in street and compound.  Some climbing wall near gate B. Mounted
      officer in situ.

31.   Shot taken from same angle as above.   Gate C in view and shut.

32.   Similar view as above, Gate C out of shot.

33.   Gate C apparently open crowds gathered round that area making way
       through. Mounted officers at Gateway from street to turnstile
      compound.

34.   Supporters appear to be making their way through gate ’C* steady
      flow, no crush.

35.   Steady flow through to gate C.

36.   Larger crowd making way to gate C.

37.   Gate C fully open supporters quite compact inside and outside of
      gate.

38.   Outside gate C compound congested but no crush.




                                                                             821
                                         PHOTOGRAPH

                                    SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                        DOCUMENT 152

Source:     South Yorkshire Police                   West Midlands Police Ref: MWL15

                                        TIME AND DATE

                Commences         1436 Hours          15th April 1989
                Terminates        1528 Hours          15th April 1989

                                           CONTENT


Print No.

    1A           Two men climbing over gate/wall.

    2A          Two men climbing over gate/wall. (Poor quality).

    3A           Two men climbing over gate/wall.

    4A          Two men climbing over gate/wall.

    5A           Four men atop gate (poor quality).

    6A          Visiting supporters crowd outside turnstiles, Leppings Lane end
                with mounted police, view from behind barrier and line of
                police on foot.

    7A          Visiting supporters crowd outside turnstiles, Leppings Lane end
                with mounted police, view from behind barrier and line of police
                on foot.

    8A           Crowd scene, close up within terracing.        People standing on crush
                 barriers.

   *9A*          No photograph.

   10A          Wide view of pitch, North Stand, crush behind goal, ambulance,
                and scattered prostrate bodies.

   11A          Wide view of pitch, North Stand, crush behind goal, ambulance,
                and scattered prostrate bodies.

   12A           Close up focusing on area around goal.

   13A           Close up focusing on area around goal.

   14A           View of pitch looking towards North Stand from perimeter track.

   15A           View of pitch looking towards North Stand including front of
                 terrace.




                                                                                       8 2 2
                                                              DPP DOC
                                      PHOTOGRAPH

                                 SCHKnm.K DESCRIPTION

                                     DOCUMENT 153

Source:    South Yorkshire Police              West Midlands Police Ref; MWL11

                                     TIME AND DATE

              Commences        1507 Hours         15th April 1989
              Terminates       1513 Hours         15th April 1989

                                        CONTENT

PRINT NO

    4A     Towards North Stand, Pens 1-7, spillover onto pitch, gates 1-4 open.

    5A     Close-up of the   front of the   West Stand and pitch by goal.

    6A     Close-up of the   front of the West Stand and pitch by goal.

    7A     Close-up of the front of the West Stand, and pitch by goal. One man
           on floor with police constable in front of goal (blue denims).

   8A      Goal mouth view, several people on the floor.

    9A     Close up   of area behind the goal, line of police North StandCorner.

   lOA     View of scene of front of pen 7, and the fence of Pens 5 and 6.

   11A     Close in area behind goal, supporters in centre looking at stand and
           scuffle (?) in foreground.

   12A     As above - blurred, body on floor in foreground.

   13A     View of fence, gates 3-6, towards Pen 7.

   14A     Close in   of area behind goal, people climbing over fences.

   15A     Close in (of area behind goal, people climbing over fencesbut       with
           part of pitch included, towards the North Stand.

   16A     Rear of goal, pitch area and fence.       People climbing and atop crowd.

   17A     Close in pitch line to fence police line top right.

   18A     View of people pitch line to fence.

   19A     View of pitch line onto pitch, standing from Gate 2 to goalpost
           (South).

   20A     View of pitch line onto pitch, standing from Gate 2 to goalpost
           (South). More police in group top right.

   21A     Wide view pitch area, towards North Stand.

   22A      View of pitch area goalpost (N) towards North Stand and Pen 7.
                                                                 Document No.   ]   53   CONT’D




PRINT NO

   23A     View of pitch, and   fence line (Gates 3-6).


   24A     View of Pen 7 to rear, and front ofWest Stand      Pens(Gate 3-6).


  25A      Front of West Stand and rear of pens.       People pulled up.

  26A      Wider view of West   Stand and rear of pens. More pulled      up.

  27A      People pulled up into West Stand, and rear     of pens.

  28A      People pulled up into West     Stand.

  29A      People pulled up into West     Stand.

  30A      Wider view of rear   of pens, and West Stand front.

  31A      Wide view of pitch   towards North Stand and front of pens.

  32A      Near centre of pitch police grappling with supporter.

  33A      Same man being led away by inspector.      Crowd of Pressphotographers
           gathering around.

   34A     Wide view of pitch and front of pens.      One body being moved from Pen
           3 to Pen 2.

   35A     View of pens, West Stand and Pen 7 and North Stand crowded fence
           line. Movement at Gate 2.

   36A     View of pitch towards Pen 7.

   37A     View of pitch towards North Stand.      A few people lying   on pitch.




                                                                                         824
                                                             t     ______________
                                        PHOTOGRAPH

                                   SCHEPTTT.K DESCRIPTION

                                       DOCUMENT 154

Source:    South Yorkshire Police                West Midlands Police Ref? MWL12

                                      TIME AND DATE

               Commences      1514 Hours             15th April 1989
               Terminates     1653 Hours             15th April 1989

                                           CONTENT

PRINT NO

   AA.     View of photographers on the pitch.

    OA.    View of photographers on the pitch.

    1A.     Two police officers carrying casualty, appears to be young boy.

    2A.     Casualty tended by police officer and St Johns Ambulance Officer.

    3A.     Casualty tended by police and St Johns Ambulance officer.

    4A.     Casualty on stretcher.

    5A.     Young boy (as at shot 1A) being tended on pitch.

    6A.     Young boy (as at shot 1A) being tended on pitch.

    7A.     Supporters on track near Pens 1 and 2.

    8A.     Views of Pens and Gates 3 ,4,5,6 and 7. All conjested.         Fans climbing
            perimeter fence, officers assisting. All gates open.

    9A.     Pen 3 conjested, supporters climbing perimeter fence. Barrier broken
            and protruding through crowd, police officers in pen.

   10A.     Shot of Pens 2,3,4 severe crushing at front of 3 and 4.

   11A.     Pens 3,4 and 5.   Pen 4 shows severe crush at front.

   12A.     Fans and police on pitch, gate 7 shut.          Gates 6, 4 and 5 open.   Fans
            assisted over fence by police.

   13A.     Young boy receiving cardiac massage on perimeter track.

   14A.     Casualties on pitch.

   15A.     View from South Stand.     Supporters and police on pitch, ambulance at
            scene.

   16A.     View from South Stand.     Supporters and police on pitch, ambulance at
            scene.

   17A.     View of West Stand.
                                                                                       825
                                                                Document No.   154    CONT’ D




PRINT NO

   18A.    Close up of West Stand.

   19A.    Close up of West Stand, fan beingpulled    up from    pensbelow.

  20A.     Supporters on pitch.


  21A.     Pens 5,4,3 and 2 quite clear; fencingdamaged. Police         officers in
           pens.

  22A.     Pens 5,4,3   and 2 quite clear; fencing damaged.      Police officers in
           pens.

  23A.     Distant view of Pens 5,4,3 and 2 quite clear; fencing damaged.
           Police officers in pens.

  24A.     Pile of hoardings.

  25A.     Close up of pile of hoardings.

  26A.     View of torn back perimeter fencing.

  27A.     View of torn back perimeter fencing.

  28A.     View of broken barrier    in Pen 3.

  29A.     View of broken barrier    in Pen 3.

   30A.    Side view of fencing pulled down, and a pile of advertising
           hoardings.

   31A.    Ripped back fencing Pen 3.

   32A.    Damaged fencing.

   33A.    Damaged fencing.

   34A.    Damaged fencing.

   35A.    Close view of fencing bolt pulled away from wall.

   36A.    Closer close up of bolt pulled away    from wall.

   37A.    Closer close up of bolt pulled away    from wall.




                                                                                      826
                                                                 DPP DOC 155
                                         PHOTOGRAPH

                                    SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                        DOCUMENT 155

Source:     South Yorkshire Police               West Midlands Police Ref: PR1

                                       TIME AND DATE

                 Commences     1501 Hours           15th April 1989
                 Terminates    1505 Hours           15th April 1989

                                          CONTENT

Print No.

1.   A.          Shot of clock at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club showing
                 3.00 pm.

2.   A.          Shot of crowd at the corner of Pen 1 and South Stand.
                 Liverpool supporters front of pen. Relatively empty.

3.   A.          Further shot of Pen 1 Liverpool supporters.

4.   A.          Further shot of Pen 1 moving towards Pen 2.

5.   A.          Further shot of Pen 1 moving towards Pen 2.

6.   A.          Shot showing Gate 2 people entering Gate 2 terraces quite full.

7.   A.          Pens 2 and 3 at their divide supporters climb over divide
                 fencing.  Terracing full. Pen 3 heavily congested with
                 supporters at front.

8.   A.          Shot of Pen 3 heavily packed with supporters.

9.   A.          Shot of Pen 3.      Supporter on fence reaching in to Pen 3.

10. A.           Further shot of Pen 3 showing gate open heavily congested at
                 front.

11. A.           Further shot of Pen 3 spectators on fence.        Police entering Pen
                 via open gate.

12. A.           Same shot as above people in centre of shot appear to be looking
                 at ground.

13. A.           Close up shot of    gate area of Pen 3.

14. A.           Further close up    shot of gate area of Pen 3.

15. A.           Close up shot of gate area Pen 3 policeand supporters at
                 fencing. People trying to get to gate.

16. A.           Further close up of Gate 3area.

17. A.           Further shot of Pen 3.     Person comes through Gate 3 onto
                 perimeter track.
                                                                 Document No.    1 55   CONT’D




Print No.

18. A.      Further shot of Pen 3.

19.    A.   Further close up shot of Pen 3.


20.    A.   Further shot of Pen 3 towards South Standheavilycongested
             terraces.

21. A.      Further shot of Pen 3 towards South Stnad heavily congested
            terraces.

22. A.      Shot of Pens 3 and 4; Gate 4open.     Supporters climbing dividing
             fence.  Supporters on perimeter track.

23.    A.   Closer shot of Pens 3 and 4.

24.    A.   Close up shot of Pens 3 and 4 showing crush ofpeople           at front of
             Pen 3.

25. A.      Shot of Pen   6   front of terrace relatively       empty.

26. A.      Shot of Pen   6   and the corner of Pen 7.

27. A.      Shot of Pen   6   , gate open.

28. A.      Shots of Pens 4, walkway 5 and        Pen   6   .

29. A.      Shot of Pen 4, gate open.

30. A.      Shot of Pens 3 and 4 supporters on fence.

31.   a.    Shot of Pen 3, gate open.         Person centre of picture   lying on top
             of supporters.

32. A.      Distant shot Pen 3 and view         of tunnel.

33. A.      Closer shot of Pen 3.

34.   a.    Shot of Pen 3 and the corner of Pen 2.

35.   A.    shot of Pen   3   , at Pen 2.    Gate 2 in shot.    Peopleclimbing
            dividing fence.

36. A.      View of Pen 2.




                                                                                        82 8
                                                                   DPP DOC 156
                                           PHOTOGRAPH

                                   SCHKDTTT.K INSCRIPTION

                                       DOCUMENT 156

Source:     South Yorkshire Police                 West Midlands Police Ref :_PR2

                                       TIME AND DATE

                Commences         1505 Hours          15th April 1989
                Terminates        1511 Hours          15th April 1989

                                            CONTENT

Print No

    1.           Shot of   Pens 3 and 4 heavily congested.       Gatesopen.

    2.           Shot of   Pens 3 and 4.

    3.           Shot of Pens 4,5 and 6.

    4.           Shot of   Pens 6 and 7.

    5.           Shot of Pens 6 and 7 and the cornerof the pitch.              Supporters on
                 perimeter track.

    6   .        Shot of Pen 6, supporters on pitch.

    7.           Shot of Pen 4, walkway 5 and Pen 6.
                 Gate open.

    8.           Shot of Pens 3 and 4.

    9.           Shot of Pen 2 and heavily congested pen 3.

   10 .          Shot of Pen 2, gate closed and Pen 3.

   11   .        Shot of Pen 4.    Gate 5 open.         Supporters on pitch.

   12 .          Shot of Pens 3and 4 gates open.

   13.           Shot of Pens 3and 4 and tunnel heavilycongested.

   14.           Shot of player, referee and police officer.

   15.           Shot of Pen 4.    Police officers on pitch.

   16.           Shot of Pens 4,5 and 6.

   17.           Shot of Pens 3 and 4 supporters and police on pitch.

   18.           Shot of the corner of Pens 6 and 7.          Police on pitch.

   19.           Shot of Pen 6.

   20 .          Shot of Pens 4 and 5.

   21 .          Shot of Pens 3 and 4 heavily congested people on pitch.                   p
                                                           Document No.   156   CONT’D




Print No.

    22.     Shot of Pens 3 and 4.   Supporters on pitch.

    23.     Shot of Pens 1, 2 and 3.

    24.     Shot of supporters, police and Press on pitch.

    25.     Shot of 3 and 4 and centre tunnel.

    26.     Shot of 3 and 4 supporters climbing to second tier.

    27.     Shot of Pens 2 and 3, both gates open.

    28.     Shot of Pens 6 and 7 at the corner of the North Stand

    29.     Shot of Pen 4 and walkway 5, gates open.

    30.     Goal mouth area and pen 3 and 4 casualties on pitch.

    31      Shot of Pens 3 and 4, both gates open.

    32      Shot of Pens 2 and 3.

    33.     Shot of Pens 1 and 2, police on pitch.

    34.     Shot of player area corner of pitch 6 and 7.
            Casualties, police and Press on pitch.

    35.     Goal mouth area of Leppings Lane, people on pitch.

    36.     Casualties, Press and police on playing area.

    37.     Lone supporter gesturing to supporters Spion Kop end of ground.




                                                                                8 3 0
                                      PHOTOGRAPH

                                 SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                     DOCUMENT 157

Source:     South Yorkshire Police             West Midlands Police Ref: PR3

                                     TIME AND DATE

                 Commences     1509 Hours         15th April 1989
                 Terminates    1531 Hours         15th April 1989

                                        CONTENT

Print No.

    1A.          Shot of Pens 2,3 and 4. Pens 3 and 4 densely packed.
                 Police casualties on pitch. Leppings Lane Terrace.

    2A. >        Shot of Pens 4, 5, 6 and 7. Leppings Lane Terrace.
                 Supporters and police on pitch.

    3A.          Distant shot. Leppings Lane Terrace Pen’s 4,5,6 and 7.
                 Supporters and police on pitch.

    4A.          Shot of Leppings Lane Terrace Pens 2,3 and 4.      Police and
                 supporters on pitch.

    5A.          Shot of lone supporter on pitch, Spion Kop end of ground.

    7A.          Shot of Leppings Lane Terrace Pen 6.    Police and supporters on
                 pitch.

    8A.          Shot of the corner of Leppings Lane Terrace and the North Stand.
                 Supporters on perimeter track. Pens 6 and 7.

    9A.          Shot of the goal mouth area of Leppings Lane Terrace and Pen 4.
                 Police on perimeter fence with supporters.

   10A.          Shot of Leppings Lane Terrace Pens 3 and 4, gates open densely
                 packed police and supporters at perimeter fences.

   11A.          Closer shot as above showing Pens 3 and 4 and centre tunnel.
                 Gates open. Supporters being pulled from packed pens.

   12A.          View of Pens 6 and 7 Leppings Lane Terrace.  Supporters and
                 police on perimeter fence and on pitch, goal mouth area.
                 Corner of North Terrace.

   13A.          View of Pens 3,4,5 and 6. Leppings Lane Terrace. Centre
                 tunnel. Police and supporters on fence and playing area.

   14A.          View of corner South Terrace/Leppings Lane Terrace.  Showing Pens
                 1,2 and 3 Leppings Lane, casualties and police on pitch.

   15A.          Distant shot of Leppings Lane end, Pens 2 - 7 .     Police on
                 perimeter fence.  Supporters in goal area.

   16A.          Further shot of Leppings Lane end Pens 2 - 7.
                                                          Document No. 1 5 7    CONT’D




Print No.

   17A.     Further distant shot showing West Stand and corner of North
             Stand.  Supporters and police on pitch.

    18A.    Further shot showing West Stand and corner of North Stand.

    19A.    Close shot as above showing Pens 4 to 7, and ambulance arriving
            on pitch.

    20A.    Further shot showing Leppings Lane end and goal mouth area.        Pens
             3 and 4.

    21A.    Distant shot showing West Stand supporters and police     on pitch.

    22A.    Further shot showing West Stand supporters and police     on pitch.

    23A.    Further shot showing West Stand   supporters and police   on pitch.

    24A.    Further shot of the terraces West Stand.   Ambulances present.

    25A.    Shot of North Stand at West Stand.   Police cordon on pitch.

    26A.    Distant shot of West Stand/North Stand.    Hoardings being used as
             stretchers.

    27A.    Closer shot of West Stand/North Stand including playing area.
             Supporters and police on pitch. Hoardings used as stretchers.

    28A.    Shot of Pens 3 - 7 .  Pen 3 with less supporters. Pitch showing
             supporters and police. Ambulance behind Liverpool goal area.

    29A.    Shot of Pens 2 and 3 West Terrace Pen 3 showing police and
             spectators at the rear. Also showing spectators and police on
             pitch.

    30A.    Shot of person being carried on make shift stretcher leaving
             ground via South Stand.

    31A.    Further shot of person being carried on make shift stretcher.

    32A.    Shot of supporters and police carrying stretchers across pitch.
             Corner of North Stand/Spion Kop.

    33A.    Further shot of supporters and police carrying stretchers across
            pitch.

    34A.    Distant shot of the North Stand/West Stand.    Spectators and
             police on pitch. Terraces full.




                                                                                  8 3 2
                                                                   DPP DOC158
                                        PHOTOGRAPH

                                   SCHEnm.E DESCRIPTION

                                       DOCUMENT 158

Source:     South Yorkshire   Police                   West Midlands Police Ref: PR4

                                       TIME AND DATE

               Commences        1513 Hours             15th April 1989
               Terminates       1524 Hours             15th April 1989

                                             CONTENT

PRINT NO

    1.      Shot of Pen 1 showing gate area.           Casualties on pitch.   Terraces
            showing Liverpool supporters.

    2.      Shot of West Stand Pen 3 Area.        Police on perimeter fencing.

    3.      West Stand Pen 3 showing police on perimeter fencing.             Spectators on
            pitch.

    4.      Distant shot of West Stand Pen 3.           Spectators climbing to upper tier.

    5.      Close up of pitch area corner West Stand/North Stand.

    6.      Close up of pitch area corner West Stand/North Stand.

    7.      Closer shot of Pens 3 and 4 showing tunnel area and densely packed
            terraces.  Police at perimeter fencing.

    8.      Closer shot of Pens 3 and 4.

    9.      Closer shot of Pens 3 and 4 showing gate open.           Casualties on pitch.

   10 .      Shot of pitch area corner of West Stand/South Stand.

   11   .    Shot of pitch area showing spectators and police on pitch.

   12.       Shot of pitch area showing spectators and police on pitch.

   13.       Shot of West Stand/Corner South Stand terracing and spectators on
             pitch.

   14.       Shot of police attending to injured on pitch.

   15.       Shot of police attending to injured on pitch..

   16.       Shot of police attending to injured on pitch.

   17.       Shot of West Stand terraces. Liverpool supporters and police
             assisting people over perimeter fence. Gate Open. Pen 3.

   18.       Shot of Pens 3 and 4, Liverpool supporters and police getting people
             over perimeter fencing spectators on pitch. Gates open.

   19.       Shot of persons receiving attention on the pitch area and terraces
             showing Liverpool supporters.
                                                                                              833
                                                             Document No.   158   CONT’ D

PRINT NO

    20 .   Shot of Pens 3 and 4 Liverpool supporters showing police assisting
           people at perimeter fence.  Supporters on pitch area.

    21.    Pitch area person receiving treatment, South Stand   side.

    22.    Close up of pitch area person receiving treatment,   South Stand side.

    23.    Further shot of person receiving treatment, South    Stand side.

    24.    Further shot of person receiving treatment, South    Stand side.

    25.    Shot of injured person being placed on stretcher.

    26.    Shot of injured person on stretcher pitch area.

    27.    Shot of injured person on stretcher.

    28.    Shot   of person being carried across pitch on hoarding.

    29     Shot   of person on stretcher on pitch (as 27).

    30     Shot   of person being carried on hoarding.

    31.    Shot of supporters and police on pitch.

    32.    Shot of supporters on pitch carrying hoarding.

    33.    Shot of supporters receiving treatment pitch area.

    34.    Shot of supporters receiving treatment pitch area.




                                                                                  834
                                                                DPP DOC159
                                        PHOTOGRAPH

                                   SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                       DOCUMENT 159

Source:     South Yorkshire Police               West Midlands Police Ref: PR5

                                       TIME AND DATE

                  Commences        1525 Hours         15th April 1989
                  Terminates       1533 Hours         15th April 1989

                                          CONTENT


PRINT NO

    0       Body/injured being carried by police officers and supporters on
            advertising hoardings.

    1.      Shot of injured being tended by police, supporters and St Johns
            ambulance officers.

    2.      Further shot of above casualties being tended.

    3.      Casualties being conveyed on hoardings through police cordon to Spion
            Kop end.

    4.      Further views of casualties conveyed through police cordon.

    5.      Further shot of casualties conveyed through police cordon.

    6   .   Fan being carried across pitch.

    7.      View of casualties on hoardings.

    8.      Close up of above casualty.

    9.       Shot of Pens 6 and 7, and gates 5,6 and 7.       Supporters on pitch.

   10 .      Shot of   casualty being carried by supporters.

   11 .      Shot of   police cordon, supporters on pitch.

   12.       Shot of   Pens 6 and 7, gates 6 and 7, supporters on thepitch.

   13.       Shot of supporters on the pitch, and pens       directly behind the goal.
             Gate 4 closed, Gate 5 open.

   14.       Shot of   supporters on pitch, ambulance at    scene.

   15.       Shot of   the corner of Pens 1 and 2.

   16.       Shot of Gates 1 and 2, Pens 1 and 2 and casualties on the       pitch.

   17.       Shot of Pens 2 and 3. Pen 3 practically emptyat this stage,
             supporters and casualties on pitch.

   18.       Shot of Pens 4,5 and 6.    Ambulance at scene.                              o
                                                             Document No.    |5 9   CONT’D




PRINT NO

    19.    Supporters carrying empty hoardings.


    20.    Shot   of two supporters being conveyed across the pitch on hoardings.

   21.     Shot   of Pens 6 and 7 at corner, casualties being tended.

   22.     Shot   of casualty on hoardings.

   23.     Shot   of casualty on hoardings.

   24.     Shot of casualty on hoardings.     Police, supporters and firemen on the
           pitch.

   25.     Close up shot of above casualty.

   26.     Shot of a casualty conveyed across the pitch by officers and
           supporters.

    27.    Shot   of another casualty conveyed across the pitch.

   28.     Shot   of supporters on the pitch - casualty being conveyed.

    29.    Further   shot of supporters on the pitch - casualty being conveyed.

    30.    Further views of police officers and supporters on pitch.        Casualty
           being conveyed.

    31.    Shot   of casualty dressed all in black.

    32.    Shot   of crowds and conveyance of casualties.

    33.    Shot   of casualty on hoarding.

    34.    Shot   of two casualties on hoardings.

    35.    Shot   of female casualty.

    36.    Shot   of police officer and supporter.

    37.    Shot   of the flow of hoardings back and forth from Leppings Lane.




                                                                                    8 3 6
                                                               IPP DOC160
                                     PHOTOGRAPH

                                SnHKDTTT.E DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 160

Source; South Yorkshire Police                 West Midlands Police Ref: PR6

                                    TIME AND DATE

                 Commences      1532 Hours          15th April 1989
                 Terminates     1556 Hours          15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT

PRINT NO

            Shot of the pitch North Stand area showing people being carried on
            stretchers.

    2.      Shot of semi circle area of pitch, showing police and spectators on
            the pitch. People being carried on stretchers.

    3.      Shot of Pens 5,6 and 7 West Stand.     (North Stand police and
            spectators on pitch).

    4.      Shot of West Stand and North Stand.  Ambulance in front of West
            Stand.  Police and spectators on pitch.

    5.      Shot of West Stand and North Stand. Ambulance in front     of West
            Stand.  Police and spectators on pitch.

    6.      Shot of playing area North Stand     at SpionKop showingambulance on
            pitch. People on stretchers.

    7.      Shot of spectators on the pitch Spion Kop end police between
            spectators and the Spion Kop.

    8.      Shot of spectators on the pitch Spion Kop end police between
            spectators and the Spion Kop.

    9.      Shot of spectators on the pitch Spion Kop end police between
            spectators and the Spion Kop.

   10 .     Shot of spectators on the pitch, Spion Kop end.     Shows police
            removing supporters from the pitch.

   11   .   Shot of Spion Kop pitch area showing cordon of officers on the pitch.

   12.      Shot of playing area showing South Stand police and supporters on the
            pitch.

   13.      Shot of West Stand/North Stand supporters on the pitch.     Ambulance on
            perimeter track.

   14.      Shot of West Stand/North Stand supporters on the pitch.     Ambulance on
            perimeter track.

   15.      Shot of West Stand/North Stand showing cordon of police across the
            pitch.                                                                 337
                                                            Document No.   1 60   CONT’D




PRINT

   16.    Shot of West Stand/North Stand showing ambulance on the pitch.

   17.    Shot of South Stand apparent confrontation between supporters.

   18.    Shot of South Stand apparent confrontation between supporters - with
          police presence.

   19.    Shot of West Stand/North Stand supporters on the pitch.      Ambulance on
          perimeter track.


   20 .   Shot of West Stand/North Stand supporters with police cordon on
          pitch.

   21 .   Close up shot as above with people being carried on makeshift
          stretchers.

   22.    Shot of West Stand/North Stand police cordon across pitch.
          Supporters on pitch.

   23.    Shot of West Stand/North Stand police cordon across pitch.
          Supporters on pitch.

   24.    Shot of playing area showing Liverpool and Nottingham Forest Football
          Clubs’ Managers talking with police and supporters.

   25     Further shot of Football Clubs’ Managers leaving the pitch.

   26     Shot of West Stand/North Stand police cordon across pitch.
          Supporters on pitch.

   27     Shot of West Stand/Corner of North Stand playing area.       Supporters
          and police on pitch, police cordon across pitch.

   28     Shot of West Stand/Corner of North Stand playing area.      Supporters
          and police on pitch, police cordon across pitch.

   29     Shot   of Spion Kop end of pitch.

   30     Shot   of Spion Kop/North Stand.    Supporters on playing area.

   31     Shot   of south side of pitch.   Supporters and police   on pitch.

   32     Shot   of south side of pitch.   Supporters and police   on pitch.

   33     Close up shot of south side of pitch.




                                                                                    8 3 8
                                         PHOTOGRAPH
                                                                 DPP DOC161
                                  SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                        DOCUMENT 161

Source; South Yorkshire Police                      West Midlands Police Ref: PR7

                                        TIME AND DATE

                   Commences      1534 Hours           15th April 1989
                   Terminates     1603 Hours           15th April 1989

                                          CONTENT

PRINT NO

    2.      Body on stretcher - NA70 Alan McGlone, face covered.

    3.      Body on hoarding - dark clothing.

    4.      Same body (as at 3.) further detail to clothing - baggy dark
            trousers, pink socks, poss NA19 Tracey Cox. Face covered.

    5.      Police and supporters carrying casualty on hoarding.

    6.      Further shot of above casualty.

    7.      Further shot of above casualty.

    8.      Casualty conveyed across pitch.

    9.      Casualty on hoarding carried by police - wearing light trousers,
            light tee shirt, dark jacket, with light sleeves - NA54 Anthony Peter
            KELLY.

   10.      Further shot of above casualty and others being conveyed across
            pitch.

   11   .   Close up of NAS4 and one other body face covered wearing black
            trousers, grey trainers, with stripes and grey blue sleeve. Poss
            NA15.

   12 .     Carriage to and fro of hoardings        andcasualties.              ^

   13.      Views of crowds on pitch with hoardings, showsPens 3,4,5 and 6 and
            persons taking net off goal post.

   14.      Close up of net being removed from goal post.

   15.      Shot   of Pens 5,6 and 7.   Crowds on pitch and ambulance in situ.

   16.      Shot   of hoardings being removed and on pitch.

   17.      Shot of Pens 4,5 and 6.      Police, firemen and supporters on pitch and
            goal devoid of net.

   18.      Shot   of Gate 4, Press photographers and police.

   19.      Shot   of police and casualties on pitch.      Casualties being attended
            to.
                                                                                       8 3 9
                                                                           Document No, 1 6 1    CQNT’D
    PRINT NO

        20.    Shot of casualty receiving cardiac massage near to Gate              6   .


        21.    Different view of same casualty and other casualties being attended
               to.

        22.    Shot of Gate 3, Pens 3 and 4.            Crowds on pitch.


        23.    View outside gate 4.      Police, firemen and supporters on pitch.               Net
               removed from goal.

       24.     Shot of supporters on perimeter track.

       25.     Shot of St Johns Ambulance officers tending distressed               fan.

       26.     Shot of Liverpool seating areas. Apparent altercation between police
               and a fan (after previous altercation between supporters).

        27.    Further view of Liverpool seating areas. Apparent altercation

•              between police and a supporter (after previous altercation between
               supporters).

        28.    Close up of Liverpool seating areas.            Apparent altercation between
               police and a supporter.

        29.    Area clearing after incident on shot 26.

        30.    General view of area in shot 26.

        31.    View of Pens 4,5 and   6   .   Police and supporters on the pitch

        32.    Closer view of Pens 4,5        and   6   .Police and supporters on the pitch

        33.    View   of the terracing    - police and spectators.

        34.    View   of the terracing    - police and spectators.

        35.    View   of the terracing    - police and spectators.

        36.    Camera man being attacked by supporters in the area of Pens 1 and 2.
               Police in situ.

        37.    Police break up above incident .




                                                                                                      8 4 0
                                            PHOTOGRAPH

                                       SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                           DOCUMENT 162

Source:        West Midlands Police                    West Midlands Police Ref: N/A

                                           TIME AND DATE

                    Various Times                          15th April 1989

                                                 CONTENT




PHOTO     NO         SOURCE                                 INFORMATION

                    Liverpool Post & Echo                   View from North Stand
                    (Taken by spectator)                    Timed 14.59

                    Liverpool Post & Echo                   View from North Stand
                                                            Timed 15.06

                    Liverpool Post & Echo                   View from North Stand
                                                            Timed 15.17

                    Sunday Times                            Corner of North Stand and
                                                            Spion Kop

                    Sunday Times                            Bodies on pitch at the above
                                                            location

                    Sunday Times                            Bodies on pitch at the above
                                                            location


7                                   All Sports              Pen 3

8                                   All Sports              Pen 3

9                                     Spectator)            View from North Stand

10                                   (Spectator)            View from North Stand
                                                            Timed 15.05

11                  Daily Express                           Bodies on pitch

12                  Daily Express                           Goal area Leppings Lane

13                  Daily Mail                              Policeman and injured fan

14                  Daily Mail                              Goal area Leppings Lane

15                  Daily Mirror                            Bodies on pitch

16                  Daily Mirror                            Pen 3

17                  Daily Mirror                            Deceased on pitch



                                                                                           841
                                             Document No. | £ 2 -CONT’D


     SOURCE                         INFORMATION

     Daily Mirror                   Pen 3

     Daily Mirror                   Pen 3

20   Daily Mirror                   Deceased carried on hoardings

21   Guardian                       Pen 4

22   Northpix                       Injured on pitch Spion Kop end

23   Northpix                       Injured on hoardings Spion Kop
                                    end and West Stand

24   Liverpool Post & Echo          Leppings Lane Terrace and West
                                    Stand seats

25   Liverpool Post & Echo          Deceased on stretcher

26   Liverpool Post & Echo          Deceased on hoarding

27                   (Spectator)    View of Pen 3 from West Stand
                                    seats

28                    (Spectator)   View from North Stand
                                    Timed 14.52

29                    (Spectator)   View from North Stand
                                    Timed 14.54

30   Mail on Sunday                 Pen 3 and Superintendent
                                    Greenwood

31   Sun Newspaper                  Fireman working on deceased

32   Sun Newspaper                  Goal area and West Stand

33   Sun Newspaper                  Deceased on pitch

34   East Midland Pictures          Pen 3

35                                  Pen 3
     (Freelance)

36                                  Pen 3
     (Freelance)

37                    (Freelance)   Deceased on pitch Spion Kop end

38                    (Freelance)   Goal area Leppings Lane end

39   The Telegraph                  Police officers carrying
                                    deceased

40   Mortuary photograph            Paula Smith - deceased




                                                                     842
                                             Document No.    j ^ ^ C O N T ’D


PHOTO NO   SOURCE                   INFORMATION

41         Mortuary   photograph   Christine Jones - deceased

42         Mortuary   photograph   Sarah Hicks - deceased

43         Mortuary   photograph   John McBrien - deceased

44         Mortuary   photograph   Victoria Hicks - deceased




                                                                         843
                                          PHOTOGRAPH

                                   sr.HKnm.K d e sc r i p ti o n

                                        DOCUMENT 163

Source:    South Yorkshire Police                     West Midlands Police Ref: DB18

                                        TIME AND DATE

               Commences       1550 Hours             15th April 1989
               Terminates      1656 Hours             15th April 1989

                                            CONTENT

PRINT NO

    OA     Fight in North Stand.

    1A     Fight in North Stand.

    2A     View of terrace from Pen 2 towards Pen 7, showing debris and bent
           barrier.

    3A     View of terrace from Pen 2 towards Pen 7, showing debris and bent
           barrier. (Obscured).

    4A     View of terrace, pen and Gate 3 onto pitch, crumpled barrier in front
           of gate.

    5A     View of terrace pen, with Gate         3 and cross fence, onto pitch.     Full
            view of crumpled barrier.

    6A     View of terrace pen, with Gate 3 and cross fence, onto pitch. Full
            view of crumpled barrier.  (Different angle, not as good of barrier).

    7A      View of crumpled   barrier, by Gate        3.

    8A      View of crumpled   barrier, by Gate        3. (Showing one post of barrier).

    9A      View of crumpled   barrier, by Gate        3. (Other post of barrier).

    10A     View of terrace and fence with crumpled barrier post in foreground.

    HA      View of fence line and terrace        - towards South Stand.

    12A     View of fence onto pitch (towards South Stand).

    13A     View of fence indicating depth         below pitch level.

    14A     View of fence line from Gate 3         to North Stand.

    15A     View   of part of fencepulled away.

    16A     View   of missing fence frame (Horizontal).

    17A     View   of missing fence frame (Vertical).

    18A     View   of missing fence frame part and terrace behind.

    19A     Wider view of missing fence part.
                                                                                            8 4 4
                                                             Document No.   163   CONT’D



PRINT NO

    20A    Wide view of terrace behind fence line (Gate 4 towards    North Stand).

    21A    Wide view of terrace behind fence line (Gate 4 towards    South Stand).

    22A    View of   fence line, damage in foreground.

    23A    View of   fence (Gate 4 to goal) onto pitch, from rear of terrace.

    24A    Close up of damaged fence near goal.

   25A     Close up of damaged fence near goal.

   26A     View of bent barrier on terrace in Pen 4.

   27A     View of   open gates at the rear of Leppings Lane terrace.

    28A    View of open gangway and tunnel.

    29A    View of open gangway and tunnel.

    30A    View of concertina gate (part shut) from inside, by turnstiles G and
           F.

    31A    View of rear of West Stand for turnstiles A to G.

    32A    View of rear of West Stand including gangway and tunnel.

    33A    View of rer of West Stand including gangway and tunnel (but angle
           shows dividing wall).

    34A    View of dividing wall, with gate, between turnstiles A to G and 1
           16.

    35A    View of concertina gate (part shut) from outside, view towards
           dividing wall.




                                                                                     845
                                     PHOTOGRAPH

                                SCHKTOTT.K DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 164

Source:    South Yorkshire Police                West Midlands Police Ref: DB19

                                    TIME AND DATE

               Commences     1700 Hours          15th April 1989
               Terminates    1708 Hours          15th April 1989

                                       CONTENT

PRINT NO
    1A     View

    2A     Long

    3A     Long

    4A     View

    5A     View

    6A     View

    7A     View

    8A     Wide

    9A     View

   10A     View




                                                                                  846
                                                             ‘ IH'r S;i>t) 165
                                                             t      ...    V»8-'   •••*»

                                      PHOTOGRAPH             >

                                 SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                     DOCUMENT 165

Source:     South Yorkshire Police                  West Midlands Police Ref: DB20

                                     TIME AND DATE

                Commences    1755 Hours         15th April 1989
                Terminates   1759 Hours         15th April 1989

                                          CONTENT

PRINT NO
    1.   Shot of road to ground showing litter in the street at the junction
          of Leppings Lane and Vere Road.

    2.      Shot of road to ground showing litter in the street at the junction
             of Leppings Lane and Vere Road showing perimeter gate to ground.

    3.      Shot of

    4.      Shot of

    5.      Shot of

    6   .   Shot of

    7.      Shot of

    8   .   Shot of

    9.      Shot of

  10    .   Shot of

   11.      Shot of

   12.      Shot of

   13.      Shot of

   14.      Shot of




                                                                                           8 4 7
                                        PHOTOGRAPH                             —

                                   Sr.HKDDLE DESCRIPTION

                                       DOCUMENT 166

Source:    South Yorkshire Police                  West Midlands Police Ref: MWL13

                                      TIME AND DATE

               Commences     1635 Hours            15th April 1989
               Terminates    1738 Hours            15th April 1989

                                         CONTENT

PRINT NO

    1A     View of buckled and broken barrier.

    2A     View of buckled but upright barrier post.

    3A     View of tunnel view (towards entrance).

    4A     View of tunnel view (towards entrance) wider view of exit.

    5A     View from tunnel onto pitch (obstructed).

    6A     View from tunnel onto pitch (no obstruction).

    7A     View of front of terrace; damage to fence and hoardings pile.

    8A     View of front of terrace; damage to fence and hoardings pile.

    9A     View from pitch of hoardings, fence and North West corner of ground.

   10A     View from pitch of hoardings, fence and North West corner of ground.

   11A     View of fence line and pitch (towards South Stand).

   12A      View of fence line and pitch (towards South Stand).

   13A      View of perimeter track fence line, towards South Stand.

   14A      View of perimeter track fence line, towards South Stand,

   15A      View of fence, pen barriers and central gangway towards North West
            corner from front of terrace.

   16A      View of fence, pen barriers and central gangway towards North West
            corner from front of terrace.

   17A      View of fence from front of terrace towards North Stand •

   18A      View of fence from front of terrace towards North Stand •

   19A      View from fence towards Spion Kop.

   20A      View from fence towards Spion Kop.

   21A      View of North Stand.

                                                                                     848
                                                               Document No. 1 6 6   CONT D



PRINT NO

   22A     View of North Stand.

   23A     View of terrace; Gates   1 and 2; and West Stand from pitch.


    24A    View of terrace; Gates   1 and 2; and West Stand from pitch.

   25A     Wide view of Leppings Lane end, terrace, stand and pitch.

   26A     Wide view of Leppings Lane end, terrace, stand and pitch.

   27A     Close in of concertina   gate, Leppings Lane end.     (Nearly all shut).

   28A     Close in of concertina   gate, Leppings Lane end.     (Nearly all shut).

   29A     Wide view of open concertina gate, turnstile entrance and barrier.

   30A     Wide view of open concertina gate, turnstile entrance and barrier.

    31A    Closer view of open concertina gate, turnstile entrance and barrier.

    32A    Closer view of open concertina gate, turnstile entrance and barrier.

    33A    View of terrace to pitch, (from above, West Stand), showing barriers.

    34A    View of terrace to pitch, (from above, West Stand), showing gangway.

    35A    View of terrace to pitch from above gangway towards centre of
           terrace.

    36A    View of terrace to pitch from above gangway towards centre of
           terrace.

    37A    View of terrace, near front, towards gate 3 buckled barrier.




                                                                                      8 4 9
                                   PHOTOGRAPH          I

                             SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                  DOCUMENT 167

Source: South Yorkshire Police                West Midlands Police Ref; MWL14

                                  TIME AND DATE

             Commences     1732 Hours          15th April 1989
             Terminates    1802 Hours          15th April 1989

                                    CONTENT

Print No.

    A.       View of fence including gate, from the West Stand.

   OA.       Top of fence, with bent top pieces.

   1A.       Top of fence, with bent top pieces.

   2A        Close up of sheared off tube - barrier inside terrace.

   3A.       Close up of sheared off tube - barrier inside terrace.

   4A.       Contents of Bin A, cans of various makes.

   5A.       Contents of Bin A, cans of various makes.

   6 A.      Contents of Bin B.

   7A.       Debris, mainly cans (approximately half alcoholic).
             Outside entrance Gate.

   8 A.      Debris, mainly cans (approximately half alcoholic).
             Outside entrance Gate.

   9A .      Debris outside two turnstiles.

  10A.       Debris outside two turnstiles.

  11A.       Debris in Leppings Lane.

  12A.       Debris in Leppings Lane.

  13A.       Debris outside shop entrance.

  14A.       Debris outside shop entrance.

  15A.       Debris beside wall (obscured).

  16A.       Debris outside turnstile C to G;
             includes damaged window.




                                                                                8 5 0
                                     PHOTOGRAPH

                               SCHKDTTT.K DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 168

Source; South Yorkshire Police                  West Midlands Police Ref: PR8

                                    TIME AND DATE

              Commences     1558 Hours          15th April 1989
              Terminates    1639 Hours          15th April 1989

                                      CONTENT

PRINT NO

    1.     View of police cordon near to the halfway line.        Pens and pitch
           Leppings Lane area within police cordon.

    2.     Further view of police cordon near to the halfway line.        Pens and
           pitch Leppings Lane area within police cordon.

    3.     Close up of corner at police cordon near halfway line, supporters
           congregated within.

    4.     As above three shots different angle.

    5.     As above four shots different angle.

    6.     As above shots different angle.

    7.     View of Spion Kop, pitch, dog handlers, and photographers.

    8.     View of the rear of players benches and players tunnel,
           photographers, supporters and officials.

    9.     View of police cordon and pens.      Supporters on the pitch.

   10 .    View of Spion Kop. Photographers and a small crowd gathered around
           the players tunnel.

   11 .    View of police cordon - supporters on pitch.

   12.     Close up of police cordon and supporters on pitch.

   13.     View of police cordon and Spion Kop side.     Photographer, dog handlers
           and firemen also in view.

   14.     View of Spion Kop area, dog handlers on perimeter track.

   15.     Close up of track near South Stand.

   16.     View of Spion Kop, dog handlers on track.

   17.     View of police cordon and Leppings Lane side of pitch.        Supporters on
           pitch.

   18.     View of police cordon.

   19.     View of Spion Kop, photographers and dog handlers.
                                                                   Document No.   168   CONT’L



PRINT NO

   20   .       View of police cordon and Leppings Lane pens, now quite clear.

  21    .       View of Spion Kop side of police cordon, stands practically clear.

   22       .   View of Spion Kop.

   23.          View of Leppings Lane pens and stands practically empty.

   24.          View of Leppings Lane pens and stands practically empty.

   25.          View of Spion Kop side of police cordon, stands practically empty.

   26.          View of Spion Kop still quite full.

   27.          View of Leppings Lane end and West Stand.

   28.          View of North Stand (empty).

   29.          View of Spion Kop practically empty.

   30.          View of West Stand (empty).

   31.          View of North Stand (empty).

   32.          View of Spion Kop (empty).




                                                                                     8 5 2
                                        PHOTOGRAPH

                                   SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                       DOCUMENT 169

Source:     South Yorkshire Police                 West Midlands Police Ref: PR9

                                      TIME AND DATE

                Commences        1615 Hours         15th April 1989
                Terminates       1632 Hours         15th April 1989

                                         CONTENT

Print No.

    2.          View of supporters on pitch with refreshments. Police
                superintendent, inspector and police constable in situ.

    3.          View of supporters and police on pitch.       Police helmets piled on
                ground.

    4.           Close up of   supporters and police on pitch.    Police   helmets piled
                on ground.

    5.           Close up of   supporters and police on pitch.    Police   helmets piled
                on ground.

    6   .        Close up of   distressed supporter with an official.

    7.           Close up of   distressed supporter with an official.




                                                                                        8 5 3
                                           PHOTOGRAPH           --- ----------------

                                      SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                          DOCUMENT 170

Source:     South Yorkshire Police                    West Midlands Police Ref: VST21

                                          TIME AND DATE

                                      Time and Date Unknown

                                            CONTENT

Print No.       All shots of empty stadium, and rear of Leppings Lane.

    1A          View of TV gantry.       North Stand.

    2A          View of Pens 4 and 5.

    3A          View of Pen 4.

    4A          View of Pen 4.

    5A          View of Pen   6   .

    6A          View of broken fence.

    7A          View of broken fence.

    SA          View of broken fence.

    9A          View of fence at tunnel between Pens 3 and 4.

   10A          View of broken fence Pen 3.

   11A          View of fence Pens 4 - 7 ,      debris on pitch.

   12A          View of Gates 1 - 5       and debris.

   13A          View of broken fence Pen 4.

   14A          View of a gate handle.

   15A           View of broken crash barrier Pen 3.

   16A           View of Gate 3.

   17 A          View of a gate handle.

   18A           View of broken crash barrier.

   19A           View of gate of Pen 3 and fence.

   20A           View of Pen 3 fence and gate.

   21A           View of wall, fence and false teeth.

   22A           View of broken crash barrier.

   23A           View of Gate 2.
                                                           Document No. 1 7 0   CONT’D



Print No.   All shots of empty stadium and the rear of Leppings Lane.

    24A     View of a gate handle.

    25A     View of Gate 1.

    26A     View of a gate handle.

    27A     View of fences broken Pens 3 and 4.

   28A      View of debris by Gate 2.

    29A     View of a blue pole.

    30A     View of tunnel number 2 West Stand.

    31A     View of broken door panel.

    32A     View of a door panel.

    33A     View of fence between Pens 3 and   4   from inside the tunnel.

    34A     View of a watch.

    35A     View of a watch stopped at 3 .08.07.

    36A     View of a watch stopped at 3 .08.07.




                                                                                 8 5 5
                                             PHOTOGRAPH
                                                                     DPP DOC171
                                       SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                            DOCUMENT 171

Source:      South Yorkshire Police                   West Midlands Police Ref: VST22

                                           TIME AND DATE

                                       Time and Date Unknown

                                              CONTENT

Print No.

    1A.          View of a gold coloured wrist watch showing time 1508 and date
                 window showing ’15.’

    2A.          View of a gold coloured wrist watch showing time 1508 and date
                 window showing '15.’

    3A.          View of empty pen.

    4A.          View of Pens 7,   6   ,   5 and 4.   Fencing damaged.      Pile of hoardings

    5A.          View of Gate 5.

    6 A.         Close up Gate 5 mechanism.

    7A.          View of two supporters looking at empty terrace.

    8A   .       View of police officers searching pens.           Fencing damaged.

    9A.          View of earring and £1 coins on terracing.

   10A.          Close up of earring and £1 coinson terracing.

   11A.          View of coin on terrace.

   12A.          View of broken fencing pulled back to allow access to pitch for
                  supporters.

   13A.          View of crushed Stella Artois can on terrace.

   14A.          View of debris (watch strap and unknown article) on             terrace.

   15A.          View of debris (watch strap and unknown article) on             terrace.

   16A.          View of part of a watch strap on terrace.

   17A.          View of a wrist watch from Shot 1 on step on terrace.             What
                  appears to be strap from same, next step down.

   18A.          View of Pen 3 bent barrier.

   19A.          Further view of bent and broken           barrier Pen 3.

   20A.          View of hat on terrace.

   21A.          View of Gate C closed.
                                                                                                8 5 6
                                                             Document No.   171   CONT’D



Print N o .

   22k.       View of Gate B closed.

    23A .     View of Gate A closed.

    24A.      View of Turnstiles 1 - 8   closed.

    25A.      View of Turnstiles 3 - 8   closed.

    26A.      View of gate by Turnstiles 3 - 8 .

    27A.      View of gate by Turnstiles 8 - 1 0 .

    28A.      View of a hole in the wall gates near Turnstiles A - G.

    29A.      View of the tunnel, Gangway 2.       One door only shown, damage
              visible to remaining door.

    30A.      View of staircase right of tunnel leading to West Stand.

    31A.      View of entrance to Pens 1 and 2 standing area.

    32A.      View of Pen 4 next to Pen 5.

    33A.      View of two ambulances and one police vehicle.

    34A.      View of two ambulances.

    35A.      View of the front of Pens 4 and 5 Leppings Lane.

    36A.      View of Leppings Lane Terrace from pitch.




                                                                                    8 5 7
                                   PHOTOGRAPH

                             SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                  DOCUMENT 172

Source:    West Midlands Police                   West Midlands Police Ref: WM1

                                  TIME AND DATE

                             Time and Date Unknown

                                    CONTENT

Print No

1              View of

2              View at

3              View of

4               Further
                gates.

5               Further
                gates.

6               Further
                gates.

7               Further
                gates.

8               View of

9               View of

10              View of

11              View of

12              View of

13              View of




                                                                                  8 5 8
                                      PHOTOGRAPH
                                                                               c
                                SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                    DOCUMENT 173

Source:    West Midlands Police                    West Midlands Police Ref: WM2.

                                    TIME AND DATE

                                Time and Date Unknown

                                       CONTENT

Print No

1               View of Turnstile C Leppings Lane entrance.

2               Close up of     infra-red sensors Turnstile C.

3               Close up of     infra-red sensors Turnstile C.

4               View of the rear of gangways 3-4 Leppings        Lane stand.

5               View of the rear of gangways 3-4 looking towards portacabins
                at the rear of Turnstiles 1-15 Leppings Lane.

6               View of Gate and Turnstiles 1-10 Leppings        Lane entrance.

7               View of Gate and rear of Turnstiles 10-15        Leppings Lane
                entrance.

8               View of Turnstiles G-F Leppings Lane.

9               Close up of     Turnstile G Leppings Lane.

10              Close up of     Turnstile F Leppings Lane.

11.             View of the area to the rear of Turnstiles 1-15behind
                Leppings Lane stand.

12              View of wall and area adjacent to Turnstiles A-G        Leppings
                Lane entrance.

13               View of area    and rear of Leppings   Lane stand.

14               View of area    and rear of Leppings   Lane stand.

15               View of area    and rear of Leppings   Lane stand.

16               View of area    and rear of Leppings   Lane stand.

17               View of area    and rear of Leppings   Lane stand.

18              View of area     and rear of Leppings   Lane stand.

19              View of area     and rear of Leppings   Lane stand.

20               View of area    and rear of Leppings   Lane stand.

21               View of area    and rear of Leppings   Lane stand.

                                                                                    8 5 9
                                                      Document No. 1 7 3




     View of tunnel showing gangway   2   reverse shot.

     Shot from gangway 2 towards pitch showing Pens 3 and 4.

24   View of Pens 3 and 4.

25   View of Pens 3 and 4.

26   View of Pens 3 and 4.

27   View of Pens 3 and 4.

28   View of Pens 3 and 4.

29   View of Pens 3 and 4.

30   View of Pens 3 and 4.

31   View from the ;pitch to the fencing Pen 4.

32   View from the pitch to the fencing Pen 4.

33   View from the pitch to Leppings Lane stand showing main
     stand.

34   View from the side of the pitch showing whole of Leppings
     Lane end.

35   View from the pitch looking towards Gates 6-7.

36   View from the side of the pitchtowards the      Police Control
     Box.

37   View from the pitch showing gates 3,4 and 5 Leppings Lane
     terrace.

38   View of fencing Pen 4.

39   View showing the whole of Leppings Lane terrace.

40   View showing Pen 3 Leppings Lane terrace.

41   View showing Pens 1 and 2 Leppings Lane terrace.

42   View showing Pens 1 and 2 Leppings Lane terrace.

43   View   showing Pens 1 and 2 Leppings Lane terrace.

44   View   from TV gantry showing Pens 1-7 Leppings      Lane terrace.

45   View   from TV gantry showing Pens 1-7 Leppings      Lane terrace.

46   View   from TV gantry showing Pens 1-7 Leppings      Lane terrace.

47   View of Police Control Box.

     View of Police Control Box.
                                                 Document No.   173   CONT’D


49   View of Police Control Box.

50   View of Police Control Box.

51   View of Police Control Box towards Leppings Lane end.

52   View of Police Control Box towards Leppings Lane end.




                                                                      861
                                    PHOTOGRAPH
                                                                        c
                               SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                   DOCUMENT 174

Source;    West Midlands Police           West Midlands Police Ref; CC/70/89

                                   TIME AND DATE

                               Time and Date Unknown

                                     CONTENT

Print No        CC1/   1 - 9

               All photographs show aerial shots of Hillsborough Stadium,
               taken in colour on 22nd May 1989.




                                                                               862
                                 PHOTOGRAPH

                            SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                DOCUMENT 175

     West Midlands Police                      West Midlands Police Ref: MGL1

                                TIME AND DATE

                            Time and Date Unknown

                                   CONTENT

Pi

1        View of inside of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Control Room.

2        View of monitors in Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Control
         Room.

3        View of monitors in Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Control
         Room.

4        View of monitors in Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Control
         Room.

5        View of monitors in Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Control
         Room.

6         View of TV and Radios in Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
          Control Room.

7         View of bank of video recorders in Sheffield Wednesday Football
          Club Control Room.

8         View of bank of video recorders in Sheffield Wednesday Football
          Club Control Room.

9         View of personal radios in Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
          Control Room.




                                                                                8 6 3
                                        PHOTOGRAPH

                                   SCHEDULE DESCRIPTION

                                       DOCUMENT 176

Source;    West Midlands Police                       West Midlands Police Ref; MGL2

                                       TIME AND DATE

                                   Time and Date Unknown

                                          CONTENT

PRINT NO

1               View of interior of Police Control Box.

2               View of interior of Police Control      Box   showing TV monitors.

3               View of interior of Police Control      Box   showing TV monitors.

4               View of Control Box console.

5               View of Control Box console.

6               Close up of Control Box console.

7               Close up of Control Box console.

8               View onto Leppings Lane terrace and
                Box.

9               View onto pitch.

10              View onto pitch.

11              View onto pitch.

12              View onto Leppings Lane terrace.

13              View onto Leppings Lane terrace.

14              View onto pitch.

15              View onto South Stand.




                                                                                       86 4
