            Ltf>J

            &   y
Av\
o^jic O^A
                    Understanc
Community         sociai issues
Awareness         the role of the
                  nises nadona
                  way they ma
                  policing o f th

DECISIONMAKING
PROBLEM SOLVING    LEVEL 3
& PLANNING

                    Having wei
Decision Making   facts and hav
                  the relevant
                  constructive s
                  lems. Makes
                  manner whicl
    *             appropriate f<
        ’         occasion. A
                  might happei
                  their own ora
                                '




                                                    <5pP-lj-52L
ALFRED BARKER                                          kh hffSCr
                                                       « A o   • <3.   <n ° i
POLICE INSPECTOR
                                                       £<• <*.
HAMMERTON ROAD POLICE STATION



I am an Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police at present

stationed at Hammerton Road Police Station.

I joined the Sheffield City Police in September 1965 and spent

my first 9 years as a constable stationed at West Bar.            During

that time I worked the occasional Football Match at the

Sheffield Wednesday Ground,

In 1974 I was promoted to Sergeant and posted to Hammerton

Road Sub-Division.    I served there for 8 years, both in

uniform and Criminal Investigation Department.     I have worked

many matches at Hillsborough in all capacities both inside and

outside the ground.    During that time I worked several Semi-

Final games.    Since, my promotion to the rank of Inspector I

have worked the football ground at Hillsborough both as a

Detective Inspector and as a Uniformed Inspector.

On Saturday 15 April 1989 I was detailed for duty at the

ground for the Semi-Final fixture to be played between

Nottingham Forrest and Liverpool.     My duties for the day were

the supervision of the 'Police Room', its personnel and the

welfare of the prisoners and their movements.

I commenced duty at 10 am and attended the briefing held in

the North Stand.     The 'Police Room' is situated under the

North Stand towards the Penistone Road end.     Next to the

'Police Room' is situated the St Johns Ambulance Brigade first

aid room.   Both these rooms face onto a three-sided yard with

the 6lub Gymnasium being opposite the Police Room and the

Sports Reception Rooms being to the left, when looking away

from the pitch.
                                                                   2

The first of the prisoners began to arrive at about midday and

as time progressed it was obvious that the state of

drunkenness of the prisoners was increasing.

At this stage, I will explain the procedure to be adopted when

persons are detained at the ground.

Those detained under ground regulations:

These people are brought     to the Police Room where details of

their detention are relayed     to one of the Sergeants onduty

and details of the individual are placed in the detained

persons book.     The officer detaining completes a pro-forma

outlining the reasons for detention and after verifying the

identity of the offender, he is ejected from the ground.

Those arrested for other matters:

These people are brought     to the Police Room where the

arresting officer relates his reason for arrest to one of the

duty Custody Sergeants.     He may then either order the person

to be ejected under the ground regulations in which case the

above procedure applies or authorise his further detention, xn

which case his details are recorded and he is searched xn
                                   *   .f
accordance with the provisions of the Police and Criminal

 Evidence Act.    He is then photographed, together with the

 arresting officer and detained whilst the officer is

 despatched to the Gymnasium to complete the paperwork.      The

 prisoner is detained in one of two cell buses which are parked

 outside the Police Room in the yard - one bus for each set of

 supporters.     When sufficient prisoners have been processed to

 utilise a transit personnel carrier, they are then transported

 to either Ecclesfield (Liverpool) or Hammerton Road

 (Nottingham Forrest) where they are^further processed, charged

 and dealt with in accordance with the instructions for the

 day.
                                                                3

As the day progressed the stream of prisoners became steady.

Most, if not all, were drunk, abusive and some were violent.

Several skirmishes occurred within the Police Room but were

dealt with firmly and properly by the staff on duty without my

having to intervene.

Because of noise in the Police Room it is not possible to hear

all of the radio transmissions but from those we did hear, it

was obvious that fans to the North of the ground, ie Worral

and Oughtibridge were drunk and disorderly as they approached.

Comments were made amongst the staff of the Police Room that

it was going to be an extremely busy afternoon.

In the Police. Room, there are two telephones, a Police phone

with a local outside line facility and an internal club phone.

At about kick-off time, I answered one of the phones and a

male voice asked me. to 'go into the gymnasium and turn

everyone out onto the pitch'.   This I did and as I entered the

gymnasium, Chief Inspector Sumner was doing just that and had

obviously received a similar message from some other source.

We emptied the gymnasium and I started back towards the Police
                                       ,f
Room. At this stage, I was not at all concerned as this

'calling everyone out' has happened several times when trouble

is anticipated.   Solely out of curiosity I went to the first

entry to the North Stand immediately behind the Police Room

and looked at the pitch.   I saw that there appeared to be a

disturbance at the Leppings Lane end of the pitch and one of

the stewards told me that the referee had stopped the match.

I saw the players heading towards the tunnel.     At the same

time I saw a solid line of Police Officers forming across the

pitch in front of the Leppings Lane terracing and remember

thinking to myself that there were enough officers there to
                      •   -    —            —       ;   —   ,   ,      *.




                                                                             4

control any situation.        I did not have a radio with me at this

point and went back to the Police Room, where I reported what

I had seen and told the staff we were in for a busy afternoon.

At this stage, it was still very busy in the Police Room with

prisoners filling the place to capacity.          I stood outside the

Police Room, talking to the Force press officer when several

people began to arrive at the Frist Aid room with what

initially appeared to be minor injuries.          The stream of people

increased.   There was a St Johns Ambulance parked in the yard

immediately outside the Police Room and this was obstructing

people getting to the First Aid room.           I tried to find the

driver to remove it but very soon people were being brought on

stretchers and simply laid between the Ambulance and the

Police Room, blocking off the access to the First Aid room.

By this time, lots of people were arriving in the yard, some

walking, some being assisted and some on stretchers.                During

this time, prisoners were still being brought to the Police

Room and I was told by someone that there had been a 'Big

Crush* at the Lepping Lane end and that some people were dead.

I carried on trying to keep an approach to the First Aid room

open, when all of a sudden I was aware that bodies were being

brought to the area, obviously dead, their faces covered and

lifeless.    The people bringing them were demanding more

stretchers from the First Aid post but none were available.

People were becoming abusive and aggressive because we had no

stretchers or oxygen equipment.

I decided that the the dead bodies should be placed in the

Gymnasium and was directing all the obvious dead into the.

Gymnasium and reclaiming the stretchers and advertising boards

for use by the people demanding more stretchers.
At this stage there was considerable confusion in the area.

People were asking me what help they could be, Doctors and

Nurses, and I was directing them towards the injured in the

vicinity of the First Aid room, doing my best to make sure

every injured person had someone taking care of them and that

every dead one was being placed in the gymnasium.   I can

remember asking for confirmation that the Gymnasium would be

used as the temporary mortuary and getting it, but I cannot

remember from whom.   There did not appear to be any Senior

Medical Staff in the area and the Doctors and Nurses who had

offered their services were asking for Oxygen and Airways.

The only action I could take was to direct them towards the

ambulances that were now arriving.   Apart from me and other

members of the Police Room, everyone else was returning to the

pitch after dropping off their charge.   I can remember

checking the area for dead in order that we could take them

into the Gymnasium and utilise the stretchers or boards under

them.   There were people administering First Aid everywhere in

what can only be described as a sea of bodies. Keeping the
                                   •   .*
access clear to the gymnasium and the First Aid Room became my

prime concern.

As the arrival of bodies in the area eased, we began dealing

with relatives - some of whom became understandably violent

and aggressive when we refused to allow them into the

gymnasium to search for people they had lost.

I began to arrange groups of Police Officers to secure the

area from press men etc.   Many more people were now arriving

on foot with minor injuries I can remember organising two

trips via Police vans to take these people to-hospital .<   I

believe Police Constable 931 Greenway was the driver on both

occasions.
Eventually the dead and injured     stopped coming from the pitch

and I secured the yard area by placing a cordon of men across

the gates which lead to Penistdne Road and to the pitch.        I

had lost all track of time, during this period.

The next problem we faced in the yard area was Police Officers,

many of whom I knew personally who were in deep shock.        Hot

drinks were available and we busied ourselves attempting to

assist them but little could be done at this stage.

Many Police Officers who were involved in the rescue were now

coming to the Police Room, seeking further instructions.        I

was aware by this time that Superintendent Bates had arrived

and had begun to take charge of things within the Gymnasium

and the immediate area.

At some stage it was brought to my notice that the prisoners

in the cell buses had now been detained for some time and were

using the buses as toilets because we could not escort them to

proper toilets or move the buses.     A further problem was that

the majority of officers who had arrested     them had been

turned out to the pitch and files were not available.  I also
                                   *   .>
noticed that some of the younger members of the St Johns

Ambulance Brigade were taking refuge from the obvious horrors

at the time, in the front of these buses.     We could not get

the buses out of the ground because of the ambulance and

emergency traffic.   Clearly it would have been totally

inhumane to keep the prisoners locked up any longer in the

buses.   Most were fully aware of the horrors of the situation

within their immediate vicinity.

I liaised   with Chief Inspector Beal, informed him of the

situation and after discussion it was agreed that each

prisoner should be verbally cautioned and released.
I arranged for this to be done by Sergeant 838 Long and his

colleagues.   On returning to the yard, I continued to assist

the injured, Police colleagues who were obviously in shock and

ambulancemen who were now bringing obvious dead from other

parts of the ground.

I continued my duties in the yard area and was kept busy with

vehicular and pedestrian traffic, though my main task was to

keep the area secure from all but those who needed to be

there.

Later in the evening and in the early morning I continued my

duties in the yard, assisting with the transport* and welfare

of the relatives, who attended at the Gymnasium.    I did this

until 5 am the following morning when the last of the

relatives had gone.    I was then released from duty.
