    *    „                                     • O 'O -
                                                                                       one   1.


  PiZTMi NOhMAN CAfiTJSR

  Pol Sgt 2467

  South Yorkshire Police Station, Maltby




  1 am a Police Sergeant in the South Yorkshire Police Force at present stationed

  at Maltby.

  At 8*0am      on Saturday 15.4.89 I commenced duty at Maltby Police Station and

  conveyed together with other officers to Hillsborough Football ground.

  I had been supplied with a 2 sheet briefing form        containing details of my allocated

  duties in connection with the Semi Final Match. 1 had been allocated         Sector 55*

^^Other officers on the serial where        PC1511 Barron,PC£224 Tyler, PC 3056 Southall,

  PC 503 Gough,PC2738 Moran, PC337 Baldwin and PC732 Yates.

  On arrival at the Hillsborough ground at 9*30a®         the serial   was allocated   Jttow 32

  for briefing      and 1 was supplied with a radio and operational briefing notes*

  At 11.0am following briefing and light lunch the serial took up its allocated

  duty       in Herries Hd, junction with   Herries Kd s^outh.   Two officers allocated

  traffic duty at the junction      directing Nottingham     coaches   along Herries Kd and

  other vehicles down Herries Jsd, South*

  After liason with the Superintendent the, remainder of the serial allocated duties

  along Herries Hd, between the South Yorkshire Bus Depot and the junction to assist

  with the debusbing of Nottinghamshire        fans and the control of the fans   walking

  along Herries Kd towards the ground*

  After debussing the majority of the fans made there way into the ground, however

  a number of the fane started to walk towards the direction of the five arches

  many saying they had arranged to meet friends at the five arches public house.

  After liason with the Superintendent I had been informed that this and other

  Pubs in the area had become full to overflowing and that the five arches pub

  would be closed down.

  I therefore with the assistance of a number of Special Constables          stopped all

  Nottinghamshire       fens walking towards the arches. All the fans who I stopped
PiitjiR NOKMAN   CAKTER P.Sgt 2467
                                                                                 %rt
                                                                                 two 2
                                                                                         in
and informed of the pubs closure turned about and made their way to the ground

without argument*

Throughout the morning a number of Liverpool fans        both in cars and one coach

had to be diverted along Herries *d, to avoid entanglement       with Nottinghamshire

fans*

Has the morning progressed and large numbers of Nottinghamshire fans started to

walk down fcom the direction of the five arches in largish groups many had

cans of beer and lager an their hands*     1 borrowed two officers from the adjoining

sector, sector 5^i PC 3097 Allen and PC 2177 Kelly to assist with traffic control

at the junction with Herries icd, and Herries Koad South.       Whilst   I used two officers

from my serial to approach all fans with drinks in their hands* All either finished

their drink or placed    them near to a hot dog stall at the junction. The fans

were in a jovial mood    and there was very little argument from the fans when requested

to dispose of their drinks*

Hy 2*30pm the traffic had eased to a normal traffic flow and by 2*40pm the number

of fans making their way to     the ground was down to a trickle of individuals*

At 2*50pm I stood down the officers engaged on traffic duty and collected my

serial along Herries Aid, and joined other serials       making their way back to the

area of Claywheels lane.

whilst walking back towards Claywheels lane, radio traffic indicated some

form of Publi Order situation was developing in or around the ground. At this

time I was with 4 other serials      and Insp Charles.

Insp Charles informed ground control of our pcesent position.

We were requested to attendat Leppings Lane.

On arrival in Leppings Lane     and being dressed intoserials, and prepared for

a Public Order situation, at about 3*05pm*

At 3*10pm after contact with ground control Insp Charles instructed us to

enter the ground via Leppings Lane into the area of the West Stand*

On entering the ground     I saw bodies and '.injured persons laid and being cariedo

out of the tunneli area below the west Stand.      There was large numbers of supporters

dazed and wandepjjag around the back of the stand many of these on seing us enter
                                                                         Three   3 *'


         NORMAN CASTER     P.Sgt 2467

  started to shout abuse at us     calling us murderes and indicating in abusive tones

  that our arrival was too late,

  I went over to the hard standing      at the rear of the tunnel attempted to clear

  the area   around the hard standing to allow the tunnel, itself to be cleared.

  Fans were bringing out bodies from the tunnell area and both fans and Police

  officers rendering first aid to the injured persons.

  “ith other officers x then entered the tunnel and rendered what assistance we

  coikld to assist the injured and clear the tunnel, '
                                                     •
                                                     ‘■he tunnel was crowded and I

  was jostled and shouted at. 1 was not physically assaulted. Many fans were hysterical

  and screaming out aloud. The fans were very distressed*
                             4-


^^1 then entered the terraces     and I saw a pile of bodies laid near to the fence

  with one man sat up but with his legs completely trapped by the bodies. I attempted

  to pull some of the bodies away but was unable to free him* Other officers joined

  me and with fans a number of bodies cleared. I could see that the tuna«l was

  blocking up and I tried to rip at the fancing to create an hole to allow bodies

  to be taken onto the field. I saw that the small gate had been opened     in the fencing

  although 1 cannot recall wether this was open when I entered tha terraces in the

  West Stand,   The fencing did give way and bodies were passed out onto the field.

  Throughout the fans were verbally venting their anger and distress towards      the

^^Police officers in the stand.     I turned to face the fans in the stand and saw that

  the anger and shouting did not appear to be developing into a physical attack.

   I saw a body of a large man near to the crash barrier that had buckled and with

   three others carried him to the open gate in the fencing and passed him through

   onto the field.   By this time all the bodies had been cleared from the terracing

   and   I climbed through onto the playing area and attempted to locate my serial .

   1 saw PC Latham on the field he appeared injured and had difficulty breathing

   1 went to him and he was supplied with oxygen by a fire officer. I left PC Southall

   with PC Latham.

   I was then instructed by an -inspector to re enter stands and obtain names and addresses

   of remaining fans.    1 was then requested to deploy the serial on the field and
PEEJSR NOJSMAN CARTSR     P.Sgt 2467
                                                                                            3
                                                                                   four k


join the Police Cordon whilst the ground was emptied.


Mith the exceptuion of PC Tyler and PC Southall the serial was then deployed

outside the North stand on Pennistone Road from the junction with Herries Rd South

along the raod on traffic control duties*

On completion of these duties I returned to theNorth Stand and after completion

of debriefing form      my serial was stood down atabout 5*30pm.   I returned to

Claywheels lane and arranged transport for my serial and other officers from the

sub division. I located PC Tyler and PC Southall at Clawheels lane.

On arrival at Maltby Police Station, at about 7»0po     we debriefed informing

the Shief Inspector, of duties carried out before retiring from duty#
