Oth«r Document Form                      Date and time raised
                                                                               Jo
                                                                                                           Number



Title.                                    j/(C$£jQ                                           M ckii^nU )
 (Include source end anymcumqnt number if relevant)             A   "7 Z - ^        “T * }

 Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/No______________________ __
                                                                                                                       Receiver




 Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                                  Indexer

 No(s) of actions raised

Statement readers instructions                                                                                        Statement
                                                                                                                      Reader


 Indexed as indicated                                                                                                  Indexer

 No(s) of actions raised

Attamined - further action to be taken                                                                              0 /M         I   SIO




                                                                                                                            If
 Further action no(s)                                                                                                      Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form

 MIR 15
                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                        SUMMARY OF VIDEO ENTITLED
                       "UNDERWATER SEARCH MATERIAL"

                          "VRM1 VRM2 VRM3 VRM4


Initial pictures are of views outside and inside the football stadium.

The following is a summary of the views inside the temporary mortuary.
The camera and recorder being operated by PC         - PC

3.50pm   Line of bodies on the floor with material covering
stated   their faces.
time     The bodies are in varying stages of undress.
         A male person in civilian clothing appears to be medically
         examining the bodies.
         There are Police Officers near each body, most in uniform
         but Detective Officers in civilian clothing are also in the
         vicinity.

         A number of the bodies are covered in a white blanket
         material.

         An officer is comforting a person holding a body on the
         floor.

         A Police Officer is stood by the entrance door.

         Members of the Fire Brigade are present and being directed
         by a supervising Police Officer.

         Detectives dressed in casual clothing are present and
         performing tasks.
                     Background noise.
         Views are now from a different position.


3.54     Commentary
stated   "General scene - Police Officers searching thebodies."
time
         A large group of detectives in plain clothes are occupying a
         part of the gymnasium.

         Other Detectives in casual clothing are searching a body -
         Police Officers placing items in bags.
         Male person appears to be medically examining a body.

         An announcement is heard over scrre form of tannoy system
         (unable to identify what is being spoken)

         It is apparent there are very few personspresent   which may
         be identified as 1fans.1
         Views show the central section of the gymnasium which is
         sectioned off by some form of netting with a solid material
         at the base.

         Comparatively few persons in the section.   Fire Brigade and
         Police Officers are in attendance.

         Persons receiving medical attention.

         Commentary

         "The current scene is across the gym, under section 6, where
         people are being brought apparently for treatment."

         Views return to the temporary mortuary. Again Police Officers
         in casual clothing can be seen in the area performing tasks.


3.57     Commentary
stated   "The flow of apparently lifeless bodies seems to have
time      slowed down considerably if not ceased. We're now taking
          just general scenes of the temporary mortuary inside the
          gym."

         Body appears to be medically examined. A male person out
         of view of the camera can be heard to raise his voice in an
         angry manner.

         Majority of bodies now covered with a white blanket material.

                      Views stop and recommence

4.10pm   Conmentry
stated   "The bodies are being labelled and placed in the green
time      body bags."

         Seme bodies on the floor are now in body bags, others are
         covered with the white blanket material.

         Views stop and recommence.

4.34     Commentary
stated   "The bodies have now been bagged by South Yorkshire Ambulance
time      and Police Officers laid in rows of 12. Some assemblance of
          order. Going by radio messages received, which are a little
          broken, it would seem there's 45 dead bodies which are now
          going to be transferred to the mortuary and hospitals."

         Views stop and recommence. Most bodies appear to be in
         Ambulance body bags. The body bags are in lines or being
         arranged.   Police Officers still performing tasks.

         Detectives in attendance.
4.57     Background noise reduced. Police activity slowed down,
stated   Commentary
time     "Another general view of the mortuary. The situation appears
           at the moment an officer has been allocated to each body.
           Paper work's being completed and we're awaiting transport
           for the bodies to the mortuary. Each body is to be
           accompanied by an officer for hopeful formal identification
           at a later stage."

          A number of officers both in uniform and civilian clothes
          are present. The bodies are in rows.

         Views stop and recommence.

5.30     Commentary
stated   "The bodies have now been placed in order, numerically,
time     in body bags and makeshift body bags. Officers have been
           deputed to each body - now awaiting removal to the mortuary
           and to the hospital. A last general shot of the temporary
          morgue."


Tape concluded.
Detective Sergeant                 14.6.90
