                                                                        A
     vv     .            a/ 7   66
,:    JU2TIK ANTHONY LONG


      POLICE CON 3TA.BLE 1159


      •E1* HAOHNTHORPE


      At 8 .15am on the 15th of April 1989 I commenced duty with other officers in
      connection with the semi final Liverpool v Nottinham forest to be held at Hillsborough
      that afternoon. I was assigned duties as part of serial 6 which was lead by Police
      Sergeant NORBTJRN of *EV    sub division. We travelled to the ground at Hillsborough as
      a serial arriving at approximately 9.00am. On arrival we were directed to the North
      stand where we occupied our specified seats in serials as previously directed.
      The briefing took place at 10.00am and we remained seated following the briefing whilst
      we had a packed lunch leaving at 11.15am for our specified points.


       I occupied a point at the Leppings Lane end by a barrier by gate E. My specific duties
 %        were to maintain a sterile area behind the barrier in which were parked television
          outside broadcasting vehicles and equipment. My duties were also to direct Nottingham
          Forest su porters with tickets to the South stand entrance E towards that gate.
          The vast majority of supporters approaching this gate had the correct ticket however
          there were a few Liverpool supporters who had tickets for the Leppings Lane end
          that approached this barrier. They were redirected around the groung towards the
          Leppings Lane end. As the kick off approached it became apparent from radio messages
          received overheard from other officers as I did not have a radio set myself that there
          was a large build up of supporters at the Leppings Lane end at the opposite end of
          the sterile area which was out of my view. The number of Nottingham Forest fans
          queins for gate E at my barrier also increased towards Kick off as did the number of
          Liverpool fans who were at the wpong gate. These supporters were redirected but
 A        informed to take their time due to the difficulties at the Leppings lane end.
          A number of the supporters I spoke to had quite obviously been drinking but I would
          not have described then as being drunk. One Liverpool supporter produced to me a
          ticket which on examination** appeared to be a photocopy coloured in with crayon.
          I asked the supporter about this and he informed me he had just purchased tins ticket
          outside the ground. When asked if he would be able to identify the person who sold it
          to him he replied »No chance.' I took and have retained possesion of this ticket but
          was unable to anything in relation to finding the seller of the ticket due to the
          large amount of people at gate E. At this time the barrier was manned by myself and
          PC 169 FILLINGHAM. At approximately *   2.55p« PC FILLINGHAM left the barrier and was
          replaced by Detective Constable 515 CMKWBLL (in uniform for this event.}
At approximately 3.00pm I heard a* M i l f r o another officer who I cannot identify
that supporters were on the pitch and assistance was required inside the groun*.
I left the barrier together with DC 0A.ffi.XIi through a stewards entrance and onto the
pitch at the Leppings Lane end by the goalmouth. Once on the pitch I could see there
were eupoorters on the pitch some sitting leaning against advertisement hoardings
and clutching therr chests obviously in pain. Other were climbing the perimeter fence
from behind the goal onto the pitch and supporters at the rear of the Leppings Lane
terrace were climbing and being assisted into the seated area above. At this time I                     ^
was completely unaware of the disaster that was about to unfold and could not understand
whv peorle were ’invading the pich and why so many appeared to be injured.
After a very short while I was approached by a supporter who was obviously in a very
distressed condition. He said to me ’theres people dying in there' and urged me to do
 something about it. I still didnt appreciate the magnitude of what had happened but it
 was becoming clear that the-e was a crush behind the goal in sector 3 and            k.
 Access to these two sectors from the pitch directly was almost impossibly so                 went
 into sector 2 which was far less crowded th-ough the open gate in the perimeter fence.
 Fromthere I went towards sector 3 and climbed the dividing fence that runs from the
 perimeter fence to the back of the terrace. This sector (3) was a mass of people and
 I had to'right' my way through the crowd to where sooeone was lying on the terracing.
 As i bent down towards this man I immediatel- noticed that the heat was stifling,the
 man himself was hardly breathing and had a definite blue colour to his face. I realised
 that there wa5 no chance of this man coming round in such an oppressive atmos.-Uere and
 that he had to be assisted onto the pithi. I would estimate the location of this man
 to be soOi 12 foot to the rear of the perimeter fenceing. - would be unaole to descr-.e
  the man other than he would be over 30 years of are and heavily built. Together with
  other su^orters and a police officer who I cannot identify we managed to lift the
  man over the s e d a t i n g fence into sector   2   in order that he could be   .riven   first aid
  in that sector or car-ieJ to the pitch for the same. After this »«. had been ea- -led
  over the fence I turned to see if I could assist further. By now the crowd seemed to
  have thinned and it was only now that it became clear to me that there was a vary large
  amount of dead and lying. I could see there was a mass of bodies piled by the perimeter
  fence. There were people still alive trapped in the pile. I attempted with fans to
  pull these Tieonle clear, this itslef -as incredibly difficult due to the weight of the
  bodies. It was necessary to untangle the limbs of people on too who were clearly dead
  to gat at those below who were still breathing and moving. Once each injured person
  was removed they were cariied with the help of supporters and other officers iver the
  fence into sector 2. From there I am unaware of what ha-pended to them as i went back
  to render further assistence. As the terrace cleared still further it became apparent
  that there was alarge amount of dead paople. I removed with another officer and support
  ers a further perhaps ■. injured in this wa,. It goes without saying that I have never
  seen anything such as this before and at times I was almost too stunned to do anything.
As the terrace cleared of supporters I was aware of other officers around me. The
only ones I can identify however are PC 2818 MARSHALL and >C 1^33 FAIRC1X)UGH. By
now the only other people on the terrace were lying on the     floor apparently dead          J
                                                                                              i*
and with other officers they were removed one by one through the gate onto the                j;
perimeter track by sector 3. Other officers being outside the fencing to asssist carrying
the people through. I also saw that one of the barriers in sector 3 had collapsed.            t"
people in the seated area above the terrace at the front were ripping down advertisement |
hoardings to use as makeshift stretchers.                                                     \
V<hen the leprings Lane end had been cleared I returned to the pitch and formed a passive
cordon with other officers along the centre line. The mood of the Liverpool fans was
mixed some being very aergressive towards officers calling them murderers whilst others
                                                                                              !■
restrained them. Kanjr were obviously upset.                                                  f
                                                                                              f
I heard an announcement     over the ground tannoy that the match was being abandoned   and   >
                                                                                              .
on this peaple left the     ground.                                                       ?
After the crround vras clear there was a de-brief againin the -louth stand before our         ^
serial left t h e stalium   f"om where we walked to a waiting bus at Clayheels Lanefrom        j

there to Hackenthorpe T olice station and rroing off duty at 6. ''■Opm.                        |
