                                                                                         M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and tim e raised
                                                                        )|5|3Q         H h -O         Num ber



T itle   laJUUu                    Jgv/W£- At^iQvc N                       ^     &efo£X 6 * /             M ig^rfcL
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o   ■&2<
                                                                                                                    Receiver


                                                                                                                3 1 =2 )
D ocum ent jfeotStered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Statem ent reader's instructions




Indexed as ini^jpateS^
No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                071VI         s io
Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                        Indexer
F urther action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
               Irvine Patnick, OBE, MP




             HOUSE OF COMMONS
                 L O N D O N SW1A0AA


                                         21st February 1990




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER 15TH APRIL 1989


At your visit to the House of Commons on Monday 19th
February, I undertook to supply you with further
particulars and to this end I enclose (nL) a copy of
a report taken by Michael Shersby, who is the
Parliamentary Adviser to the Police Federation
(2) some photo-copies of correspondence from White's
Newsagency. My own report, you confirmed, is already
with you.
I do think that the South Yorkshire police's evidence
was not fully taken into account at the Inquiry and as
a common thread runs through the three reports I do so
hope something can be done to rectify this.

Should you require ahy further information that I am
able to furnish please do not hesitate to come back to
me.




Detective Superintendent S Beechey
NecheLls Green Police Station
Fowler Street
Nechells Green
Birmingham
                                                    Cc
                       Page 1




 MEETING AT SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE FEDERATION HEADQUARTERS
                 TUESDAY 3RD OCTOBER 1989


                       MORNING SESSION


PRESENT

Michael Shersby M.P.

Peter Hayes, Deputy Chief Constable
Chief Superintendent John Nesbit
Chief Superintendent Brian Mole (in charge of Hillsborough
’ 88)
Dick Coyles, Vice Chairman, Police Federation
Bob Lax (Chairman)
Paul Middup (Secretary)
Ian Hartshorne (Treasurer)       South Yorkshire
                                 JBB Executive



                                         South Yorkshire
Chief Inspector Norman Bettison,         South Yorks Police,
 Hillsborough Enquiry Team

Tony Judge, Publicity Director, Police Federation
Nick HolroydJ Russell Jones and Walker, Federation solicitors



BOB LAX, Chairman of the South Yorkshire Police Federation
opened the meeting.  He said the purpose of the meeting was
to draw out information that would be helpful to Michael
Shersby when Parliament came to debate the Hillsborpugh
disaster.
MICHAEL SHERSBY gave his address to the meeting. He said the
interim report was published as a result of the Taylor
inquiry.   Shortly after the House went back he anticipated
there would be a major debate on the Taylor Inquiry, followed
by the remaining stages of the Football Spectators Bill.
Between now and about the 9th November, there would be a very
considerable amount of discussion in Parliament, not only
about the Hillsborough tragedy but about the policing of
football grounds and what steps could be taken in future.

 PETER HAYES.  Chief Constable Peter Wright had asked him to
 welcome the meeting in his absence at a Conference.       The
 purpose of the day was twofold. 1. To try and enable us to
 nave a better understanding of what happened at Hillsborough
 by way of video presentation and photographs.        2.   The
 afternoon session would be spent listening to police officers
                        Page 2




who had two things to say, namely they felt at risk; a n dthey
felt frustrated.    The Chief Constable, when Lord
Taylor published his Report, unequivocably accepted the
findings so that we could get on with the recommendations
contained in that report.
norman      BETTISON.     Introduced the video presentation.
Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground was built at the end of
the last century, although standards had changed since that
time .     Officers were forced to police a ground that today
would have greater strictures on how it was built, access
roads etc        95 people died in Pens 3 and 4 at Leppings Lane
e n d o f t h e around, mostly In Pen 3. Barrier 14«A collapsed
in Pen 3        It was a contributory factor but no-one knows how
iSch        Police learned after the event that the pens were
designed to hold 2,200 people. They had done a head count on
the photograph taken at 15.05, taking account of the
supporters who had come out of the pens, and there were
 ^ 498      at least 50% over capacity.      It was therefore a
 contributory factor in the barrier collapsing.      They w*nt in
 the pen because they came down the tunnel. They went down
 the tunnel because they came through Emergency Gate C.        It
 was open on the instructions of the police.      The view of the
 Police Federation is that there was such a crowd of people
 outside, there was no realistic alternative to <opening the
 gate. It was agreed that this was a fair assessment.
 There were 65 hours of video footage,       from which   Norman
 Bettison had culled 29 minutes wortji.
 The video gave a history of football disasters, e.g. 1914
 Sheffield, 1946 Bolton, 1971 Ibrox.      Perimeter fences‘were
 the result of hooliganism - walls demolished, missile attacks
 on police officers, supporters climbing perimieter f e e
 pitch invasion. Pitch invasion was thought to be the
                                                                 ,
 Hillsborough.
 There followed a description of the layout of the 9™ u n d at
 Hillsborough.  Gate C was normally an exit gate. Signs
 a club responsibility.   The video showed fine small sign
 the standing area. Pens 3 and 4 were divided by a fence.
  Ue tupn saw the 1988 footage of the semi final between the
  same two teams^t the same "ground
  Forest supporters had same ends of the ground,
  pictures were compared with the 1989 footage.

  The monitor is allowed to scan several cam*ra* ""jlii
  something of interest is seen.    The normality of the
  natch influenced the planning of the 1989 semi final.

  Officers on duty in 1989 had the same duty in 1988.
  was a pitch invasion in 1988 (at 18 minutes to 5).    Chief
  Superintendent NESBIT said there was no             1showed
  in 1988.   TONY JUDGE pointed out that the 1988 film sho
                                 Page 3




        swaying and pressure.       54 people per 10 square meters is
        supposed to be the limit.        JOHN NESBIT recalls saying that
        he did not perceive a problem. And he still does not believe
        there was a problem. MICHAEL SHERSBY asked what was the head
        count?   JOHN NESBIT:        54 people per 10 square m e t r e s .
        MICHAEL SHERSBY: When was that figure decided? JOHN NESBIT:
        it was never finalised.       After the 1981 incident, the area
        was split up into pens and a figure arrived upon for each of
        the pens of 1 0 ,1 0 0 , but it was never incorporated in the
        Safety Certificate, but the Club had those figures.       NORMAN
        BETTISON pointed out that policing the formula is a matter
        for the Local Authority. JOHN HESBIT: One of the criticisms
        was that 10,100 go into the pen and are not farmed out.
        Ticket touts attract people looking for tickets.        Capacity
        did not reach full capacity - about 52,000 - in 1988,
        although all the tickets were sold.        TONY JUDGE:   Did the
        tickets specify which entrances?       PETER HAYES:  Tickets are
        allocated to the whole of the area. The advantage of Pens 3
        and 4 is the prime position they have being behind the goal -
        they have equal advantages.
      The video then continued.         A discussion on the "Terrace
      philosophy of enthusiasm". The 1988 shots were compared with
       the 1989 ones at Leppings Lane: a much increased crowd was
II     seen coming in at the same time. ■ Mounted officers were
       trying to slice the crowd. ^pjt*o£.spectator-climbing wall.
      Deployment of mounted police was for the safety of crowd and
       queue formation.  Attempt to close perimeter gates but theyj
       were forced through., either... by .weight of numbers or by.,
       design. Estimates 'of 'people''' outside at 14.39 range between'
*      2,000/6,000.  Mounted officer told the inquiry he had never
      jteen behaviour like it before at football grounds. Crowd was
      "like clingfilm around the horses.       The crowd was massively
     , unco-operative. 44 officers plus mounted officers (17)
       originally at Leppings Lane, then supplemented to 98
       officers. They would be reliant on some co-operation on the
       6,000 people around them.
        A mounted officer was seen to lift a young child (about 10)
        out of the crowd, because it was thought he might become
        seriously injured.  The child was brought round to Gate C.
                                                             bartezu.wjLth the
         'tewards to get in.   They       did   not 'have   tickets and were
    \     ying to buy their way in.
         NORMAN BETTISON:  The turnstile gates opened from 11 a.m.
         The weather was fine in both 1988 and 1989, but colder in
         1988.
         IAN HARTSHORNE: Fans were much heavier and much later.   Was
         there any difference in the way of policing those turnstiles
         - was there any funnellings?   PETER HAYES:  No difference -
         no planning difference but they came. In 1988 there was much
         more steady flow. Officers were able to check more regularly
                                   Page 4




         for weapons    and got   the view   that   there   was   a   filtering
%. system but there was not.       they all came in the last 20
*fr~ minutes. The ability to check a lot of people was diminished.
         It was the sheer weight of people in the last 20 minutes,
         popplewell encourages entertainment, if there had been some,
         people night have got there earlier.
         JOHN NESBIT:    Letters were sent out telling them that the
         gates would    be open,
         PETER HAYES:   in 1987# Coventry and Leeds, the kick off had
         been delayed by 15 minutes because people were not there -
         people were still on motorways.    That was because of road
         access.   No traffic problem in 1389.     -Bulk of Liverpool
         supporters cane from licensed premises.

         TONY JUDGE: Absence of drink from football grounds is making
         fans spend longer at pubs. Could the law allow drinking at
         grounds to prevent them coming at last minute?  PETER HAYES:
         Difficulties because it creates queues for drink etc. in
         grounds. But it has created a new situation.    JOHN NESBIT:
         Coaches stop at pubs on the way. TONY JUDGE: Is that making
         a journey longer?    PETER HAYES: Traffic restrictions mean
         they should not stop.
         Video continued. PETER HAYES: 14.40 and no anguish shown in
         crowd.   People climbing over.   Perimeter gates closed but
         people still climbing over. 14.48, Gate C opened from inside
         to euect a youth and 150 people forced their way in (counted
         by Health and Safety Executive). 14.52, second opening of
l\       Gate C. PETER HAYES made point that people were not familiar
         with the ground.    14.52, Chief Superintendent in charge of
         the operation called for the opening of the gates to prevent
         loss of life or serious injury at gates. Lord Justice Taylor
         referred to it as a sensible decision given all the
         circumstances. Not mad rush or stampede as press referred to
         but had the effect of relieving the crush.      People still
         climbing over perimeter gates. It enabled outside to beinore
         or less cleared.     About 2,000 came through at this time.
         Anxiety outside but not inside.
         TONY JUDGE: What kind of guidance were they given?    NORMAN
         BETTISON:  No announcements - just the signs that you saw on
         the   video.
          JOHN WEBBER: What was the level of communication?    NORMAN
          BETTISON:   Communications broke down at 14.42, restored at
          14.45 but remained difficult because of noise within the
          crowd.    PETER HAYES:    Ground control could see all the
          cameras. They have six monitors.
    i     NORMAN BETTISON: Between 14.52 and 14.55, 2,000 people came
     —      in. At 14 59 the perimeter gates were opened - four minutes
I         after the surge. Only one police officer at a time could
          work the nine gates.   15.04, people still watching match.
                         Page 5




people   climbing   forward   because of   panic.

PETER HAYES: People climbing up at back to get into seating
area.   NORMAN BETTISON:   They climbed forward because of
panic, having seen what had happened at front.     Also the
crowd night have thought it was a pitch invasion and wanted
to join in.   PETES HAYES: People did not go up through the
tunnel and go away.

NORMAN BETTISON: There was plenty of room in Pen 2. Police
officers - great activity. More policemen than could do any
good.   When they were got out, there were police officers
with every injured person.   St. John's Ambulance men did not
know which one to go to.        Chief Superintendent Nesbit
organised a chain of police officers to get the bodies out.
They had to get the bodies out before getting people out.

JOHN NESBIT:   ilfis barrier was rusted      and corroded.    The
weight of people lifted the bolts out       of the ground.    The
barrier was 63 years old - part of           the original crash
barriers installed.    NORMAN BETTISON:       tfewspaper fro® the
1940s was found stuffed in one part of      the barrier,

NORMAN BETTISON:  Bodies had to be taken from Leppings Lane
and to the gymnasium by police officers and fans on
hoardings, JOHN NESBIT:    They let the fans help otherwise
they might have turned their frustration on the police.

NORMAN BETTISON:   It seems old pieces of barrier may have
been used when they were rebuilt. We now see three shots of
the mortuary: 3.50, 4.10 (95 body bags - each body seen by
doctor first) and 4.34 p.m.      Each of the Officers was
dispatched to a body and remained with the body until it was
identified.

 PETER HAYES:  First Chief Officer at Force Control.
 was rung. External Councillor __________________was rung but
 was attending Conference at Sheffield University♦

                             He makes the point that because
 we had the sort of assistance in welfare, we have saved in
 terms of the impact.

f JOHN NESBfT: At 3.0f>, "I thought it was a pitch invasion. ,
  Only when I walked up to Leppings Lane that I realised it was '
  more serious. There has been criticism that police did not
  react as quickly as they should but most people thought it
  was a pitch invasion.

 _______________ I was called out by Mr. Hayes and arrived atf
 6 and taken to temporary mortuary.     There for about six
 hours. Spent some time speaking to groups of police officers
 and individuals. Took all the names of all the officers I
 saw in the gymn and following day saw people as a sort of
 contact. People came either by referral by senior officers
                               Page §




     or by those contacts made or because of sheets sent out
     setting out help available. Wanted to de-stigmitise the help
     - that it was part of taking care of personnel, that they
     have reactions was perfectly normal.   As a result, we have
     seen about 200 officers. Still lots that have not been seen.
     Back up people from the lecturing programme.   Had a meeting
     on the following Saturday with Niagra Sports Club, inviting
     families to attend.   Also held meetings on divisions.   Saw
     everybody at least twice.     People will continue to have
     reactions of some kind.   See it as preventive mental health
     care.
     PETER HAYES: Leaflet stressed that reaction was quite normal
     and had a positive response.  I was involved in de-briefing
     afterwards.    50% of policemen were crying or visibly
     distressed. Emotion impact on people is tremendous.

     JOHN NESBIT:   Another 2,000 policemen could not have done
     more because of radial fencing. Could not get people to move
     sideways. Some officers got there and could not do anything.

     PETER HAYES:    Feelings of guilt were tried to be removed.

     BRIAN MOLE: Men involved in football matches were thoroughly
     experienced. What changed in this instance, what changed was              „y/
     the fans. r$ne ^pub sol'd'* 69''bitrelsr ''of-beef." Or inating""*'!'!     /\
f\   ,ga,r.densw. Behaviour ■was -the ■w o r ^ seen.
     JOHN HESBIT:  Liverpool fans dedicated to get into, stadium.                 /
VZ   police do not feel this was brought to Lord Justice Taylor’s             ^ j^ z r
A    motice.
     PETER HAYES:     Thousands of statements have been taken into
     account.
     JOHN NESBIT:  Matters will be referred to Criminal Inquiry.
     We are inhibited by what we can say. . Hopefully Miqhae^
     Shersby can in Parliament redress the balance.

     BRIAN H O L E :   I am Chairman of the Superintendents
     Association, fje^haye commented that the report was d o n e :i|i         f
     baste and look ‘forward to final report.            r=====H

     MICHAEL SHERSBY:      I understand the final report will give
     better balance.      We have inquiries that are still taking
     place.
     JOHN NESBIT: * The' Taylor Inquiry did not take account of
     “ “lifted,.... p olice1s report that it was the worst crowd to .             /
        ice.
      TONY JUDGE:  I do not believe that the second Taylor report
      will redress the balance.    I think it was over the top.
      Perspective from rank and file officers is quite opposed to
      the view held in South Yorkshire. Astonished that there is
                         Page 7




 no professional comment on that.    Police Federation is not
 inhibited by sub judice. The idea that a peaceful crowd went
 into a trap created by the Sjouth Yo^hire. .J^lice should not
 go down ssifitp,history. Evidence that was not given in the
^Taylor Report should come out.
PETER HAYES: We are not going to challenge the report.            Lord
Justice Taylor says ”1 am greatly strengthened that               both
assessors agree with the findings” .
'MICHAEL SHERSBY: The paragraph in the Taylor Report, however^
 short it might be, enables Parliament to discuss it. Open to
 Parliament to discuss it as any other aspect of the Report
 and I will do that but 1 will need help and advice from the
 South Yorkshire Police to do that. But it is not a question
 of challenging the report or Mr. Wright's decision.

 JOHN NESBIT:    'off M e w    "£3*1'-the 'report ‘U s 'U n b alan ced T'
 But if we challenge, we      look as we are going on thp
 offensive.
 PETER HAYES: The Officers have been told that they acted
 magnificently. We are not lacking in support by our members.

 DICK COYLES:    South Yorkshire Police have been made a
 scapegoat and officers feel inadequate and condemned by that.
 The crowd did not act peacefully and come out with 95 people
 dead.
                                      «?
 MICHAEL SHERSBY: From discussions I have had with Ministers
 and others, the very strong impression is that Police
 Federation members do not come badly out of the report and
 they are seen to have done a good job at Hillsborough.
 However, I think that that view needs to be greatly amplified
 and that the general public need to understand that because
 they only read what they see in the popular daily newspapers.
 Important to bring out that the police did behave
 magnificently    on   this  occasion    in  very   difficult
 circumstances.
 PETER HAYES: Most letters from the public have seen what you
 have seen. That theme has come across from the people I have
 talked to.
 JOHN NESBIT:    I think the public understand         and know     the
 problem.
 BRIAN MOLE:    On the   30th August, there was a match at
 Sheffield Wednesday.    Liverpool had 1/400 late arrivals -
 match delayed.
                     Anger has come up again because of the
  report, not because of the inadequacy feeling, but because it
  has come out again.
                       Page 8




TONY JUDGE: Broadwater and Handsworth - strong reaction from
rank and file against senior officers.  Feed back from rank
and file here is completely opposite.  Morale in this Force
is very high and they repudiate the judgement.   This should
come across in a debate and we should plan with Michael
Shersby the counter attack.

Meeting then finished for the morning.
                        Page 9




                       AFTERNOON SESSION


BOB LAX opened the meeting and introduced       those   on   the
platform next to him to the Police Officers:-

MICHAEL SHERSBY M.P.

dick COYLES (Deputy Chairman, JCC)

NICK HOLROYD] federation solicitors
NORMAN BETTISON

NORMAN BETTISON (addressing the Police Officers present)It
was said this morning:  "The Officers that were on duty were
the most professional experienced men in the service” . The
sentiments expressed in the article in the Sheffield Star of
the 1st June were echoed by other Officers involved in the
Inquiry:   "S. Greenwood (?) made clear his resentment of
criticism that some Officers had stood around doing nothing,
1 have turned it over in my mind, what could we have done?
What more could we have done? It is difficult to talk about
the emotion as I am in this room here.... I was there and I
have the greatest admiration for them.     The heroics they
performed I have been told by people unconnected with either
Nottingham Forest or Liverpool that each of them deserved a
medal".   If you thought Lord Justice Taylor's Report was
unfair - paragraph 253 of the Report: "Most Officers did all
they could.    Many supporters paid tribute", paragraph 278
"Over many years the South Yorkshire Police have given
excellent service to the public", paragraph 279 "Aggravated
by hostility to rescue victims".

 You have the opportunity to present more balance to., the
 Report: fit those paragraphs much more in context. Removal
 of certain items of evidence that were presented to the
 Hillsborough Inquiry Team - officers were asked to make a
 note of their recommendations whether this amounted to
 evidence.    f’fcr exam^lf^ Liverpool ’fans "they, were all
   pimals" ~ mattersv''of' conjecture and opinion were removed 9
f  rom those statements. Anything of conjecture or hearsay was^
iptemoved from the statements before officers signed them.
 Officers who felt aggrieved by this were asked to let me
 know.
 BOB LAX: Explained that Michael Shersby would take part in a
 debate in the House on the Taylor Report and would obviously
 get the opportunity to redress the balance.

 INSPECTOR GORDON SYKES, 'F1 Division: I want to protect the
 people I represent, i.e. the federated ranks and so Michaelf
                            Page 10




  Shersbj: fira,,.put.., our point of view forward in Parliament.
  «hen I gave evidence 1 'was asked not to carry on.1'- 1 hate a
   ffanscript of the ’evidence.
    When we were rescuing people, we cleared a passageway and
    took the injured and the dead away.         Whilst I was there,.,,,.,,
                       police 'officers' trying to carry a young gfrl
     W was unconscious and had stopped breathing.        They dragged
      er into the main concourse.     Her T shirt came over her head
    and her breasts were exposed.       Someone shouted:   "Throw her «
    dp here. I '11 fuck her” . When I came to that part of the /
    evidence, I was told not to say that part, to go on a b o u t the ,
    rescue.      It is that type of thing that we should lo o k to
* !lM e h | e l Shersby to put a proper balance back into % h i s
    Report.
   POLICE OFFICER 'A*:    I was at Leppings Lane end.           I had
   worked that ground for 23 years, worked every semi final. At
   19 minutes to 3, I was amazed at the lack of supporters         in
   the stand and walked over to the West Stand and asked my
   Serjeant "Where are the Liverpool supporters?"        When I wentf
   to give evidence, % was told" by the ;ttiatson Officer on'tie
   first day "Forget the <3rink...problem.. ..They have accepted
* ,ffie majority of fans in Leppings Lane, trying to get to the
   FA officials, were stoned paralytic - this never came out in
        Report. Taylor should resign.         No-one with me at the
   Inquiry was asked about the drink problem.

   POLICE OFFICER 'B':       M s d e a l i n g with pickpockets. There
   was a build up of people who did not have tickets. The drink
   problem was exacerbating all the way along the line. Nothing
   that could be done.     Suggestion that police officers could
   have done something about it.             People were told to stop
   crushing on the loudspeakers - they ignored it because they
   were "pissed out of their minds".             Lot of bodies had no j|
   identification - no money on them, no ticket stubs, they had
   pebbles in the pockets - this did not come out at the
   Inquiry. Afterwards I was responsible for a team to identify
   the public" houses that had had Liverpool supporters..        75% '
 # the public houses reported an increase in trade - sometimes
   ten times their normal Saturday match trade.          One particular^,
   pub advertised in a paper in'Liverpool: "We ran out of bee#
   last year.     We won't this year".         They ordered 20 gallons-
  ,,iore.    This was never brought out. The main cause of the
    ' :ident was people's bloodymindedness, who did not know what
          were doing. The whitewash was from the Inquiry.

   POLICE OFFICER 'C', 'A' Division:    I was on Pennistone Road
   North.   The fans fell into two categories.        The genuine
   supporters arrived in good time to attend the match.      1500
   yobbos came down Penn is tone Road to enter the ground - some*
   of these probably without tickets, jfforae of them drunk.  The
   evidence came at the Inquiry from Liverpool police officers
   that fans were genuine supporters, but they did not see the
   yobbos who came down Penn is tone' Road.     They went to the
                             Page 11




  tragic area of the natch too late to get into the match.

  POLICE OFFICER 'D' (Rotherham):      1 was at Leppings Lane
  turnstile.   When you have got 4/5,000 people so intent on
  getting into a place....we police by consent. We asked them,
  cajole them to get into line.    If they won't do that, there
  is nothing we can do.     The Taylor Report knew that if the §
  truth cane out about Liverpool fans it would be the death of
  Liverpool Club.    Liverpool’s name comes up time and time
  again. The Taylor Report gives Liverpool a carte blanche to ♦
  do what they want. Lord Justice Taylor, for some reason, has
  judged his whole Inquiry on his own personal thoughts, not on
  the evidence.   A lot of evidence could have been given that
  was not given.   Before the crush I took a wheelchair through*
  because there was no other way in. As we turned round to get;
  out, the crush was so bad we could not move.      We asked for
  horses to come across to stop them pushing.    The horses were
  kicking people back to stop them pushing.       Liverpool have
  been exonerated from this Inquiry because it would be the
  death of Liverpool Football Club.    (Applause from audience).

  POLICE OFFICER 'E' (Rotherham):           I was escorting Liverpool
  supporters from the station.          Only one special train - not
  many supporters on it - because we meet the trains and escort
  them.   There is no opportunity for them to go out boozing .£
  Supporters on that train were decent - no yobbos. We went to
  the coach park where Liverpool supporters were being
^              -it. was»f-cro*iaad' o«tsiae"¥«p^rBarlets/-l^inating in.:..
  streets.   There were so many of them,.itjwas..rid if e u lo u s . The "

          The camera was situated looking down Leppings Lane.
  But they came over the bridge too - no shots of them over
  bridge but there were just as many people coming over the
  bridge.   They were carrying 4 packs, 6 packs, anything they
  could get hold o f . There was a genuine reluctance to go into
  the ground. You could not reason with them.      The amount of
  men needed for the tactics needed would have been absolutely
  ridiculous to stop them pushing. Ten minutes after kick o f f ,
  there was still a crush in Leppings Lane. When they said the
  gates had been opened, I could not believe it because there
  was still a crush outside the turnstile. £How anyone...,w§§r'.isotv
c killed outside Leppings Lane, I do not knbw.      '   ’. 'r     7-7

 NORMAN BETTISON:    What do you think of Paragraph 55 of Lord
 Justice Taylor                    -       ■
 'jgeat, amount of alcohol       ght from off licences

   POLICE OFFICER 'D ': Coaches are not allowedalcohol. If you
 #asked residents about the number of beer cans in thei£
, gardens       they were drinking in that hot weather straight
*•*out. ..senseless drinking.

  MICHAEL SHERSBY:        Did   you    see   them   purchasing     from
  supermarkets?
                                     Page 12




 POLICE OFFICER 'D' i, gateway #'' 'just across the road from the*
 station.     They shut' the doors because they were getting '
 cflKMfedTout.'      had b o x e s ^

 TONY JUDGE:    At the Inquiry, we were served with copies of
 the police statements.     1 was astounded that the evidence
 which was contained in the statements was simply passed over
lf?f Counsel or by the Judge's instructions not given out. Was i
 Mour^.evidence about supermarkets included in'''this original
 statement and, Serjeant from Rotherham, does your evidence
 conclude that the number not turning up with tickets was
 about 1,000?

 POLICE OFFICER 'D':           Yes, definitely.

 POLICE OFFICER 'P*:  I was crushed against the shop.  People
 in the seats were just as bad as those standing.  I pulled a
 woman out.  But people were jumping up and down.   You could
 not reason with them.   You could smell alcohol in the air
 outside the football ground.

 POLICE OFFICER 'G' :   I would corroborate with what
 said.    We were accused of making allegations to counter
 criticisms.      Experienced policemen     do not   make wild
 allegations.     Our job was to police the city centre and
 station so they missed the town centre and went s£g||^hjt to
 the ground. " pttpptejt trains, at 10 or 11 a.m. all you could
 saell: was beer.   All those supporters were searched beff6se
 they got on the coach - they had no tickets and had very
 little money. Average age group was 18 or 19.      There was a
 large skip on the railway platform which we        filled with
 bottles of gin, whisky, lager etc.You had the oddfamily
 man and they jumped into a taxi and were not searched.

 MICHAEL SHERSBY: The trains you are talking about were not
 specials - they came into the centre of Sheffield? Did yoja
 give that in evidence?                                    ■
  POLICE OFFICER           'G ' :^    I have    never   been     asked'r'
                                                                        i;'"%o /giv
? e v i d e n c e * • .'         r
 MICHAEL SHERSBY:              Has    that     been asked   to     be   given     in
 evidence?

 POLICE OFFICER 'G':            No.

  POLICE OFFICER 'H ' (Force Operations R o o m ) : . I cannot
  understand the lack oC;evidence,about people buying drink.,!#.
 jpjt©res‘.> "Dozens "and dozens of calls from members of public
-'about" 'people buying drinkTf      Only 2 or 3 of them   to my
  knowledge gave evidence in Court. This never came out in the
  Inquiry.

   BOB LAX:  West Midlands Police Officer made the point to me
fr that Lord Justice Taylor tried to rush this Interim Report#
                            Page 13




  through, told by certain members of the West Midlands team
  they were not ready, they had not collated all the evidence
  collected about drinking and were overruled by Lord Justice
  Taylor who said "1 am going to anyway".

  POLICE OFFICER 'I ’: %sce§tiii»e<l'lot only cans coining’from :
  supermarkets but a lot of _landlpx:<j|s selling cans over the
  counter and fr^f5th§M'^ack':" *'of "pulll - one from a vehicle
 outside. All this information taken from us and we were told
  it would be passed to the West Midlands Tea*.        We were not
  told to keep any copies but 1 kept some.       It was only three
  weeks* later that we realised that it was going to be a
  whitewash.      That information never came out.            That
  information is still there now. Public houses three or seven ■»
  miles away....one supporter stopped at the ^same pub
  way backhand was given a free Heal.          S» repaid then by*
 £P$fhih 9^'the "place*'up.  The landlords precipitated what was
  going to happen.     They buy cans from supermarkets and sell
  them at the back of the pub.

   POLICE OFFICES 'J' : 1 dealt with fans from 9 a.m. until 6
   a.m. next morning. We were parking the coaches, telling them #
   no drink.   They were arriving at 11 a.m. - they said they
   were regulars. But a 40p bus ride will get them out of the jj
   city and to a pub. Pub called the Gatf. At 2.40 a Liverpool §
   fan said his friend was being beaten op. We went inside and *
a found.the-pub smashed up. ' Fans were using tables oiitside'as
         ■■
          •
          ;
          .area,  We set up road blocks where we shopped the
    ans, telling them not take-drinks -wi£h them.       i’here were
 - bottles upon bottles. ~^They did not throw them away, they
   stood there and drank them -f_ 2/300 yards away. At 3.10 I was*
 < present with the first two dead bodies -|,we were urinated biinf
       we were spat on and we were abused for a long time. ' We*
 t were fighting outside the gyntn and inside the gynunt,.;trying.-to
 "pet people out.' And that was due to pure drink and nothing -


  INSPECTOR GORDON SYKES: Two points. 1. Lord Justice Taylor
  only takes stock of the licensed premises in the immediate
  area of the football" grourid'-'but we have seen drunkenness wasf
ipfiirtber afield - 14 miles away. In that respect Taylor faas#,
. been blinkered.    2. ' Lord Justice Taylor accepted so many
  statements of drunkenness but then went on to say that police
* overstated the position* So he has not accepted it. I think
  it is a slur on these people here today - |800 police-officers f
  conspiring to overstate the drunkenness.

  INSPECTOR PURDY, H.Q.: Working alongside Inspector Sykes at
  Leppings Lane.       In the Taylor Report there are just three *
  lines about intoxication of the deceased.         ®:,M#eople ■
    m t -.■120vmg of alcohol in their blood, fifteen'J,'*peBpIe'^i»a<l'
        "80" mg', i.e. 25% of those clea#.'®'

  POLICE OFFICER 'F1:    When Liverpool      come back here next
  season, what will their attitude be?       Liverpool think thdfy
                            Page 14




are untouchable.   How does Lord Justice Taylor expect us to
police Liverpool, to give them a fair crack of the whip when
they come again.    Drink problem has come out as "I don't
believe you".   That is why everybody is here today - we are
being whitewashed, we are not being believed.

BOB LAX:    We will find out next month.
POLICE OFF 1CEE 1K 1: 1 have been in this    for‘s#2S         years and
1 have never seen such a level of drunkenness in               my life.
The sad thing is that nothing has changed.    They            are still
arriving late, still having a significant amount to           drink.

POLICE OFFICER ’^il'^sTwo''‘
                           w eeks^’ago at Rotherham/ when Bolton
played, there were 2/300 people who turned up at 2.50 because
we would delay the match until they arrived.
POLICE OFFICER 'L*: Lord Justice Taylor has whitewashed the
whole thing.     He said lie was not looking for scapegoats.
There appear to be more and more scapegoats every day. 1 was
t *#eBPi®9s-iane#v:Irwas                  bodier^ottirSfcna 1 was at *
   e inquiry.   I was asked to describe the behaviour of the
crowd outside.    J sdid had we had more man.-"power,     t*>:an<3.,
                                                                   .
                                                                   ',,iJMfe©n
aior§ hostile we eSuid" lave "'sorted rthe matter--ou^.- fwybcrhave if
prevented what had happened.      Did not think at that time it
was a riot because of all the things that had been said. Now
looking back I am sure it was a riot because the people were
intent on getting into the ground by whatever means.                  Lord
Justice Taylor has dismissed the, conspiracy thepry. - not
heard any evidence about that. I would be interested to know
whether there had been any large scale meetings in Liverpool,
whether they had tried to get into the ground by whatever
means.    I do not think it was the reason why it happened.
The Club, allocation of the tickets, people staying away
because we had educated them that they would be put in the
 ground without drink — they were intent on staying away until
 the last minute and then forcing entry at any cost.                  I am
 certain there was some effort to embarrass us.

I NORMAN BETTISON:   With regard to the conspiracy theory,
■inspector King of Scotland Yard was asked to find out
 whether there was a conspiratorial effort - he could not find
 any direct evidence that Liverpool supporters held this*
 conspiratorial view, apart from three isolated statements
 from members of the public who overheard conversations in the|
 pub.   Lord Justice Taylor had the conspiracy theory before
 him as a separate comment.
 POLICE OFFICER ’L:   Lord Justice Taylor was not prepared to %
 hear any criticisms of the Liverpool supporters.
 POLICE OFFICER ’C * : That group of supporters which numbered
 many hundreds down Pennington Road, there were all rude, all
 same age group - they had one ,target, they had a common
 intent to enter that ground.
TONY JUDGE:   The conspiracy theory looks more tenable when
you look at Birmingham and Crystal Palace,   Several hundred
supporters went to Blackpool with the intention of breaking
down the gates,.

 E K E t h a t 1 th e y                                           <
 One woman saw them getting off a bus, grab piles of drln^.
 The report was read by the Inquiry but the manageress pt«§ not t
,caliM to give’evidence.    Special trains are dry trains, but ■
"service trains do sell alcohol.    Inquiry never took evidence
 from frit Ash Transport Police.   People now hire box vans as
 personal transport and carry alcohol with them.    Box van not*
 contained in legislation.     Hotting Forest supporters were1
 minor offenders. ^ There was rubbishin'^<g®rdens.    One woman
 fcad to hire a skip to remove it.                            9
 POLICE OFFICER     'M* : 1 was in charge of intelligence at
 Hillsborough.   Could not see why reports had to be vetted
 before going before the Taylor Inquiry because they were not
 going to a Court of Law and should have gone in the full
 context. 1 was asked for action sheet of intelligence repor|
 by Merseyside. 1 described it as "the music hall joke of th^
 year" because       you cannot get any intelligence      from
 Merseyside.   Every time you speak to them, they "don't have
 any trouble at Liverpool". Asked them to give the Exclusion
 Orders - they only gave me expired ones.    A football officer
 is appointed for one year and it is like a punishment detail
 and he is not,therefore, interested in giving information.
 Prior to the semi final 1 was asked, at the briefing to invite
 spotters from both Liverpool and Nottingham.      I told them
 Notting Forest would accept but that Liverpool would not.     1
 got the Exclusion Orders two days before the game (I asked
 three weeks before).     The Exclusion Orders were all 1 got
 from Liverpool.   1 got nothing else.
 POLICE OFFICER 'N*, 'F' Division:   fT was in th€& Control-,^0^
 all day.   1 have two points.  1.  People being lifted up orF
 to West Stand was not to escape the crush but to get a better |
 seat.   This occurred in 1987.  2.   The written statement by
■Mr, Dalgleish was totally accepted by the Inquiry without any |
"cross examination. When he came into the Control Box he came
 with Brian Clough.     ough offered any help.    Dalgleish was.
 asked to broadcast to fans. His voice could not be heard on*
 the tannoy yet it had been used quite effectively throughout
 the disaster.     Dalgleish was allowed to give a written
 account at the Inquiry which was not true.

  POLICE OFFICER 'M' : 1 flatted and waited to he called to _
^ evidence. Then I had t!r"g6 abroad. They knew what my leave
  commitments were*.?'1*
 TONY JUDGE:   to Liverpool    ever ask   for   information   about
 Sheffield Wednesday fans?                         |
                           Page 16




POLICE OFFICER *M': At Norwich, Liverpool blackmailed then
to let them in so they would not destroy their centre.

POLICE   OFFICER 'O':1 was at Leppings Lane end of-tie road -
it was   full of idiots with ale. It got worse, ?ht 2.45 p.p. I
when the mob arrived, 1 have never seen anything like it. It
made me feel ashamed to be English.       If we had tried to
arrestthem, 1 dread to think       what would have happened.
About 3,000 in the mob.     It turned from an empty road to a
full road.
 POLICE OFFICER ’P* :   1 reinforce what has been said about |
 drunkenness of fans. . . Fiisfif1'Lane .thef were fully stocked
 up with spirts etc. Egt&Toy&S*'extra lix 'Staff. At 2.30 p.m.
 it was as if someone had pushed a button. One lad was being
 carried by           confrQ^tj^^two^-young^jSjrirls, showed them
fbis penis and said HSuck'"rt&is you whojffe” .      A doctor in
 Liverpool criticised the police performance outside.          As
 ambulances were arriving, injured people were getting into
 them, so the more severe cases were not being taken to
 hospital.  So when people came for a stretcher, 1 asked them
 who it was for and then tried to categorise the more
 seriously hurt people to get them to hospital.       That doctor
 was wrong.
 DICK COYLES:   Two doctors went on T.V. and criticised us. |

 POLICE OFFICER 1Q 1: 1 was in charge of coaches parking on
 Leppings Lane. The vast majority of coaches up to 1.45 p.m.
 were less than half full - they had therefore left the bus
 Our searches on those buses - nothing was seized.     We were
 greeted with "You won't find anything on this bus, we have
 got shot of it".    But there» were plenty of bottlll^raps on ^
 buses. Went to the®late public house and acted as a filter 9
 for the alchohol that was coming down.       At first just a
 steady trickle but after 2.30 onwards it was quite a sea.
 Pace of people was quite frightening.    At the end they were
 running. We had several hundreds of bottles and cans. / Had
 to smash into the Gate to stop the fight.     This could have
 contributed to the dramatic effect at the end of Leppings
 Lane.
  POLICE CONSTABLE 'R' :      At Pennington North.    jk t 11 a.m. £
  supporters had bootfuls of beer.        There were more people
  leaving the ground that going to it. The tide was uphill,
  not down.  Majority.,., were going to the Fox public house. v,No
  doubt it was meeting place'- for Liverpool supporters -
® preconceived. This was the landlord that ran out of drink
  but did not this time. This was the advert in the Liverpool
  press. We were there until 2.45 p.m. 11.30 a.m. people were
  looking for the Fox.      Noticeable number of fans who did not
  have tickets. Saw a tout with a handful of tickets at the
  same time when special train arrived. The fans were escorted
  down. The tout appeared with thg^tickets. As soon as he saw
  us, he disappeared.            trying to resuscitate '-one ,person.,.
                                                           •
                          Page 17




(Liverpool fan W t' was kicked and spat on by Liverpool ?
supporters. 1 know one officer was hit  on the headbya coin
while trying to rescue people. When we  were tryingtorescue
their own, they attacked us.

POLICE OFFICER ' S ' : In charge of transit vans. At 11 a.m.
there were queues outside the Fox before it was open.   Cars
asked us directions to the Fox.

 POLICE OFFICER 't' , 'F1 Division:,, We did not get involved
until 2.45 p.m.      fft. lads were urinating cm wall sides. Our
 instruction was not to arrest fans because this would have
depleted 12 men.        We did not have the manpower to arrest
 them. 1 was on Gate 'A*. 1 asked for Gate 'A* to be opened
 because 1 thought the wall would come in.             cut off -afe
J;lte Jnqffillry. The relevant points 1 wanted to make were cut
'off.      Not even our barrister came through to ask me
 questions.
DICK COYLES:    The fault was that we - the Federation - were
not represented by a barrister. We were not allowed to be by
Lord Justice Taylor. The barrister who represented the South
Yorkshire Police represented us.   It was the biggest Mistake
we made.     The barrister was speaking on behalf of the
insurance firm. If he had said "we have made a mistake”, the
claims would have been enormous.■
____________ An application was made and Lord Justice Taylor
refused separate representation fpr the Federation.       The
reason he gave was that he was conducting an Inquiry with a
view to making recommendations and he did not consider that
the evidence he was getting from the federation as opposed to
you as Police Officers in your capacity as servants of the
South Yorkshire Council, would assist.      He believed the
representation by the barrister of the South Yorkshire Police
Force would be sufficient.   In Paragraph 14 of the Report*
Lord Justice Taylor indicates that he was satisfied that the
number of witnesses and their reliability was sufficient for
hint to reach conclusions.
 POLICE OFFICER ’T 1: It was a public inquiry per se but it
 had 11 prosecution barristers with no defence barrister.

                 You had the Liaison Officer for  the legal
 representations of the South Yorkshire Council.   That was
 their brief.   The Federation will instruct us to make an
 application at the next Public Inquiry.

  POLICE OFFICER *0': ^I escorted a prisoner to Ecclesfie
  Police Station.   At 2.15 p.m..there were still hundreds of
v Liverpool supporters moving to the White Horse public house.
  It was obvious that they would be struggling to get back to
  the ground in reasonable time to get back in.
 INSPECTOR SYKES:   It is important to know why statements were
                         Page 18




not called for.
DICK COYLES:   1 am appalled at how your lads were treated,
paragraph 257 of the Report incenses m e .     Not a single
witness was called before the Inquiry about fans urinating on
police. Where was the barrister for the police?

INSPECTOR SYKES:     When 1 came to the statement about the
        .was interrupted by ”1 do not think we need to go into
specific detail. All we are concerned about is
yesterday".
POLICE OFFICER 'D ’:   The barristers have not allowed the
evidence.  The Court has not allowed the evidence.    How can
Lord Justice Taylor justify his Report is a fair report,
having heard a cross section of what people have heard today?

POLICE OFFICER 'J ’: There were asides between the judge and
his barristers ffdiduling'what the South Yorkshire barrister
had to say.
NORMAN BETTISON:    Our barrister was in some respects the fly
in the ointment    because he was deviating the pace of the
Inquiry.
TONY JUDGE:   I understand there was no meeting between the
barrister and those who gave evidence.

NORMAN BETTISON:   I think there are, those who would not agree
with that.
              No reason why the barrister should not speak to
police witnesses,
[None present at the meeting had spoken       to   the     barrister
before doing their statements].
     ICE OFFICER 'W' :     I was Football Liaison Officer for
Sheffield Wednesday Ground. The QC for South Yorkshire
Police tried to get up to give evidence but Lord Justice
Taylor told him to sit down:      "We have heard it all before",
•jftlis happened on a number of occasions.

IAN HARTSHORNE, HQ: I understand that a video      was made a day
or two after the event of all the litter           that was left
throughout Sheffield by visiting fans, and 1,      wonder whether
Norman Bettison could highlight what the video     was like?
                               .                   ‘   3
 NORMAN BETTISON: ^Fhe video shows a stream of cans.  Decided
 it was pointless giving it. Decided there was an alternative
 version of the video that even if Liverpool supporters had
 drunk one can each, it did not prove anything.

 POLICE OFFICER 'X' ,T             H I was on perimeter track.
 I was the Officer on               I rang West Midlands Police
                         Page I f




 and asked to be seen.       1 was told that 1 would not give
 evidence.       When  1 was giving evidence,     there was    no
 opportunity to say what you wanted to say. When people firsj^
 started to get crushed, the surge had not started at the
 back. There was nobody in the, tynjiel at that tine. Whilst I
      up on the fence, 1 was spat oh, swore at.       The barri
gfeij»£;.went down went down earlier on, net after *the kick off.
 At" n o ” time have 1 been able’ to give that evidence at the
 Inquiry. They had already       made their minds up.

TONY JUDGE:   You rang a senior West Midlands            Officer and
wanted to give certain evidence?
POLICE OFFICER ’X': 1 was in trauma and shock.  How can you
give an account in that state.  They said there was no time
to come and see them.
TONY JUDGE:    What is emerging is a picture of a very rushed
Inquiry.
POLICE OFFICER 'Y' : We opened Gate B.    Tried to get people
to see us to give statements.    Eventually gave them to C1D
Officers at Hammertoe Road.        We were then asked for
explanations.  A lot of things were left off the statements.
In my original statement, I mentioned nothing about the Hicks
girl or another lad who died.    Yet it will come out at the
Inquest. 1 only realised I had handled the bodies when I saw
it on the video.
               We should make certain at the Inquest that any
 Officer giving evidence is properly represented.

 POLICE OFFICER 'J' :   Poor manner in which the Inquiry has
 been conducted.   If the Inquest is going to be conducted by
 the same Officers who conducted a haphazard Inquiry, they are
 going to look at their own backs. As a Federation, we should
 say let us stop this now and put the Inquiry into the hands
 of someone totally independent.
                 An application of    that nature would not be
 successful.
 POLICE OFFICER 'J' : We should apply        anyhow.     We are not
 happy with the way it has gone.
 POLICE OFFICER ’K' :   Where are we going from here?     The
 manning of football grounds post-Taylor Report: manpower at
 Rotherham for 5,000 is now 100 officers. Someone is going to
 have to pay for this policing. ■
 DICK COYLES   Taylor says we should have standbyes.

 POLICE OFFICER *2':      The   Football   Association   should   get
 their house in order.
                         Page 20




POLICE OFFICER 'D': What can we do to redress the balance?
TONY JUDGE: We have deliberately played it quietly. We are
aware of conflicting feelings in the Federation.      In the
light of the Taylor Report and the views here, clearly there
is a case to challenge the Report.    It should not stand on
its own as a definitive statement of what happened that
afternoon.

              No realistic judicial challenge being made to
the Report.   It is not something that is capable of being
reviewed judicially.    We have got to rely on the Police
Federation and on other representatives and hope that some
balance can be restored through the public channels.    There
is an Inquest to take place,       Originally scheduled for
January 1990 and told it would take             months.   But
Inquests are usually short.   If thefeoroner "Is intending to
have further evidence given and is intending for that to last
over three months, there is obviously an opportunity at the
Inquest to redress the balance. The coroner will not provide
a public report as Taylor did.   You would rely on police and
other reports to redress the balance.   The other alternative
is that we may consider advising the Federation that Taylor
should be approached.    ”1 shall want in some instances to
have further oral evidence” . We should consider writing to
him indicating that there are some points of evidence that
have caused concern.

MICHAEL SHERSBY:  No-one could listen to what you have said
without being impressed with the clearness of your evidence.
1 shall have to consider carefully, to use the evidence very
carefully. We have a situation here where you feel that your
evidence has not been considered.       You feel that your
evidence has not been considered, you feel that the Inquiry
has been rushed and I will try to get your views across.   On
the question of the speed of the Inquiry, there is a certain
pressure to make progress with the Inquiry and everyone knows
that is the case.     We will do our best to distill^ the
evidence and see that it is deployed.

HICK HOLROYD: Through the Federation it is available to you
to seek legal advice. Facilities will be available to seek
legal advice.

POLICE OFFICER 'Y* :   If there any possibility of criminal
proceedings, would it be on individual police officers?

MICK HOLROYD: As 1 understand it, members of the public can
do that. Therefore Officers will receive notices in respect
of their individual conduct.
POLICE OFFICER 'Y* :     .            'gate5 ®   Would   that   be
construed as criminal?
NICK HOLROYD:  Police Discipline Regulation 7 would cover
that. West Midlands may serve you with a notice.
                       Page 21




POLICE OFFICER 'C*: What about criminal allegations against
people who rushed the gate? There seems to be nothing.

DICK COYLES: They are not going to find them. How can they
find them amongst the thousands that went through the gate?
Assurance that JCC will support every Officer. You will not
be left on your own.
POLICE OFFICER 'A* :   Not one member of the public   1 have
spoken to has agreed with that Report.
POLICE OFFICER 'C' :    In May 1988, feltconcerned     that
Yorkshire was not prepared for any disasters.     Asked for
procedures to be evaluated. Certain points were taken up on
that.  Castigated in press for not being properly prepared.
No force in this country could have been prepared for what
happened on that day.
POLICE OFFICER:   Colleagues suffered frustration at people
being crushed and dying and not being able to do anything
about it, being attacked verbally and physically and not
being able to deal with that.   Then the Taylor Report - it
has devastated them.
POLICE OFFICER *M* f^T'On the day there were 58 arrests prior
to the game. 14 of them were in the city centre.   44 arrests
at Hillsborough.   All released from Hillsborough except omfa
chap kept in custody, appeared in' Magistrates Court, finea
£100 for possessing an offensive weapon.
MICHAEL SHERSBY: We have listened to 50 Police Officers,     1
am very unhappy and disturbed about what 1 have heard, not
only about the events you had to deal with but that so many
Police Officers feel so strongly about the Inquiry which has *
been set up b y Parliament. It is a very unsatisfactory statie
of affairs and you have my assurance that 1 will remedy it.
(Applause from audience).
DICK COYLES:  Thanked guests for attending the meeting.   He
had worked for the Federation for 35 years.
TONY JUDGE:   Never been to a gathering where you can say
these things. What has come out of it is the vindication of
Paul Middup who was crucified in the press but who spoke the
truth.
 The meeting closed at about 5.15 p.m.
                     «




G r a h a m Boon ,
Whites News,
Carver S t .,
SHEFFIELD SI.                          23rd April   1989.


Dear Graham,

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 15th April    1989.

You will recollect we did speak on the telephone on the 19th
April 1989 regarding allegations that dead people had been
discovered outside the Leppings Lane entrance of the football
ground.
I informed you that I had not heard anything about that. (This
rumour was denied by South Yorkshires' Chief Constable Peter
Wright at the Police Authority meeting in Barnsley 21.4.89)1
then pointed out that press reports which must have come from
your colleague Peter Moxon the day before stated I had spoken
to police officers in the mortuary .
You agreed the story had been mixed up and my comments re­
arranged but not at your end.
I had commented to Peter that I had visited the mortuary and
was shocked , but had not spoken to the police officers there.

Since reading THE SUN (19.4.89) I do not recollect naming
Liverpool fans but said ’people'.

My letter is purely to confi rm our telephone conversation .


Sincerely,                              '


Irvi ne
                                                                                                 2   lines) (Office)
Partners:    A. V . H. W hite.      H. Poucher.       G. Boon,       P. Moxon.                                     Press Box Hillsborough)
                                                                                                                   Press Box Bramall Lane)
  WHITE’S                        NEWS AGENCY                                                     Press Box Mill moor)
       F O U N D E D (1 9 3 8 ) B Y V IC T O R C. W H IT E . M .B .E .
            ~~                           f
   NEWS FEATURES SPORT
   PHOTOGRAPHS (Picture Wire Transmitter)
                                                                                 Telex: 547583

    Sheffield Correspondents:
                                                                                 Alpha House,
      National and Provincial Newspapers,                                               10 Carver Street,
      Television and Radio.
                                                                                               Sheffield SI 4FS


      Irvine Patnick M P ,                                                                       July 12th,1989

    Sheffield.




    Dear Irvine,

    As promised I enclose extracts from the sworn statements made by
    witnesses to the Hillsborough disaster.
                                                                                                            g.
    We were prevented from using the contents of these statments and
    told it would be regarded as contempt if we ignored  the ruling by
    Lor   iustice Taylor.




     P^te Moxotf.
        Irvine Patnick, OBE, MP




         HOUSE OF C O M M O N S
          L O N D O N SW1A0AA


                                  27th July 1989




Thank you very very much indeed for
the enclosures with your letter of
12th July which actually confirm
everything you stated and I await
the outcome of the Inquiry.

I thank you for taking the trouble
to send these on and I shall remember
it and it was appreciated.




Pete Moxon Esq.,
White's News Agency
10 Carver Street
Sheffield ' s i 4FS
? * T « I C K     U l U d l N f c    -   A   ^    a o    i . ^ 6       JW C V .« .




the police had brought a number of supporters out from
behind the Leppings Lane end onto                        the pitch,         and the
supporters were sitting against the fence and wall behind

the goal.
We joined ambulanceman                                  with the casualty with
the suspected broken/fractured leg.                      He appeared to be the

only    supporter           with serious         injuries          at that time.

Ambulancemen                   and                      continued to treat this

casualty.             I recall that Mr                             *as being kicked

and pushed by fans, at a point on the lefthand side of the

goal, on the actual playing area, at point A.
I received kicks and punches from the Liverpool supporters

at   that       end    of   the ground,          I believe          out of     sheer
frustration on their part. By this time the players had left

the pitch.
I tried to contact Control from this point with my radio

handset but was not able to do so.                       I made a decision that

it was going to be a Major Incident and immediately ran back
 alongside the North Stand to our ambulance vehicle in order

 to make radio contact, at 15.08.49 (Track 19, Page 2).                              I

 used the vehicle radio and contacted Control,
 Control asked me if it was the same incident that had been

 notified to them by the police concerning Leppings Lane.                            I

 told them that it was an incident at the Leppings Lane end

 and that the only point of access for ambulance vehicles on
 the to the pitch was from the gymnasium end of the ground. I

 knew this from my own knowledge of Hillsborough and I asked
                                                                                                                                                              s“ AGE
                                                                                                                                                              S438



                                                                                                        ■
                                                                                                        .   ^r - . *>r s ■••. •:• ■ a ■:; a\-; : ys i y ve r
                                                                                                            » < " \ •*




                                                                                                                                  ; ‘, a
                                                                                      S '1.1.1? ? , *       iT ij        S.'


                                                                  "a."'C- amor-st c tr.sr t h i r s *.8 anc s 1 «;in-.3 us f 0
                          .   .   - i •
                          *jy* / •
                                 '
                                                              ■.a i pi r.g L i v e r p o o l                iuppoi'vari .                       Cne y 0 u 1 r. who

                     » w nte              mala,              ajsaiit      16 y r s    o.ld a bo u t                        14 s t o n s and a o o u t 6

          f      : .                w ,.t;-. s i c n d     hair    wa 3    lying       oy        the             steps             l e a d i n g up t o       the

          c e .s-f;in=- s r s *             i n t h e West S t a n d .          I checked h is                                  pulse         and d i s c o v e r e d

          it        to    &e s h a l l o w .        Ac I was d o i n g          this          a woman a p p r o a c h e d me and

          identified                      herself    t o ms as a n u r s e ,              she took o v e r.                                   She was a

          Live       r   poo * s u p p o r t e r , w h i t e ,         5*3"     <5’ 3)            tall               and q u i t e              plump.

          I 7 h ° n d i v e r t e - i a y o u t h who was a b o u t                            1Syrs, white,                                 mal e w i t h b l a c k

          hair           wearing            aanim j a c k e t       and j e a n s who a p p e a r e d t o have a br o ke n ar

          1 0 wa r ds             a first         a i d e r who t o o k him -away.                                                                                       ,-j-

              I was t h e n a p p r o a c h e d by a roan who was w h i t e ,                                                  about 6 ’ 4 t a l l ,           aboat

              ,17 s t Q ns who was                  crying,        I a s k e d what was wrong and he e x p l a i n e d tjna
                                                                                                                                                                        *' *r


              he 'had s e e n h i s               brother         lying     on t h e        p itch unattended,                                    so I t o o k him

              onto the             pitch       to    see    his     brother.
              All        this       time      I was s u b j e c t e d t o s w e a r i n g b e c a u s e                                    I was i d e n t i f i e d ^

              a S t e w a r d by t h e              bib    I was w e a r i n g *                Evenutally                           I was a d v i s e d to.

              remove my b i b by a P o l i c e                      Officer          f o r my own p r o t e c t i o n .
                                                                                                            ■come o f f               the p i t c h having

              been h e l p i n g w i t h the                 i n j u r e d and a g r o u p o f L i v e r p o o l                                   f a n s grabbed^

              h o l d o f him a n d p u s h e d hi m up a w a l l                             calling                      him a BASTARD.                     I %^

          , b e l i e v e d t h e y were go in g t o a s s a u l t                        him s o I i n t e r v e n e d and -they
SH
                                                                                to     remove - h i s                           bib a l s o /
kM
               During t h e s e              events        I saw what w a s - l i k e ' r a i n ; f a l l i n g ^

u

I
     r%                                                                                                             r',v                                      ^ # f |l
                                                          "iMcsriKo-                                                                                             PAGE
                                                                                                                                                                 S-V38 '.'



                                                                                                                    was i i : i l        r.2 " ’- l e a r           and

                                                                ■■«•■■■• or.--,     s r/ii-j ” i f : i    : :-.<i    ; o a v r«     •.>.•_n i i s w s   tc         t he

                                                                        A'^ein * ;'.tf g l a s s *>>■                  £ ,   v s * * i r . j down o nt o

                                  -..•, ••!..        ""n~rs ■•■aa          no       one t r a p p e a                    >hi    s   l o c a t i o n and th<

         . -l..,a .-,a           -»a r 9 i * f    var . dai i s m .           I d i d no t               les        who wst. r e s p o n s i b l e                   for
         - .-1'1*• a “ '           *        J

         ths    viarnas* be s a l s a                L   was o u t s i d e .
               i<=t i n t:-s We s t                  Stand            I saw a s n a c k bar w h i c h i s n o r m a l l y s t a f f e d

         Ky y77n»3 ~g i r i s / b e i n s                 loo t ad .              The g i r l s          had        gone t o           helpwith                    t he

         i n j u r e d and t h e r e               was a g r o u p o f a b o u t s e v e n y o u t hs s t e a l i n g                                   the          pie-

         and o t h e r           food       From t h e        s n a c k _b;a r .               (I    can’ t describe                      t he youths
i   f.
         involved except                         tosay they           werea l l           w h i t e and                  i n t h e i r mid t e e n s . ) , ,

         r t"ld        a Police                  Officer       who c h a s e d              t hem o f f -               Then t h e o f f i c e r                   went

         and t h e y o u t h s              r e t u r n e d as        I was t i d y i n g                 up .         They t h e n s h o u t e d                     / f

         after       me and I f e a r e d                  f o r my s a f e t y and r an o f f ,                             chased for a sho rt y

          distance           by t h e m .                                                                                                                                 .*
          I had s p o k e n t o a L i v e r p o o l                    S t e w a r d who had come t o t h e mat ch t o
                                                                                                                                              1                           ;<*
         .assist           us,     before          the     g a me b e g an and he s a i d he t h o u g h t s o me I DI OT S

          might       come,          because             l a s t year        t h e St Ledger                        r a c e was run on t h e s a g

          riay p, c t h e          same I e m i ~ f i n a l j g a s               p l a y e d b e t w e e n N o t t i ngham Fo r e s t a n d j

          Liverpool,               on t h a t        o c c a s i o n e v e r y t h i n g had gone v e r y s m o o t h l y a n d . * |

          we r e     expecting                  t h e same t h i s         year,           but t h e L i v e r p o o l S t e w a r d ( h e i | |
                                                                                                                                                                          '
                                                                                         b e l i e v e d t h a t more p e o p l e woul d                                  %


           come b e c a u s e            th e St Leger wasn’ t                        being          r un.             Whi ch_ s u b s e quent l y

           ap peared             correct           because        t h e r e w e r e a l o t more p e o p l e a r o und

           year than l a s t                    year.
                                                                                                                                                             .    ■: m

           I am w i l l i n g            to a tten d the               Inquiry i f                  required.

            I have handed t o Sgt |                                         a - ma p .■-tinkd                         (Ex' no                > whi c h .&jjjjj g
             qttomt               'juozve
                                        - 7 -


lot   of     abuse. The swearing was much worse than usual and                     the
police      officers were being subjected to a great deal of abuse.
There      were     two to three officers for each turnstile                for    the
terraced      area     and    I   remember there   were    about       20     police
officers      in     total in position behind these turnstiles.                   This
is quite normal for a big match.

I went off to tell the stewards in the seated area to remove
their jackets. This was at about kick-off time. I told them
to    roll    up the jackets and put them in their pockets.                      Albert
Marsh      went     off to tell some of the stewards and           gatemen          the
same.

X remember going back to the bottom of the right hand steps.
Albert Marsh was present. Two of the stewards said they were
going      to go onto the pitch as there was a lot of trouble.                       At
this stage none of us really knew what was happening.


After the game was stopped, my son came over to me and                       brouaht
 along a Liverpool supporter.. The Liverpool supporter said that
his brother was on the pitch.            He was crying.      I took him            down
 to the .'pitch and noticed the chaos. There were police and
 supporters on the pitch. Some of my stewards went down onto
 the pitch to try and help.

 I    went    back to C Gate and noticed people           being    brought          out
 through      the     central     tunnel either injured     or    on    ambulance
 stretchers.         Liverpool supporters were shouting and swearing as
 they      made     their    way out through this tunnel.          I   went        back
 upstairs to the seated area.


I There
  old,
             were    about seven or eight youths, about 18 -
           pilfering the snack bar.        The girls in the snack bar were
                                                                            20    years


 involved         in taking water onto the pitch.         I told those            youths
 to     clear 'off.         However, they carried on and in the end I                had
 to     fetch       a police officer.    They then disappeared.             When     the
 officer       went,     they came back and told me they were               going     to
                                         ■   ' l e f t s ’              '




                                                   -    8    -




"get    me".        I ran down the stairs and told the                          police    officer
what had happened.


The     stewards then came down from the seated area as they                                       were
very         frightened.             Some     of       the        supporters    had     taken          the
stewards' jackets                    from my cupboard in the snack bar which I
discovered later.                    I went back up the stairs, but noticed that
the     gang of youths had gone.                       It was hard to see from the back
of     the     stand       what       was happening below.                  There      were        still
supporters          in     the        seated area.               Many were drunk. " This               was
easy     to see as some were walking on seats and falling.off.                                           I
have never seen such drunkenness or bad behaviour before.


I     have     attended 13 semi-finals and this is the worst                                  I     have
seen for people being drunk.

I     took my radio back to the club control room as I was advised
to     do so by a police officer.                       The radio meant that I could be
easily        identified as being an official of Sheffield                               Wednesday
Football Club.

When     I ’ was         at the bottom of the                     right hand    steps and              just
before        I    took the radio back, Doug Lock had spoken to                                   me     by
radio        to    check that the stewards                        and gatemen    were allright.
On     returning           from the          club control room, I went back                   to       the
 seated       area       which was           more or lessempty by               then.     HoVever,
 pilfering         was still taking place although by a different group
 of people.

 I    went        back downstairs.             I told my younger son to go home                          so
 that     he       could tell my wife that                        we were allright.       By           this
 stage        someone       had       heard on the radio that                  there    were           five
 reported          dead.         I    sent my other son home shortly                    later.            I
 also        arranged for the temporary stewards to                            go home.    About
 4.50        pm I went down to the pitch to see if I                           could do anything
 to help.
                                                        S chT-                 D A o \D             c^oTcH&^v

guvcher                                     DAVID                                                                          PAGE


inflations,            followed th is                 by c a r d i a c f f - ass s gs and f u r t h e r mouth t o

mouth..         The y o u t h v o m i t e d           i n t o my mo u t n .            I t u r n e d him o v e r ,        cleared

his      mo u t h a n d t h r o a t         with-my f in g e r s             and t r i a d t o g e t m e n a i r            into

hi m         I save      further            h e a r t massage            and mout h t o mout h.                  The y o u t h d i d

not      respond.              I left       the    t wo s u p p o ' t ^ s        w i t * >..,[* t r y i n g t o r e v i v e

h i m.       He was       obviously            dead.

I w e n t bac k t o             the     entangled           pile     of      p e o p l e end t r i a d t o         pull    seme

f r 9 a ,      i Was      sarrcunded              by s u p p e r t e i ' s     trying       t * h*I;> but « o a « ,

understandably                  ioo-xng         fcr     their       friend*           anc r e l a t i v e * ,    ^ e      just

 seating         i n t h e way-              X t^ied        to o r g a n is e         t h e * ir.to a l i n o to          carry

 bodies        towards          t;ie       perimeter        fence        gate.          I knew t h e r e wo ul d be a

 gate       s o me w h e r e    in the        f e n c i n g and I hoped t o g e l                   p c g p l s o ut t h r o u g h     i\

 to      receive       h e l p from t h e             police       officers           and S t     Johns ambul anc e me n on

 the        pitch.       When I l o o k e d f o r             the gate           I saw i t was s t i l l             closed.

 T h e r e was a p i l e              of    bodies       under      it.        P e o p l e f r o * the          crowd were

 still        pushing forward a g a i n s t                   m y s e l f and o t h e r h e l p e r s .            The o n l y

 p o l i c e m e n I c o u l d s e e were s t i l l                  up on t h e o u t s i d e o f t h e               perimeter        .

 fence.           The y w e r e         pulling         people       over       it     who we r e s t i l l       rushing

  forward, scrambling                       over      the    bodies,          and c l i m b i n g up i t .             1 saw

' Police         Constable             1 7 7 5 H u mp h r i e s on t h e f e n c e            p u l l in g a supporter

  over.          I shouted to P o l i c e                C o n s t a b l e Hu mp h r i e s t o g e t t h e g a t e open

  a nd t o       get     some p o l i c e m e n         into       the    pe n t o f or m a l i n e             to carry people

  out.          I t h e n s aw C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t N e s b i t a t                the f e n c e .       I shouted

 ' t o him a n d made t h e                  same      request.           The s u p p o r t e r s       in the       pen we r e

   acting         in panic            and i f wa s i m p o s s i b l e           to     organise        t hem.

 • i had f o u n d a y o u t h i n t h e                    pile    still        b r e a t h i n g and X was c a r r y i n g

   him t o w a r d s       the g a t e ,          assisted         by a s u p p o r t e r n o t         in panic.           Whilst I

   was d o i n g        so,      the       c r o wd was s t i l l         pushing forward,                I was k i c k e d i n             .

      the    back,      s o me o n e b e h i n d me p i c k e d up a l e n g t h o f b r o k e n c r u s h
G’
 JTCHER                                 DAVID                                            .                                 PAGE


barrier        and t h e w i t         over     the    p e r i m e t e r - f ence a t           the ^ o l i c e .        I was
                                                                                                                           w

looking        t o w a r d s C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t N e s b i t w - i v w a s o r g a n i s i n g men a*t

the qate            into    a line       and. I saw t h e b a r r i e r                 l a n d n e a r t o him and t h o s e

officers.             As I n e a r e d t h e g a t e           it    was o p e n e d and a p a n i c k i n g y o u t h

who ha d s e e n s o m e o n e           in tne       pi l a     of people             he knew,          jumped o n t o t h e

pile      i n - f ront o f         me and i n f r o n t             of the gate-               Tne y o u t h l a i d on       top

of      the   pile      crying        and t o t a l l y    emotionally distraught.                             I had t o move

him t o       get     So t h e      gate,        Mr - Ne s bi t       saw t h i s        ini      catiis i n t o t h e    pen t o

assist.             The yc- ut h was          pushed threcgrs t h e                    sate.       I was t h e n a b l e t o

 pass     t h e y o u t h I was          carrying,         assisted               i y tfr N e s b i t ,     through t he gate

 t« o f f i c e r s        outside      the    fence.          Wi t h Mr N e s b i t and o t h e r o f f i c e r s                I

 b e g a n t o move b o d i e s           from t h e v s i            of    the g a ts .

 Once t h i s        was     achieved,          other     officers               we r e a b l e     to enter        t h e pen and

 a s s i s 1, t o    get     the     i n j u r e d a n d de a d o u t ,             Ttiere was no way t o s e l e c t

 the      living       from t h e       dead i n t h e          pile.            Every       p e r s o n was p u l l e d o u t

 an d     passed through the                  gate.       O t h e r s were s t i l l              climbing tne fence

 whilst        this        was     going      on.

  In th e      struggle            I t w i s t e d my r i g h t       k n e e and I            felt      a very sharp

  pain,        I shouted            ’ My k n e e s    gone.’           I was u n a b l e t o s t a n d ,             Mr N e s b i t

  saw t h i s        and i n s t r u c t e d ’ me t o     leave            the     pen.        He r e m a i n e d i n t h e r e

  with other            officers,             I recall         P o l i c e C o n s t a b l e Humphri es h e l p i n g me

  through the              gate     a nd I w a l k e d o n t o t h e              pitch.          I was p h y s i c a l l y

  exhausted.               After      sitting        on t h e       p i t c h fo r a couple of minutes,                       the

   pain i n' my knee               eased.        I got     up,        took o f f         my P o l i c e anor ak and t u n i c

' a nd r e j o i n e d t h e        line      bf P o l i c e     t a k i n g a p o s i t i o n d i r e c t l y at the

   gate.        C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t N e s b i t was s t i l l               in the       pen p a s s i n g t h e

     injured through,                 I was a w a r e o f a n o t h e r o f f i c e r                 on t h e f e n c e a b o v e

     rr.y h e a d w i t h a l o u d h a i l e r        organising                the    line.         At one p o i n t ,      after

     a number o f           people      had b e e n p a s s e d t h r o u g h t h e g a t e ,               t h e l i n e was h e l i


                                                                                       o _
CATCHER                                   DAVID                                                                             PAGE


up*      Mr N e s b i t        s h o u t e d t o rr;9 t h a t         t h e o ne he was p a s s i n g was s t i l l

alive.        Due t o          the      line    b e i n g h e l d up,          ; carried th is             p e r s o n f rom t h e

gate     onto ths          pitch with another                      officer.          As we put, him down I f e l l

for a pulse              in his         neck.       I c o u ld not f e e l           one.          I was t h e n , aware o f

Police      S e r g e a n t Mc C a l l         t o my r i g h t        bending over the youth.                        The y o u t h

had s t o p p e d        b r e a t h i n g and S e r g e a n t Mc Ca l l           s t a r t e d mouth t o mouth

resuscitation whilst                      I cave         hyart tsassage.               A l mo s t      immediately a f t e r

starting           this,       t wo d o c t o r *       came t o t h e y o u t h and c o n t i n u e d t o t e n d

h'tri.     I left         to     re-join         the     line.          I •.vent bad-,           inside     ths    pen a f t e r a

while.          The      pile      of    people         se-i-nsd * o t t o ff i l e s s .        Tney had b e e n p i l e d

several         people         deep in the w ell                 at     the    front        of    the t e r r a c i n g .    It

was my o n l y t h o u g h t             t o ge". fel l        tne      people      in the          pile    out o n t o t h e

pitch.          The p h y s i c a l       effort          i n v o l v e d was t r e m e n d o u s .         At one s t a g e

whilst       in the         c-en I s aw S e r g e a n t            f c c Ca l i a g a i n g i v i n g h e a r t ma s s a g e t o

an i n j u r e d s u p p o r t e r .            Another o f f i c e r          was g i v i n g mouth t o mout h.

S o me b o dy s h o u t e d ,         ’ We’ ve g o t        this      one g o i n g . '          He was l y i n g on t h e

steps      of      the     terrace.             Mos t     of    the     other      p e o p l e had a l r e a d y been

taken out of               the       gate.       A g a i n my t h o u g h t was t o g e t t h e s u p p o r t e r o u t

 onto     the      p i t c h as q u i c k l y as            possible.            I shouted,             'Come on l e t s       ha v e

 hirr. o u t . *      I went t o           pick the youth                  up,    he v o m i t e d and I g o t my

 fingers         into      his       mo u t h t o make s u r e             his    a i r w a y was c l e a r .       The y o u t h

 was     c o u g h i n g a nd s p l u t t e r i n g         but I co ul d s e e             he t h e n c o n t i n u e d t o

 breath.           Again C hief S u p e r in t e n d e n t N e s b i t                 came t o h e l p us and we

 ca rr ie d the           supporter            to the       g a t e a nd p a s s e d him t h r o u g h t o o t h e r

 officers.

 We w o r k e d u n t i l         all     the     p e o p l e were         carried out.

  I t h e n saw t h a t           a crush b a r r ie r             had     completely collapsed.                    There         were

  shoes,        c o a t s and p e r s o n a l           belongings            strewn a l l         o v e r t he. f r o n t o f t h e

  terracing.               I l o o k e d up t o          s e e a number o f            individuals             i n t h e West           ;


                                                                         <Z                                                           v
GUTCKE3                                       DAVID •                                                                        PAGE ‘


S t a n d a b o v e m s . s h o u t i n g and s c r e a m i n g                   obscenities         d irected at ths

Police.              Some o f         the         people      remaining           in the      pen we r e be c omi ng a n g r y

with each other*

Some a l l e g e d            that       others          had b e e n r u n n i n g f o r w a r d and p i c k i n g up

p r o p e r t y from t h e               front       terracing*             I wao i n t h e          pen but had not s e e i

thist              A p r o b l e m w i t h a g r o u p o f men and a y o u t i i •:,** t o . - t s d o ut and

then        I organised                ten        police      officers        from t h e        p i t c h t o f orm a l i n e

across             terracing           h a l f w a y down t o          preserve          t h e s c e n e and p r o t e c t t h e

lost        property.               Whilst          still       in the      pe n w i t h t h e s e o f f i c e r s ,     a Police

nhotog raphe r , D e t e c t i v e                      C o n s t a b l e ) ________ cams i n t o t h e        pen t o t a k e

 photographs                 of    the     scene.            Trsis a g g r a v a t e d some o f t h s            crowd s t i l l      in

the       pen.          It     ‘.vas a p p a r e n t       they     believed          Detective        constable                     who

 was      in       plain       clothes            and n o t      identifiable             a* a P o l i c e O f f i c e r ,   t o be

 a     p r e s s     p h o t o g r a p h s 1' .     Two or        three     men o r o k e t--»/ougn t h e c o r d o n of

 Police            and ran a t           Defective             Constable                    [in a n a g g r e s s i v e manner,

 shouting              obscenities.                  I restrained            one o f them and saw P o l i c e

 Sergeant             mcCall          restrain in g -another.                      The y we r e t a k e n back b e h i n d t h e

 cordon1 to              the      top.of          the     terracing.              D e t e c t i v e C o n s t a b l e Bond l e f t

 the       pen*          I shouted to                the      remaining           c rowd i n t h e      pen t o t r y and

• remain calm.                     I explained that                  t h e man w i t h t h e         camera had be e n a

 Police             p h o t o g r a p h e r and t h a t          he was n o t          press.        I e x p l a i n e d t h a t t he

  p h o t o g r a p h s had t o              be t a k e n f o r       the Coroner.               The m a j o r i t y s ee me d t o

  accept t h i s ,                other      replied with abuse.
                                                                        *                                  *

  •The p r o p e r t y s t r e w n a r o u n d was                   c o l l e c t e d and p i l e d on t h e t r a c k

 1a r o u n d t h e " p i t c h .            The'Police            in the         pen,     including myself,             then l e f t

. the       pen.
     T h e r e we r e b o t h p o l i c e               and s u p p o r t e r s     on t h e p i t c h .       Some i n j u r e d

     were s t i l l          being a tten d ed ,              b o t h P o l i c e and s u p p o r t e r s       involved in                .•

' carrying               people        on a d v e r t i s i n g      b o a r d s us e d, a s s t r e t c h e r s .      An
GUTCHER                                 DAVID '                                                                      PAGE


a m b u l a n c e was     on t n e      pitch.        The c r o w d ' i ft ".•is f c s st S t a n d was now q u i e t

a l t h o u g h some i n a i v i d u a l s      were s h o u t i n g       o b s c e n i t i e s at    the P o lice       a n d jj

throwing m i s s i l e s .             At t h i s    time       I c o u l d o n l y wa l k a r ound t o t a l l y         •

s h o c k e d and p h y s i c a l l y      exhausts*,              I tried       to       c o n s o l e some

supporters.             One f a n came t o me and i d e n t i f i e d me as h a v i n g p u l l e d

him f r o m t h e       crowd.          I did       not    know w h e t h e r      1      had or n o t ,       whether i t

was me or o ne o f               the    hundreds          of    other     policmen tn ere.               I n any e v e n t ,

h<° t h a n k e d me f o r        ssvi-ig      nis     iife       and w a l k e d away.            The w h o l e s c e n e

was o ne o f         total       shcok.        Police          officer*       I i v. ve Known f o r y e a r s who

are very          e x p e r i e n c e d men w a l k e d a r o u n d w i t h t e a l ’ s r o l l i n g          down t h e i r

 cheeks.          Some s t o o d       m    siler.t       groups w h i l s t       others         t r i e d to help

distressed           fans.

 t    r e m a i n e d on t h s    D i t c h and t h e r e was            an a n n o u n c e me n t t h a t      t n e game

 w o u l d be a b a n d o n e d .        The c r o wd a t         t h e s-epc-i n§«j Lane end a p p l a u d e d

 whilst        t h e r e was j e e r i n g     f r om t h e S p i o n Kop.                The crowd t h e n s t a r t e d

 to d i s p e r s e ,    I remained on t h e                   pitch until       the m ajority of i t                had l e f

 I f o u n d my h e l m e t a n d t u n i c           but       c o u l d n o t f i n d my a n o r a k .         I returned

 to the P o l i c e        room a r e a       behind th e North St and.                        I t was t h e r e     I heard

 over      the     r a d i o t h a t my s e r i a l       was on H a l i f a x Road w i t h t h e b u s e s t he

 Liverpool          s u p p o r t e r s were to           take     ba c k t o t h e        railway s t a t io n .

  I made my way t h e r e               and r e - j o i n e d my s e r i a l .             I r e ma i n e d w i t h them

  until       we w e r e s t o o d down f r o m t h e g r o u n d a t a b o u t 7 . 0 0 p m ( 1 9 0 0 )                 that

  date.
  I then         returned to P o lice               H e a d q u a r t e r s and we nt o f f         d u t y a t 9. 00pm

     (2100)    that"date.




                                                                       v° .           >
        *
                                                           STATEMENT OF WITNESS                            - 7 -
aw


                                    (CJ Act, 1967, s.9: MC Act, 1980, s. 102: MC Rules, 1981, r,70)

                                            ~ £ )g r            SQt-
                 Continuation of statement of                  PAUL MORTON


                  I saw the f i r e s e r v i c e were i n attendance and oxygen was being                                 used    where

                  possible.              Make    shift      stretchers               had   been     made    from the      adverti si ng

                 ‘ hoardings and supporters and p o l i c e o f f i c e r s were pl aci ng persons on these

                  and moving them to the other end of the ground through the cordon of pol i ce

             jl o f f i c e r s .
                  Several of the supporters on the pi t c h who had, with a s s i s t a n c e , clambered
             '
                  over the perimeter fence had been dri nki ng he avi l y and smelled strongly of

                   intoxicants.            I saw some of these supporters s p i t t i n g and kicking o f f i c e r s

                 i who were in the process of attempti ng r e s u s c i t a t i o n .                        Several approached me

                   in anger and c a l l e d me a murderer.                       I attempted to calm them down.

                   The announcement was then made that the match was to be abandoned.                                            A short

                   time l a t e r Mr Nesbi t d i r e c t e d part of the l i n e of o f f i c e r s on the pitch to

                   form a cordon                across     Peni stone          Road in order that               the ambulances with

                   casualties            could     obtain       a     cl e ar        escape     route     and   to    segregate    rival

                    supporters.           Chief I ns pec t or Beal , De t ec t i ve Inspector Meek and myself went

                    with these o f f i c e r s and formed the cordon as requested.

                    I n i t i a l l y when I arri ved at the Leppings Lane end I saw two o f f i c e r s from

                    my s e r i a l , P o l i c e Constable f ~                             land Pol i ce Constable        21^     Cutler,

                    who were making t h e i r way towards the gate area of the fence.                                           I did not

                    see these o f f i c e r s from my s e r i a l u n t i l much l a t e r that ni ght.                         I did not

                     see     any other o f f i c e r s         from my s e r i a l            that day,     although I did contact

                     I nspector Dewes by radio l a t e r that ni ght .

                     I saw at t h i s most unf or get t abl e i nc i de nt several o f f i c e r s , most of whom

                     were unknown to me,                   working with t o t a l              commitment and with the highest

                      degree        of    pr of e s s i onal i s m.           Ones    I    knew were       Pol i ce   Constable    Steven

                      F airc lo u g h     and Po l i c e Constable John Friend.



                                                                        . .    Signature witnessed by •
     GEN/6            Sigr.ad .
                                           D c        l& ie r C '                                PAGE 6
                                           '                9.CAA.I                              R292                         J

St.     John’ s ,      fans    and P o l i c e .            S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Greenwood t e l l s          me t o

assist      in g e t t i n g      the S t .         John's          Ambul anc e t o        gate 3. t h i s       I           do. I

saw I n s p e c t o r     Darling* about               more ambulances.

I remember            a large       number o f L i v e r p o o l            fans     c h a r g e down t h e p i t c h

with a roar            and a t      that         point      expected        the    fans     to begin f i g h t i n g .

People       a r e now b e i n g           r e m o v e d on          a d v e r t i s i n g h o a r d i n g s but I a s s i s t

with      loading        bodies        onto them.               I recall       a photographer during a l l

this      p u s h i n g p a s t me         and t a k i n g a p i c t u r e        o f t h e young woman up t o

the     fence       f r om a b o u t       t wo f o o t .       I was now c o n s i d e r a b l y d i s t r e s s e d

and i n      shock.
A smartly           dressed       man a b o u t         40 came t o me and s a i d ,               ’ MY SON,         I ’ VE

LOST MY S O N ' .             I suggested             he c o n t i n u e d t o l o o k and he s h o o k my

hand         I assisted           one          particular         body o n t o a h o a r d t h a t I r emember,

 s he was i n         a state         of       undress       and f a n s we r e j e e r i n g      bu t I c o u l d n ’ t

 tell     what       t h e y we r e s h o u t i n g .           I assisted         i n maki ng he r d e c e n t and

 she     was t a k e n away on t h e                 hoard.            I can r e c a l l      other o f f i c e r s

 including           Police      Constable             3069         and I n s p e c t o r Har pe r a s k i n g i f I ’ m

 alright.            Superintendent                Gr e e n wo o d t e l l s      me t o g e t i n an ambul ance

 due t o t h e         state     I am i n ,            I d o n ’ t and wande r o f f t r y i n g t o a s s i s t

 people        to     find r e l a t i v e s .         Police        Constable        I l l i n g w o r t h J o i n s me

 and t a k e s       me t o     the     rear        o f t h e N o r t h S t a n d and t h e n down t o t h e

  Police       Room whe r e I am g i v e n                  a    cup o f t e a .      Police       S e r g e a n t Lang

  be gan t o v e r b a l l y        caution prisoners                    and I l e f t      the P o l i c e   Room

  whe r e a P o l i c e        Constable            t o o k me a s i d e       and t h e n w i t h P o l i c e

  Constable           Hulley,       t h e y t o o k me t o an a mb ul a nc e whe r e I r e f u s e d t o

  be t a k e n t o h o s p i t a l             bu t was g i v e n o x y g e n f o r a t i m e .           Shortly

  afterwards            we we r e      instructed               t o go o n t o t h e No r t h St a n d f o r a d e ­

   brief.           T h e r e we r e no f a n s          and I n o t i c e d b r o k e n s e a t s      and t h o u g h t

      ’what a r e      these     people?’ .              I s a t w i t h ' o t h e r Ar e a o f f i c e r s      from

      serial     1 and Mr.         Mol e         and w a l k e d f rom t h e So u t h S t a n d a c r o s s            the
