                             r— ^ \ O b>\
POLICE CONSTABLE 844 ANDREW DONALD REES - DEEPCAR POLICE STATION

I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, at present

stationed at Deepcar.



On Saturday, 15 April 1989, I was on duty in connection with the

F.A. Cup Semi Final game between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

which was being held at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground,

Hillsborough



My duties were those of a mobile patrol in a personnel carrier, in

company with Police Sergeant 681 HILL, Police Constables 583 DAVIES,

(driver), 2378 WEBSTER, 2628 CHURMS and 300 HAYS.

Our area of patrol was the Deepcar/Oughtibridge area, paying

particular attention to licensed premises and generally maintaining

public order.



At approximately 11.00 a.m. we took up our patrol area.    At this

time I noticed that there were numerous people waiting about outside

licensed premises, many of them wearing Liverpool colours.

Throughout the day until just before 3.00 p.m. frequent checks were

made of licensed premises.



Checks at public houses showed that some had few customers, whereas

others in particular, the Silver Fox, Manchester Road, Stocksbridge,

and the Blue Ball, Whamcliffe Side, were heavily patronised by

Liverpool supporters.   Both these public houses in particular

werevery full from mid-day onwards, and it was obvious that a lot of

alcohol was being consumed.    Most people's conduct throughout this

period was good humoured and there were no public order incidents.
                                                                          m
At 1.30 p.m. I was present at Whamcliffe Side near to the Blue

Ball Public House when PC. CHURMS reported a man for the offence

of carrying alcohol to a designated sporting event.   The vehicle

contained 48 empty lager cans.   The occupants of this vehicle were

in the public house together with a large number of other

Liverpool supporters.



The area where we were patrolling was some 20 to 30 minutes drive

frcm the football ground under normal conditions and traffic

conditions.   However, in view of the large volume of vehicular

traffic travelling towards the football ground on this day it

would take in the region of one hour to get to the ground.     We

advised numerous people of the time factor but to well after half

past two there were still people in the public houses and still

quite heavy traffic making its way towards the ground.



In fact at 2.15 p.m. at Manchester Road, Deepcar, Sheffield, I had

occasion to speak to the driver of a vehicle and report him for '

the offence of carry alcohol to a designated sporting event.        The

vehicle contained five full cans of lager.   The occupants had

obviously consumed a quantity of alcohol.



By approximately 2.50 p.m. we had made our way towards the

vicinity of the ground.   Qn route I heard a broken radio message

believing there to be crowd control problems at the Leppings Lane

turnstiles.



Police Sergeant 681 HILL asked if our 'Tango' mobile was to be

directed to any particular area and we were told to stay on patrol
around the ground.



Shortly after 3.00 p.m. we were in the Penis tone Road North area.

A further radio message was heard saying that there were serious

crowd problems inside the ground at Leppings Lane end.   At this

time a further radio message was passed by ground control

requesting that.all available officers go onto the track inside

the ground.



We vent there via. Penistone Road North and Penis tone Road.

Together with the other officers in our mobile with the exception of



PC.DAVIES who remained with the vehicle, we entered the ground

via. the access between the North Stand and the Spion Kop.     We

were directed across the pitch towards the Leppings Lane end.

Upon entering the arena I looked towards the Leppings Lane end and

saw a large number of Police Officers standing on the pitch. Also

there were fans standing on the pitch.   The game had been stopped.

I could see in the distance that fans were climbing from the lover

terrace into the stand above and people were climbing the

perimeter fence at that end.



From what I could see at this point and the information we had

received, I believed that a pitch invasion was taking place.    We

walked along the front of the North Stand expecting to begin to

move supporters back into the Leppings Lane terraces or out of the

ground.   Whilst approaching the Leppings Lane end of the ground I

could not see into the lower standing section of the terraces due

to the large number of people on the pitch at that end of the
ground in front of me.



When I arrived at a point in front of the Leppings Lane goal I

could see that people were being carried from an area behind the

goal and placed on the pitch clear of that area.     There were a

large number of Police Officers and other emergency services

personnel in that area.     I then saw a young man of about 20 years

laying on the pitch in front of me.       It became evident that

people in the crowd were being crushed.     I saw that the young man

was laying face down and no one else was around him.     He had short

fair hair and was wearing a green 'T' shirt and blue jeans.        I

checked his pulse and he was alive but unconscious and appear to

have difficulty breathing.     I assisted him the best I could.     His

eyes opened but he could not speak.     Then a Liverpool supporter

from the crowd on the pitch assisted and a stretcher was obtained

and the man was taken away for treatment.     Whilst this was

happening a large man of about 40 years, wearing a white 'T' shirt

and trousers was placed on the ground near to me, he was obviously

dead.     I then saw another young man in a vfaite *T' shirt laying on

the ground apparently unconscious. Together with Liverpool

supporters I placed him on an advertising board and the supporters

carried him off for medical attention.     Whilst this was going on I

was aware of members of all the emergency services together with

some Liverpool supporters on the pitch around me attenpting to

resuscitate injured and dying fans.     Some supporters obviously

worse for drink were being abusive and hindering the efforts of

others.     In particular I recall seing Police Woman Constable 3118

CROOKES effectively instructing seme fans how to administer

artificial resuscitation, to people from the crowd.     Whilst this
was going on, I then saw snail groups of Liverpool supporters on

the pitch becoming abusive and aggressive towards the Nottingham

Forest supporters on the Spion Kop, they were screaming and

shouting and they began to move across the pitch towards the Kop.

I was then instructed together with other officers to form a

cordon across the half way line on the pitch in order to prevent

public disorder.    I became aware that PS.HILL and Police

Constables CHURMS and WEBSTER were standing nearby.    I then saw

that a crowd of people were surrounding the entrance to the

players tunnel from where Brian Clough had emerged.    There

appeared to be people iteking threatening remarks towards him and

at this time there was no Police presence there.   PS.HILL, Police

Constables CHURMS and WEBSTER began to move over to his position

to assist.    I was about to follow when I was directed with other

officers by Inspector WHITE to move and form a cordon in front of

the South Stand at the Leppings Lane half of the pitch where a

group of young Liverpool supporters were attempting to get into

the stand at the Nottingham Forest supporters there.    A group of

about 30 young Liverpool supporters were obviously worse for drink

being abusive and threatening towards the people in the stand and

the Police.   The Police presence prevented them causing any

further disorder.   I recall one youth in particular who appeared

to be inciting other young Liverpool supporters into directing

abuse towards the Police and the Nottingham Forest fans in the

stand.   The youth was about 19 years with short fair hair and was

wearing a red and white 'T' shirt.   A large number of Liverpool

supporters on the pitch were obviously under the influence of

alcohol.



At 4.30 p.m. all mobile officers were ordered back to their
vehicles.   Together with PS.HILL, PC.CHURMS and PC.WEBSTER, ve

made our way back to the vehicle.



We resumed patrol, PC.HAYS was separated from us.



We then continued duties which consisted generally watching and

assisting in keeping the traffic flowing up out of Sheffield along

the A6102 and A616.



At 6.00 p.m. vre vent to the ground.   There ve had a break.



At 7.00 p.m. ve vere ordered to be on standby duties at Niagara

Sports Club ground.



I vent off duty at 1.30 a.m.
