       *   •              Sheffield Archives Ref: fo^\°tjl / l > M &                  M IR .15




OTHER DOCUMENT                                      DaTe and time raised   ^^   ^        ^       Number


TH .
                                              t ic ic v a iu /



Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Ye 0                   f c g
                                                                                                               Receiver


                                                                                                               3~?2D
                                                                                                                Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                          Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions                                                 (dbtOdhj

                                                                                                                Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken


                                                                                                          ^ *9
                                                                                                               BAMBi   (rt   ----
                                                                                                               Indexer
Further action No(s)                                                                                       r

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                      m / m


sxivingniiii
                                                      24 April t m




Star Sir

I read your letter cmeeralng th# Hillsborough tragedy with great
tntarost and found your <mm— «fe* of halo.
X ahare your feelings of distress at the incident and I as vary grateful
to you for writing*


fours faithfully
                                                           BIRMINGHAM

 Mr GEOFFREY DEAR.
WEST MIDLANDS CHIEF CONSTABLE.

20 Ij. 8 9 .


           Dear Sir,
                  In the light    of recent events at HILLSBOROUGH may I first
express my condolences to all     those who have suffered a loss to a loved one.
       As an ordinary football    supporter I do not k$o w the correct manor to
make representation to public     inquirys or other bodies concerned with these
matters and therefor hope you     can take on board the comments I have set out
below.

      Gould I make the point that the crowd control barriers at most
grounds are put in position to stop crowds pushing forward and do work very
well, but exits and the tern stile area are left open and allow large
groups of people to be pushed, should these areas have barriers and why are
there no areas for police horses to shelter from crowds.I also feel that
some barriers would benifit from being full shields as opposed to being
the single 'BAR’ type,the bars are at tummy hight to an adult and NECK high
to a child.Should people with children have there own small area of the
ground.
       I also feel very strongly against ALL SEATER stadium for many
reasons,we do have the techknolodgy to make standing safe if we look at
modern day reqiurments and think of what we need. Also most people who attend
football on a regular basis will say that the seats are known as a SAFER
place to be in,and I think the price difference does deter some of the
holligan element. If we had ALL SEATER stadium we may loose the ability to
target where the thug might be,and force people to listen to bad languge*
And would we be giving the thug a shield and a missile to throw at polio®?
and who will pay, not the people who impose seats on football I think.
      May I make one final point on the subject of the I.D. card, who pays
the price when a machine or card fails and someone at the back of 3,000
people shouts ’PUSH LADS', I have been brought up to feer the law of the
land,not loosing a bit of plastic


               yours faithfully
