       t   I
-*•




                              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - INVESTIGATION NOTES OF R.M. FORD




                    The following document will be divided date events and sub-divided into
                    the hours of investigation.



      15.4.89. Hillsborough Stadium had been selected by the Football Association to
               stage a F.A. Cup Semi Final football game between Liverpool and
               Nottingham Forest.  Kick-off of the game was at 3.00 p.m. and at around
               3.06 p.m. an incident occurred crushing spectators in the Leppings Lane
               terrace, hereafter known as the West Terrace.  The West Terrace had been
               designated for Liverpool spectators only and the crushing occurred in
               the two central enclosures of that terrace.

                    At around 4.15 p.m. John Rice (Assistant Director) telephoned me at home
                    to inform of multiple fatalities at the above football match.  From this
                    conversation I ascertained that the disaster had happened on the West
                    Terrace end of the ground, at this time I was requested to attend so as
                    to provide a "field officer" to fully brief Mr.  Rice at home to arrange
                    for such immediate emergency procedures that were necessary.

                    I immediately contacted Hammerton Road Police Station to ascertain where
                    the control point was for the event and asked for details of access into
                    the ground and the traffic situation at that time.' I was informed that
                    the spectators from the match were now leaving and there was choatic
                    situations around the area.

                    Immediately after this I attempted to contact Graham Smith and I also
                    spoke to Shiva Prasad both of the Health and Safety Section to try to
                    attempt to get background information in recent visits made by officers
                    of the Section in regard to the Safety in Sports Ground Act.  Graham
                    Smith was not at home and Shiva Prasad did not know any information.
                       H-
               %■   At ?. 40 p.m. I arri'ved at Hillsborough.  I gained access into the
                    ground and made my way to the Control Room where Inspector Murray was
                    identified as the Officer in charge.   At this time I was unable to gain
                    information as to the exact occurrence and I was told by another Senior
                    Officer, who was not in uniform, that the information would be given at
                    a briefing meeting open to the media in about half an hours time.   I
                    asked if the Health and Safety Executive were present, but the two
                    officers did not know.

                    I made an immediate visit to the area of the incident.  I noted that
                    there was a crush barrier completely demolished with a barrier rail
                    missing.  I quickly noted that that barrier rail was located on the
                    pitch and obviously been removed from the terracing.   Other barriers
                    were bent and the pitch perimeter fence was bent inwards at various
                    points back in towards the terracing, obviously in an attempt to extract
                    people from the terrace area.   Advertising boards were scattered around
                    and I spoke to several persons to try to get information regarding the
                    incident.   Many people were obviously in a great state of shock and the
                    indication I had at that time, that there had been a gate opened by the
                    turnstiles and therefore there had been a large influx of spectators
                    into already full areas of terracing.
                                    -   2   -




  t




At 5.00 p.m. I telephoned John Rice to update on the situation at
Hillsborough and I explained how the situation was still confused with
the many people in shock.  At that time I was unable to gain a telephone
line out of the ground and the telephone calls were made with the
permission of the owner of the corner shop on Leppings Lane.  John Rice
informed me that he had left messages for Paul Jackson my Principal
Officer to attend and he would be arriving at the ground between 6.00
and 6.15 p.m.

I returned into the ground and at 5.15 p.m.   spoke to Mr.  Mackrell,
Sheffield Wednesday's Club Secretary.  Mr. Mackrell was openly shocked
and the conversation took place on the pitch.   Very briefly he said that
he had thought that someone had opened a door at Leppings Lane end of
the ground and people were crushed in a fairly full area.   He said that
the actual electronic counts on the turnstiles indicated that the whole
of the Leppings Lane end was not at capacity.   He said Clive Betts^'KSd'"^
been down onto the pitch and, at that time, he couldn't explain much
more but would contact us on Monday or early in the week.   He had not
seen anybody from the Health and Safety Executive.

At 5.25 p.m. I updated John Rice and it was confirmed that Paul Jackson
was to attend with Vodaphone and camera.  We were to rendezvous at the
gates at Leppings Lane close to the corner shop where my telephone calls
were made.

During my wait I talked to the shop owner and he said that around 3.05
p.m. thousands of supporters were crushing to get into turnstiles with
the police horses trying to control them.  He suddenly noted that a gap
had appeared in the crowd just like a gate had opened to relieve the
crowd pressure.

At 6.00 p.m. I examined the turnstile area external to the ground and it
was noted that at the top of the turnstiles a balustrade was loose.  I
spoke to several Liverpool supporters who had been at the game and they
confirmed that a gate had been opened and when I tried to locate which
gate had opened, one pointed to the large exit gate to the North Stand.
He said that police had lined up inside the ground as to stop the crowd
getting into the North Stand and directed them to the Leppings Lane
standing area.  The other spectator confirmed this.

At around 6.30 p.m. Paul Jackson arrived.   I briefed him on the
situation and we entered into the ground and went onto the pitch.    A
police sergeant showed us to the terracing and a sketch was made of the
layout.  Paul Jackson returned to the car to make a further briefing
telephone call to John Rice.   I left the pitch and proceeded to the
office area of the stand.   I spoke to Mr.  Makrell whether any other
investigating officers, including the Health and Safety Executive, had
arrived and he said that he had not seen anyone.   At this time access to
the terracing was refused by the South Yorkshire Police Scene of Crimes
Officer, Mr.  Eggleston, until police evidence was gained.   This was for
the Coroners investigation.   We requested to view the video of the close
circuit cameras but we were told that these were already sealed for
evidence.

A further sketch of the terracing, showing barrier positions, was made
from the front of the West Stand which overlooks the affected terracing.
Barriers wi th obvious damage were noted.  At around 7.00 p.m. the Scene
of Crimes Officer, Mr.   Eggleston, allowed us access onto the terracing.
We entered through the enclosure gate marked No.3 this being the
enclosure where a barrier had collapsed.
                                                -   3   -




           Visually, the barrier that had collapsed and bent with no obvious
           failure of welds although it was apparent that a inspection would be
           required by Structural Engineers, probably of the Health and Safety
           Executive.  The length of barrier that was found on the pitch was placed
           back onto the terraced area by myself and Paul Jackson in the position
           of the barrier.

           At around 8.00 p.a. Mr.   Mackrell the Club Secretary was interviewed and
           was informed that we would require the names and addresses of the
           stewards on duty and also their positions and actual duties on that day.
           Mr. Makrell said he was unable to supply that information at that time
           because the staff were so shocked about the event but would attempt to
           get that information for Monday.   He said also that the Consulting
           Engineer for Sheffield Wednesday, Dr. Eastwood, would be attending the
           ground the next day, that is Sunday the 16th April, to test the
           barriers.  Shortly after David Bownes, the Chief Licensing Officer of
           the Council and Arthur Butler of the Building Surveyors Division
           attended.  Mr.  Mackrell was informed that he needed to secure the area
           so as to keep people out.   A re-examination of the Leppings Lane end,
           with David Bownes and Arthur Butler, took place with Arthur Butler
           taking photographs.

           At the rear of the West Stand a gate which divided turnstile areas was
           open.  David Bownes said that would be normally closed and it was found
           that the placing of a portacabin „ for the selling of programmes on that
           day was obstructing the df^'ni'ajg-'or "the gate.  The portacabin had a sign
           on saying it was hired from M.P.H.       Hire with telephone numbers of
           offices in Sheffield and Mansfield.       It was noted that the tunnel that
           led from the rear of the West Stand to the terracing was noted to be
           dar< and, at the time of a football match when the terracing would be
           occupied by people, there would be a substantial reduction in the light
           entering the tunnel from the terraced area.

           John Rice was further briefed at 9.00 p.m. and it was agreed a
           de-briefing meeting at Town Hall Chambers would be held next day at
           09-00 in the morning.

           On leaving the ground we -aet David Purchon, the Director, and Stuart
           Nattrass of the Health and Safety Executive at the Lepping Lane's gates.
           Paul Jackson and myself briefed them on the current information to hand
           and Stuart Nattrass was asked to consider the attendance of a engineer
           to monitor any tests undertaken by Dr. Eastwood on behalf of Sheffield
           Wednesday.  Paul mentioned a Consultants name of Brian Hibbs and Stuart
           Nattrass agreed that he would try to contact him. We confirmed that
           there was a meeting next day at 09.00 a.m. at Town Hall Chambers.

16.4.89.   I was informed by Paul Jackson that our brief for the Sunday was to
           carry out an investigation of the site of the incident. This meant a
           detailed examination of the Enclosures 3 and 4 and also of the tunnel
           that gave access to the terracing.  Before leaving to go to Hillsborough
           with Paul Jackson, I attended the meeting at Town Hall Chambers.  The
           people present were -

                      David Purchon,    John Rice,   Paul Jackson and myself.
                      Pat O'Neil    - Safety Advisers Unit
                      Mark Webster)
                      David Bownes)- ^-dmin an<i Legal
                      Stuart Nattrass )
                      Richards Johns   )“ Health and Safety Executive
                      Arthur Butler - Land and Planning, Building Surveyors.
Before I left this meeting I noted that Stuart Nattrass of the Health
and Safety Executive viewed that the Safety in Sports Ground Act was
primarily legislation and superceded the Health and Safety at Work Act
and as such he did not view that the Health and Safety Executive would
be a lead investigating Body.   He did, however, state that the Health
and Safety Executive would give full support in the carrying out of a
investigation.  He said that he had been asked to report to the
Secretary of State for 10.00 a.m.   the next day, that is the 17th April,
1989 and viewed that an initial report from the Local Authority would be
required by that time also.   A discussion took place around the Safety
Certificate and a plan of the Leppings Lane end was circulated by David
Bownes.  It was acknowledged that the Coroner's investigation would take
over-riding presidence over any other.   At this time it was quite openly
agreed that there would be an inquiry into this event.

At 09.40 myself and Paul Jackson left to go to Hillsborough, the meeting
now ongoing.

At 09.55 I   arrived at the ground.  Paul Jackson and myself were delayed
in gaining   access into the ground until we have authorised entry by Mr.
Mackrell.    Once Mr. Mackrell had been contacted, to confirm our
authority,   there was no difficulty in gaining access.

On entering the ground myself and Paul Jackson started taking detailed
measurements of barriers and photographing the enclosures of the
disaster.  It was noted that there was no effective security.^on arrival
at the ground^of the enclosures^" Immediately we were within the
enclosures I identified ourselves to a man who was-stood on the
terracing, he confirmed that his name was Don Sherriff of the Building
Surveyor's Section.   The taking of measurements was to enable the
production of a plan of the terracing and comparison with the "Green
Code".  Later Mr.   Purchon, John Rice and others from the Town Hall
Chambers meeting attended the site.   John Rice had now taken the lead
role in the investigation.

Dr. Eastwood the Sheffield Wednesday Engineering Consultant arrived and
also Brian Hibbs, Consultant for the H.S.E.   Whilst measurements were
being taken it was iroted that other barriers, not obviously damaged, had
been affected by the pressure and also the perimeter fence showed
evidence of pressure damage.    Paul Jackson requested details of the
Coroner's seizure of evidence rrom a Inspector of South Yorkshire Police
and Gordon Levers of the Public Safety Unit videod the terrace m n n e l
and area behind the West Stand.   Dr.  Eastwood brought load testing
equipment on to test various barriers, the first barrier that was tested
was outside the enclosures that had been affected by the crowd pressure
and the barrier was in Area 2 which was connected to barrier 136.

At 12.10 barrier 137, which had suffered bending during the incident,
was load tested.  The barrier was tested beyond the guidance load and
yielded at 500 lbs. per linear foot.  At 1.4 tonnes there was a 13 mm
deflection of the barrier, the barrier failing at a maximum of 1.6
tonnes.

At 12.30 a similar load test was undertaken on barrier 128. The test
load of 400 lbs. per linear foot was held by the barrier with a 4 mm
permanent set noted.   The barrier was further loaded to 1.4 tonnes and a
deflection of 15mm was noted.   The barrier recovered after release of
the load.   The barrier was then further tested to a load 25% over test
level, i.e.   1.75 tonnes and a 27 mm movement was noted after three
minutes.  The load was released and then a further load test was
undertaken up to 50% over the test load, i.e.          2.1 tonnes.       At this load
40 mm of defelction was           if't*1*‘i" **'vrhgTmr^nP'tttrii ^tUcni— /> ^
                                               -   5   -




            At around 1.30 p.m. the barrier pole from 124A which had been previously
            moved rrom the terracing to the secured Referee's Locker Room, was moved
            by myself and Paul Jackson to the Secretary's Office for further
            security.

            A meeting for 09.00 a.m. the next day at the Health and Safety
            Executive's testing laboratories was made with their Field Staff.

           At around 2.00 p.m. myself and Paul Jackson left the ground.    We
           returned to Town Hall Chambers to discuss the investigation with John
           ^ice.   John Rice had been appointed Chief Investigating Officer for our
           Department and our various roles were identified.   I was asked, along
             5 *      Jackson, to read the Guidance Note on Safety in Sports Ground
           and following that make initial observations.   I noted that several of
           the barrier heights that we had measured during the morning were below
           the Guidance Notes recommended heights and also the spacing of the
           barriers in Enclosure 3 were more widely spaced than the Guidance Note
           recommended.   I immediately notified John Rice of this and I was asked
           to return to Hillsborough the next day to carry out the s-cond detailed
           measurement of the terracing.   During this period in the office I
           detailed my Unit's involvement to date and discussed the investigations
           progress with John Rice.   I left the office at around 5.00 p.m.
           That evening, I again studied the Guidance Notes on the Safety of Sport
           Grounds.                                                            Y

17.4.89.   I arrived at work at 08.00 a.m. and arranged for a member of the Health
           and Consumer Services Department to draw a plan of' the terracing based
           on the measurements undertaicen the day previous.  I arranged for the
           films of the photographs taken the day previous to be processed at Boots
           the Chemist on Fargate.

           At 10.00 a.m. I left the office with               an
           Environmental Health Technician, and we arrived at Hillsborough at
           approximately 10.15 a.m.  During the morning session Mr.  Pitts and I
           took detailed measurements of Enclosure 3 and the tunnel.   During our
           time on the terracing a team of Health and Safety Executive
           Investigation Officers were examining the barriers within Enclosure 3.
           Mr.  Paul Jackson undertook brief measuring of gaps within the barriers
           and barrier heights.  Also the Fire Service attended to also measure
           various details of the terraced area.

           Before leaving the terraced area, the terracing was secured by the
           ground staff of Sheffield Wednesday with locks and chains both at the
           pitch entrances and also at the tunnel entrance at the rear of the West
           Stand.  An officer of the Building Surveyor's Section of the City
           Council arrived but, under instruction from Paul Jackson, I advised him
           that he could not enter the two central areas of the terracing because
           of the investigation of the disaster.

                     and 1 left Hillsborough at approximately 1.00 p.m. and
           returned three quarters of an hour later to carry out further detailed
           measurements.  During the afternoon we measured the relevant dimensions
           of both barriers and the terraced area in Enclosure 4.  Detailed
           drawings of the perimeter fence were also taken.
                                            -   6   -




         On completion of the measuring in Enclosure 4, Mr. Pitts and I examined
         the rear of the West Stand and noted that there were only two apparent
         signs for standing areas on the Leppings Lane end of the ground.  One
         placed over the tunnel entrance and a smaller one indicating entrance to
         the Wing Terrace nearer to the South Stand.  I did not see any sign
         indicating terraced or standing areas to the North Stand Wing of the
         West Terrace.

18.4.89. Arrived in the office at 08.00 a.m.   and spoke to Paul Jackson regarding
         the roles, in the investigation, of Paul and myself.    His view would be
         that we are to carry on the investigation to any physical defect of the
         ground that may have caused the disaster.   I informed Paul that John
         Rice had requested me to consider the questions to be put to Stewards
         and to Sheffield Wednesday and Paul was of the opinion that I should
         immediately carry on with the hard evidence to support the
         investigation.   I arranged for Mr. Pitts to start the conversion of the
         measurements taken the day previous onto a scaled plan. During my
         absence at Hillsborough the day previous, the Health and Safety Section
         of the Department had been fully briefed on the events and given tasks
         of investigation.   I briefed the members of Health and Safety Section
         regarding attendance at the ground, that entrance would be fine so long
         as they had identity cards, did not enter the enclosures affected by the
         crushing and to refer any press people wanting interviews to the
         Director of our Department.   Up to 10.30 a.m. there was very little map
         or plan details held by this Department.   I arrang-ed for a plan of the
         ground to be obtained from Pat O'Neil of the Safety Advisers.    Mr.
                collected the maps.   Officers from Health and Safety Section with
         their individual tasks highlighted left the office for Hillsborough at
         around 11.00 a.m.

        It had been agreed with Paul Jackson that further detailed examination
        of the terraced areas was required regarding any defects of terrace
        steps and nosings and other structure faults.  It was also agreed that
        the gradient of the tunnel and terracing should be calculated and the
        levelling equipment from Osgathorpe Depot was arranged so as to enable
        site attendance that same day.

        I questioned with John Rice whether David Moore, an Environmental Health
        Officer who had been seconded the the Health and Safety Executive,
        should be asked if he would return to Sheffield to give advice on any
        inspections of the ground he had undertaken during his employment in the
        Health and Safety Section.   David Moore had responsibilities for the
        Safety in Sports Ground Act, with particular reference to Sheffield
        Wednesday Football Club.   John's immediate reaction was that he didn't
        think that was a good idea but later, about one hour later, he said that
        we should try to gain David's return for a couple of days.

        I notified David Purchon that the Health and Safety Executive's Field
        Testing Officers requested the day previous the results from Dr.
        Eastwood or Sheffield Wednesday of the most recent barrier testing
        undertaken in the West Terrace of the Leppings Lane end.  This request
        for information had been placed with John Rice and referred back to
        David Purchon by David Bownes of the Administration and Legal
        Department.
                                                                -   7   -




            I provided for John Rice, via David Bownes of the Administration and
            Legal Department, the current ground capacity, the capacity of the
            t h pP^ f  L an \ en? ’ the caPa c ity of the Leppings Lane standing areas and
                    ? nn           tSt inspection of the City Council. John Rice briefed
            me at2.00 p.m. that David Moore would         be returning to the Unit to

                   H e X ? ? r t k n ° W l 6 d S e ° n t h e S a f e t y i n S P ° r t s G r o u n d A c ‘ for twenty
            days.  He also informed me that there is now pressure to undertake
            sarety visits at Bramall Lane and, therefore, there was an obvious
            problem with the amounts of staff to be put onto the ground.

            I was requested to get half a dozen copies of the/"Green'Guide" and I

            da Jed3 1976 w°       k? ^  thlS' ^     3 C°Py ° f the ori8 inal document,
            dated 1976, was available from the photocopier someone is required to
             ompare the 1976 "Green Guide" to the most recent published (1986).

            At 2.10 p.m. I left Town Hall Chambers with Steve Pitts to go to
            Hillsborough Stadium to measure the gradient of both the terrace and
            t u nn e l .


           tn            we a r f iv ed at Hillsborough but had difficulty (45 minutes)
           in gaining access due to the visit of the Duke of Kent and the
           instructions of Lord Justice Taylor re access.      Eventually we gained
           access into the ground and the gradients of both terraces in Enclosures
           3 & ^ were measured, the gradients of the tunnel was also levelled and
           detailed examination or the terrace steps in Enclosure 3 made.

           We left the ground at 5.25 p.m. intending to return next day to
           photograph and complete our examination of the terracing.  At
           approximately 6.30 p.m. Paul Jackson telephoned me at home that the
           investigation had been suspended by Lord Justice Taylor and hence not to
           enter the ground until further notice.

19.4.89.
           ] a fn6CL M r ‘ Pitts to draw U P the measurements taken previously to scale.
           At iO.OO a.m.      John Rice briefed the Health and Safety Section re the
           events.    The officers were told to write up their notes and to gather as
           much information as ^possible without direct investigation.

           Mr. Rice informed me that I was to lead a team of officers specifically
           for the inspection of Bramall Lane and Owlerton.  This was to be given
           priority and inspection of Bramall Lane would take place from Monday
           24th April, 1989.   Staff from other Sections would support this
           including my managerial position in the Environmental Protection*Unit.

           I contacted David Bownes unit to try to gain copies of plans of Bramall
           Lane but I was told that at this time it would not be possible and staff
           were busy collating Hillsborough details.

           Graham Smith, David Moore and Alan Charlesworth were selected for Lead
           Inspection Officers for Hillsborough, Bramall Lane and Owlerton
           respectively.   David Moore was fully briefed on the disaster on his
           arrival in the office at about 12.00 hours.  A previously arranged
           briefing meeting with David Purchon was postponed and I arranged to file
           read with David Moore and Graham Smith that afternoon.
                                             -   8   -




         Full case history of the Inspection of Hillsborough was highlighted from
         file and David Moore's direct involvements.  People involved at various
         stages have included David Bird, John Batley, Brian Platts (Housing) and
         Chris Reed (Eastleigh).

20.4.89. Requested Bramall Lane and Owlerton files to he sorted in chronological
         order and indexed by              and               Comparison between
         1976 and 1986 "Green uuiaes" undertaken by Graham Smith.  Delay in
        Owlerton file review due to sickness absence of Alan Charlesworth, who
        has taken file home.  David Moore's historical background of
        Hillsborough and indexing of file.

        Briefed by John Rice.    Defined the role of myself and selected team -

         1.   Departmental review of involvement of Safety in Sports
              Grounds, including individual sport areas.

        2.    Inspection of Bramall Lane, Owlerton and Hillsborough.

        3.    Critique and submission of draft Revised Safety
              Certificate Conditions.



        In relation to these statements of involvements from everyone who had
        any responsibility for Safety in Sports Grounds in the past and present
        would be required.

        Inspection of 3ramall Lane to start Monday 24th April, 1989.   Plans
        being sorted by David 3ownes.    Inspection would cover all aspects of
        safety including any obvious structural weaknesses should be noted,
        measured etc.  Public Safety Unit would, however, be asked to inspect
        ground.  The inspections must be undertaken professionally with no
        individual conversations re views of inspecting officer, competently
        with nothing missed and no contact with media.   Pat O'Neill was now
        spokesman, with no direct involvement re Health and Safety advice to
        Admin and Legal on Safety in Sports Ground - this needed to be watched.
        All typing to be through Admin and Legal with everything in confidence.
        Decision had been made to remove perimeter fence gates at Bramall Lane.
        I raised question of confidentiality within this Department and John
        Rice would keep an eye on it.   Contact at Bramall Lane - Derek Dooley or
        Mr. Capper, the Club Secretary.

        Owlerton inspection was discussed re forthcoming rugby match on Sunday
        23th April 1989 which was very likely to be the biggest game at Owlerton
        so far with possible capacity attendance.   John Rice's view was
        Owlerton already had a good safety management plan but suggested someone
        to attend and view arrangements.

        Briefing meeting with Health and Safety team at 1.00 p.m.    The above
        issues were discussed and notes of people agreed.    Aims 1 & 3 above to
        be D. Moore's responsibility.    Aim 2 - inspection of Bramall Lane to be
        divided between two teams of three officers - teams to be led by
        G. Smith and A. Charlesworth.    D. Moore to advise on inspections a
        safety raamangeraent plans following completion of primary role.
        Owlerton's position re match on Sunday 23rd April discussed, prior to
        anyone observing the day of the match, clarification as to input of
        Council re safety plan implementation.
                                                 -   9   -




             Telephoned David Bownes - plans of Bramall Lane should be available the
             next day, that is 21st April, 1989, and with regard to Owlerton he said
             that he thought either H & C.S., Building Surveyors or Fire Service had
             visited and have checked it should  be on file. Informed him that this
             Department did not have any record  of that.

 21.4.89.   Request from Don Sherriff of the 3uilding Surveyors for the dimensions
            and any drawings that we had completed following our on-site
            investigation at Hillsborough.    Informed David Purchon of this request
            and it was agreed that drawings and any measurements should be supplied
            but that all maps and drawings should be clearly labelled as being
            conridential with no unauthorised copying allowed.   This was put into
            erfect and Map Set 3 delivered to Gordon Levers personally by Liz
            Wright, Environmental Health Officer.

            Briefing meeting with David Purchon confirmed inspection at Hillsborough
            to commence on Monday 24th April, 1989 and David Purchon confirmed he
            would be attending Sheffield United's Home game on the 22nd April and
            the Rugby League match at Owlerton    on Sunday the     23rd April.It was to
            be David Purchon's intention to video    the stewarding and other safety
            aspects with relation to the perimeter fence.

            Dr. Eastwood telephoned in response to a letter forwarded by Paul
            Jackson dated 21st April, 1989 in which copies of all tests carried out
            on barriers at Hillsborough within the last five years was requested.
            Dr. Eastwood questioned the need for full test certificates for the last
            five years and said also that copies of the most recent tests carried
            out on barriers at the Leppings Lane end had been provided to David
            Bownes in Admin and Legal this same day.   Dr. Eastwood also pointed out
            that in the past all tests carried out on the barriers had been provided
            to both Admin and Legal and the Building Surveyors for their
            information.  I explained that the results required by Paul Jackson were
            for the Health and Safety Executive's investigation and that if Paul had
            required five years results then it would not be an error in typing. It
            was left, however, with Dr. Eastwood that I would check with Admin and
            Legal on the availability of test records both on the Leppings Lane end
            of the ground and also for the rest of the stadium.

            Following this conversation I telephoned David Bownes who confirmed that
            test certificates for the Leppings Lane end were available and I asked
            for copies of those certificates to be provided for this Department's
            attention.  David 3 o w n e s , however, was of the opinion that the letter
            from Paul Jackson should not have been sent unless authorised by the
            Co-ordinating Group.       The test certificates were subsequently picked up
            by David Moore who, together with Steve Clay, an Environmental Health
            Technician, were trying to obtain copies of plans for Bramall Lane.
            Steve Clay was authorised to attend the Sheffield Unit home game on the
            following day to examine the safety issues at the Kop end of Bramall
            Lane.

24.4.89. John Rice briefed me that he had also attended Bramall Lane with David
         Purchon and Gordon Levers on the preceeding Saturday.  He had noted
         certain aspects of safety that would require to be inspected.  At this
         time I confirmed that the inspection teams for the inspection of Bramall
         Lane were ready to commence inspection that day.  At this time I
         questioned the Environmental Protection Unit's cover arrangements
         involving John Hendley and it was mutually agreed between John Rice,
         John Hendley and myself that the inspection of the sports grounds would
         be under the management of John Hendley and the Hillsborough Disaster
         inquiry involving this Department's reaction to Safety in Sport Grounds
                                           -   10   -




         generally would be the remit of myself.

         A briefing meeting between the Director, John Rice, John Hendley and
         myself took place at around 9.30 a.m. and in this meeting it was
         confirmed that the inspection of Bramall Lane should commence later
         in the day.  The inspection strategy was discussed and it was made
         obvious that the inspection should cover all aspects of ground safety.

         Further briefing of the two events at Bramall Lane and Owlerton over the
         weekend was given by David Purchon.       Following this meeting an
         inspection team briefing was made to the officers of the Health and
         Safety Section by myself and John Hendley and the inspection details
         were discussed.       Two inspection teams, each covering various parts of
         Bramall Lane, were agreed each under the control of a group leader who
         would lead in the inspection and assess any risk that may be of marginal
         signi f i c a n c e .

         It was confirmed that John Hendley was now head of the inspection team
         and that each group were to cover all aspects from entrances, signs,
         structures, exits etc.   The inspection would be comprehensive and
         accurate and on a professional basis with no personal comments being
         made to external people.   Any conversation with any person from outside
         the Department would need to be witnessed and recorded by one of the
         group.  Any typing at all on the subject would be directed via John or
         myself.

         At around 10.20 a.m. I telephoned Sheffield United and spoke to Mr.
         Capper the Club Secretary.   I informed him that inspection teams had
         been arranged and that they would be arriving at the ground from
         approximately 11.00 a.m.   Mr. Capper was aimable about the arrangments
         and I confirm that the inspecting teams would report to himself on
         arrival at the Ground.   The role of co-ordinating any inspection of
         3ramall Lane and other grounds was then left in the hands of John
         Hendley.  I am aware that the inspection groups arrived at Bramall Lane
         at approximately 1.00 p.m. and after being allowed access into the
         ground by Mr.  Capper, Mr.   Strange of Eastwood and Partners requested
         the to teams theleave ground.

Z5.4.89. Paul Walshaw was requested to taice two copies of the individual sports
         ground files for Hillsborough, 3ramall Lane and Owlerton.   John Rice was
         consulted as to the situation regarding the forwarding of the barrier
         test reports of Eastwood and Partners to the Health and Safety
         Executive.  John Rice's reaction was that as the Health and Safety
         Executive were now the Investigation Body for Lord Justice Taylor that
         they could actually acquire these test records by their statutory powers
         so, therefore, at this stage any records should not be forwarded to the
         Health and Safety Executive.

        I was requested by Liz Bashforth of Admin and Legal to bring the
        photographs of the Hillsborough Disaster which were mounted onto two
        card boards to her office so as to allow full briefing of the Council's
        Barristers.   I delivered the photographs, together with two copies of
        the maps and drawings (copies 6 & 7) at 10.00 a.m.   Later in the day at
        around about 4.00 p.m. Liz Bashforth asked me to fetch the photographs
        back from the officers of Admin and Legal.  Whilst picking the
                                              -   11   -




           photographs up I was asked by Liz Sashforth what our Department's
           inspection needs were for Bramall Lane and X informed her to contact
           John Hendley as he was now Co-ordinating Inspection Officer.   I
           informed John Hendley of Liz Bashforth's need to speak to him and at
           approximately 4.20 p.m. John Hendley spoke by telephone to Liz
           Bashforth.  Details of this conversation are kept on private files of
           John Hendley.

           Following this telephone conversation John Hendley confirmed to me that
           he had a breifing meeting with David Purchon and John Rice the following
           morning to disucss the requirements for the inspection of Bramall Lane.

26.4.89    At around 2.00 p.m. I was asked by John Rice to organise for confined
           space testing at one of the City's Cemeteries as the flowers of respect
           that had been left at Hillsborough were to be partly disposed of by
           Council incineration and burial of the remainder.  Paul Jackson was
           contacted by a West Midlands Police Officer, I think Supt.  Pemberton,
           to introduce himself to Paul.

 7.4.89. I received authorisation from Mark Webster of Admin and Legal for the
         purposes of the Sarety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.  This authorisation
         was dated the 26th April,  1989 with a date of expiry of 26th June,
         1989.  Copies of the files that had been requested from Paul Walshaw,
         Admin. Officer, were found to have a number of missing or badly copied
         documents and David Moore, during the afternoon, did a full file check
         on all three sports grounds files.

           I am also aware that, at 10.00 a.m. when the inspection groups headed by
           John Hendley, arrived at Bramall Lane to commence their inspection that
           a confrontation arose between Dr. Eastwood, Sheffield United's
           representative and the inspection teams regarding unreasonable
           restrictions that would be placed on the inspection group by Dr.
           Eastwood.  John Hendley and the teams, together with David Bownes, left
           the ground without inspecting.   The Fire, Police and Arthur Butler
           representing the Building Surveyors remained.

           Following David Moore's checking of the copying of the files, I issued
           one copy to myself and the remaining copy to John Hendley.  It was
           agreed that the original files should be provided to either John Rice or
           David Purchon for reading and safe keeping.  John Hendley was to carry
           this out.

28.4.89.   A copy of David Moore's statement of this involvements at Hillsborough
           was given to David Purchon for his perusal.  Later David Bird called in
           and took a copy for his information.

           Liz Bashforth visited this Department and interviewed both Paul Jackson
           and myself on involvements of various staff in the past.   Paul
           authorised release of David Moore's report to Liz.    Informed Liz that I
           had been only involved since 15th April, 1989 but Paul gave dates of his
           visits to Hillsborough and discussed Department involvements.    I gave
           her the names of John Bat ley, David Bird, Chris Reed, John Rice and
           David Purchon as the other officers with any involvement.   Paul wanted
           Liz to take a copy of his initial recommendations.   David Moore
           discussed his involvement with Liz and general departmental
           involvement.
                                            -   12   -




          Liz was provided with a copy of David Moore's report and a copy of the
          first seven pages of my investigation notes.   On reading the initial
          recommendations of Paul Jackson's she did not require a copy.

 2.5.89   Received from John Hendley six rolls of plans supplied by David Bownes
          ot Hillsborough.

          Memos to John Batley, David Bird and Brian Platts regarding past
          involvements drafted, to be sent on Director's signature.



3.5.89    10.00 a.m.  Supt. Fancott, Wet Midlands Inquiry Team, telephoned re
          Safety in Sports Grounds Certificate and my involvement.  Advised him of
          our department structure and advised him to contact J.N. Rice to arrange
          interviews.

          Informed D.W. Purchon of 'phone call.  He will inform Liz Bashforth
          (Admin. & Legal).   D.W. Purchon confirmed he had checked with Mark
          Webster and interviews with Police should be carried out on individual
          arrangements and access to files (copies also) should be open.

          Meeting arranged between D.W. Purchon, Supt. Fancott and myself for
          4.00 p.m.

          Spoke to Brian Platts re written brief of his involvement and on
          discussing with his Senior, Rod Naylor, Brian is to work for half a day
          on Thursday, 4th May, 1989, on this matter.




          MMGADP (MRM)
          2.5.89.
