/■?




      ■
STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS ROSEVEAR
POLICE CONSTABLE 808
OPERATIONS DIVISION


Since 10 February 1986 I have been the Force Football Liaison and Major
Events Manpower Officer attached to the Operations Division at Police
Headquarters, Snig Hill, Sheffield.

On Saturday, 15 April 1989, I commenced duty at Police Headquarters at
7.30 am and, following a period of clerical duty and dealing with telephone
calls regarding the Semi-Final and other matters, I attended the North
Stand of Hillsborough Stadium at 10.00 am along with other officers for
briefing. Following the briefing by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield,
I attended at the South Yorkshire Police sports conplex at Niagara ground,
Sheffield, where I rendezvoused with Superintendent Marsh. My original
duties were to work with serial 64 but following the arrival of
Superintendent Marsh at Operations Division about two weeks before the
Semi-Final I was assigned to act as Superintendent Marsh’s aide.

From approximately 11.30 am to 2.00 pm with Superintendent Marsh I
patrolled the areas inside and outside the ground pointing out to him key
features in relation to policing a Semi-Final at Hillsborough Stadium.
We walked in the areas used by Nottingham Forest and Liverpool fans and
my general view was that both sets of fans were orderly and good humoured.
Fans were very much in evidence at both ends of the ground but neither
end was crowded.

At 2.00 pm approximately Superintendent Marsh and I attended the mobile
canteen near the gymnasium and at 2.45 pm approximately went to stand at
the corner of the North Stand where the disabled enclosure is. I noticed
that the terraces were now filling quickly although there was still plenty
of room in the spion kop and on the outer ends of the Leppings Lane end.
The two centre pens of the Leppings Lane end did however appear to be quite
full, much fuller than the outer pens. I was not in possession of a radio
and because of the general noise in the stadium I was unable to hear
Superintendent Marsh’s. Mr Marsh did however keep relaying to me messages
he could hear. He told me that there was some sort of problem with numbers
at the Leppings Lane end and that a delayed kick-off had been requested.
He then told me that the gates had been opened. It was obvious that the
kick off had not been delayed because the teams were now on the pitch and
a few minutes later the game kicked off. Soon after I noticed people
climbing over the barrier in the centre behind the goal onto the playing
area and others being assisted to climb into the seated area above at the
Leppings Lane end. I saw officers being deployed from the gymnasium area
passing in front of me and towards the Leppings Lane end and all the time
more and more people were spilling onto the playing area at that end but
I could not work out why they were not boisterous or aggressive as in a
normal pitch invasion. I saw Superintendent Greenwood run onto the pitch
and speak to the referee who in turn cleared
                                                                              (   5^

-   2   -




the pitch of players. The playing area at that end was now a mass of
people and I went down towards that end to observe. Fans were wandering
about all over the place and hostility was building up between the fans
on the pitch and those remaining in the stands and spion kop. I realised
there were problems with the crowd at the Leppings Lane end and I made
my way further towards the barrier fencing. As I did so I became aware
of persons suffering minor injury, some very distressed, fighting for their
breath, some were hysterical, some very abusive to me, other officers and
their own fans in the North Stand. People were laying on the ground being
attended by police officers and other fans giving heart massage and
artificial respiration. Some appeared dead at the barriers, lots of people
on the pitch side were leaning over the top and assisting people over. -
The gates were open and people many deep were trying to get out through
the tanglement of bodies around the gates. A lot of people were on the
pitch side trying to assist them. I could see people lying on the ground
on the terrace but no-one was able to get to them although they appeared
dead. Everything that could be done was being done and I assisted a group
of police and fans to carry a dead person to the gymnasium.

On returning to the pitch I heard over the PA system that the game was
to be abandoned and I went to Leppings Lane and assisted in clearing that
end of spectators. Once clear I returned to the gymnasium area and
assisted to segregate observers from those with a job to do. Many of the
casual observers were abusive towards police and others and on one occasion
I saw a fight break out among themselves. It was sometime after 5.00 pm
that I left Hillsborough for Headquarters where I remained on duty
assisting senior officers and providing food for officers until
9.30 pm.
