                                                                                                      MIR, i
                                                                                                                 C&P'                                      C;


It HER DOCUMENT FORM                                 D ate an d tim e raised
                                                                                        37     It 181                   N um ber



"itle
                                   k       f-A- L n u r t r h            Q A fiJ -                                          ^


Receiver's instructions - urg ent action -Xei/No
                                                              / L ^At oh---------
                                                             f\
                                                                             4> G>/-
                                                                                   —
                                                                                        '                   "     I
                                                                                                                                ^“ “ ° ccc^RE   i
                                                                                                                                            eceiv e

                                                                                  Ldxis                          f^A    •




                                                                                                                                              (pdexer'
 ocu m en t registered/indexed as indicated

vjo(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                                        Statement Reader
I
Statem ent reader's instructions


                                                                                                                                              Indexer

pdexed as indicated

|io(s) o f a c tio n ! raised

(Examined;* lu r th e r action to be taken




                                                                                                                                          s   Indexer
f u r th e r action No(s)

    h S h sa tis^ e d ^ lJ actions raised Office Manager to endorse o th e r D ocum en t Master N um ber F orm
                    LETTERS FROM GENERAL PUBLIC




          From the many letters that we have received from the
general public to date the following is a summary of some of the
comments contained therein

 1.   CUP - Ribbons to be different, i.e. black, - 1 letter.

 2.   DON'T PROCEED - As at the evening of 24th April some 60
      were suggesting we should not proceed.

 3.   CHANGE NAME OF CUP - 3 letters

 4.   NO FENCING - 11 letters.

 5.   ALL SEATER   - 7 letters

 6.   NO FENCING   AND ALL SEATER - 1 letter

 7.   DELAY CUP/SPONSORED WALK OR RUN - 1 letter.

 8.   PROCEED - Money to go to fund - approximately 50 letters.

 9.   CHANGE FENCING - 17 letters.

10.   CHANGE ENTRANCE/EXIT - 3 letters.

11.   DELAY KICK-OFF - 3 letters.

12.   BEREAVED TO DECIDE - 1 letter.

13.   POSTPONE - 4 letters.

14.   CHANGE CRUSH BARRIERS - 3 letters.

15.   ADMITTED WITHOUT TICKETS - 4 letters.

16.   GROUNDS TO   BE ALTERED - 4 letters.

17.   BLAME ON FANS - 1 letter.

18.   REFERENCE TO WEMBLEY STADIUM CONDITIONS - 3 letters.

19.   WRONG VENUE - 2 letters.

20.   OFFER OF DOCTORS FOR FUTURE MATCHES - 1 letter.

21.   REFERENCE TO LUTON   V .   MILLWALL MATCH SOME 3 OR 4 YEARS AGO
       - 1 letter.

22.   REFERENCE TO SEMI FINAL IN 1981 -      2 letters.

23.   NOT ALL SEATER STADIA - 1 letter.

24.   IMPROVED STEWARDING - 1 letter.
25.   REFERENCE TO AN EXCESS AMOUNT OF ALCOHOL CONSUMED
      - 3 letters.

26.   ONE OFFER TO PLAY CUP FINAL IN AUSTRALIA!

27    COMPLAINTS REGARDING JACQUES GEORGES - 7 letters.

28.   VARIOUS COMPLAINTS WITH REGARD TO THE MANNER IN WHICH
      THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION ALLOCATES TICKETS FOR THESE
      MATCHES.

29.   ONE LETTER OF COMPLAINT REFERENCE MR. SEPP BLATTER'S
      COMMENTS.




PFS/bc/B:499
24.4.89
                         THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                     LIMITED
                                                     Founded 1H63
                                      Patron. H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                    President: H . R . H . T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                          Chairman: F. A. M l L L l C H l P
                                                                                           Phone: 01 -402 7151/262 4542
   Chief Executive:                                                                               Telex: 261110
R. H. G.    K e l l y f c is                                                                 Facsimile: 01-402 0486



                               16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
                                                   Your Ref:
                                                                                          21st April, 1989
 Our Ref:           PFS/JMC/14



 ALL MEMBERS OF COUNCIL WHO ATTENDED THE FA CUP SEMI FINAL
 AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY, ON 15TH APRIL 1989



  PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL



  Dear Sirs,
  Our solicitors, Freshfield, have requested that all those
  Council Members who attended the above Semi Final,
  Liverpool V Nottingham Forest, should submit a report
  including any information which you may consider
  relevant, i. e. timings, any personal comments that were
  made to you and your own observations.

  I would stress that at this stage these reports will be
  merely to provide further background to the solicitors
  and if it is felt that any of the information received
  should be included in any presentation to the enquiry,
  you will be contacted and a statement will be prepared
  for your approval.

  This information is required as soon as possible.

  In the event you did not attend the match but obtained
  tickets for somebody else who has any relevant comments,
  we shall be pleased to receive these.

  Your assistance in this matter is appreciated.

  Yours faithfully


                                                                                  c.c.    Freshfields
  /6hi eft/Executive




                                    Registered Office M Lancasier Gale. L ondon W2 JZ-W
                                    Incorporated in London Registration N um ber 777V7
                                                                          10




                        MEM O R A H D P H

TO : Those Members of Staff who attended    ^        **0M
     the P. A. Cup Seal-Final at Hillsborough
     or who purchased ticket* for fwily ox
     friends.                        . .


                                                     lSth APRIL,   1989
PPS/SKC/815




        F. A. C u p Semi-Final - Liverpool v. Nottingham Forest
                        Saturday. 15th April. 1989
      If you attended the above match it would be appreciated if you
would prepare a brief report of your visit including any events you
wish to highlight.
      If y o u did not attend personally but purchased tickets for
family or friends and received observations from them, would you
please put these on paper and pass them to me.




                                                HI
COUNCIL MEMBERS - PURCHASE TICKETS    (All £12 tickets at Leppings Lane end)



                           £14       £12     £10        £6

                             4
                             2                 9         7
                             6         4
                                       2
                                       4
                                                2
                             2         4
                             4         6
                                                3


                                                6
                             3
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             2
                             2
                             3
                                                    6
                                                    5
                             8
                             2
                                      13
                             4
                             4         2
                            10        10
                             2
                             8                          11
                             3
                            10        10        10
                             4                           8*
                                       6            8

* Indicates Leppings Lane terrace
COUNCIL MEMBERS - COMPLIMENTARY TICKETS
FA CHALLENGE CUP - SEMI-FINAL
AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC
15 APRIL 1989

COMPLIMENTARY            PURCHASE
                             THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
   i                         _________________________

                             COMPETITIONS DEPARTMENT


 FA CHALLENGE CUP SEMI-FINAL - TIE AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC - APRIL 15 1989

                        DIRECTORS BOX - TICKET ALLOCATION


FA COUNCIL MEMBERS

W T ANNABLE, (1967)
(Vice-President)(Nottinghamshire FA

M M ARMSTRONG, (1984)
(Huntingdonshire FA)
A W BRETT, (1975)
(Shropshire FA)
>E A BROWN, (1959)
 (Life Vice-President)(Suffolk FA)

   E CHAPPELL, (1980)
^(Lincolnshire FA)
F HANNAH, (1979)
(Manchester FA)
C JONES, (1982)
(UAU FA)
L J REW, (1986)
(Div 8)(Bristol City FC)
P KIRBY, (1987)
(New Zealand)
 k D McMULLEN,MBE, (1954)
 (Life Vice-President)
 (Bedfordshire FA)

« PADGET, (1976)
(East Riding FA)
 E M PARRY, (1987)
 <Wiltshire FA)
 F J PEART, (1970)
 (Vice-President)(Wiltshire FA)

 5 A RUDD, (1967)
 (Life Vice-President)(Liverpool F/
[j M RYDER, (1973)
I(Cornwall FA)
Is SEYMOUR, (1978)
 (Northumberland FA)
I
    L SMART, (1969)
    (Vice-President)(Swindon Town FC)

    F D TERRY, (1982)
i   (North Riding FA)
      C THOMAS, (1973)
    (Durham FA)
t
    G THOMPSON, (1979)
    (Sheffield & Hallamshire FA)

    L UNDERWOOD, (1978)
    (Northamptonshire FA)
    R T VAUDRY, (1973)
    (Canada)
    J J WATERALL, (1985)
    (Nottinghamshire FA)

    L G WEBB, (1966)
    (Life Vice-President)
    (Somerset & Avon(South) FA)
    N WHITE,FSCA, (1976)
    (Div 3)(Liverpool FC)
    R WRAGG,F.INST,BM,FIOR, (1964)
    (Life Vice-President)
    (Sheffield United FC)

    FA OFFICIALS

    R H G KELLY                         c/o The Football Association, 16 Lancaster
    Chief Executive                     Gate, London, W2 3LW.

    G KIRTON                            c/o The Football Association, 16 Lancaster
    Head of External Affairs            Gate, London, W2 3LW.


    R W ROBSON                          c/o The Football Association, 16 Lancaster
    England Team Manager                Gate, London, W2 3LW.
 FA GUESTS

 A E EVANS                                    Secretary, Football Association of Wales,
                                              Plymouth Chambers, 3 Westgate Street,
                                              Cardiff, South Glamorgan, CF1 1JF.

* R FAULKNER                                  Deputy Chairman, The Football Trust,
                                              2nd Floor, Walkden House, 10 Melton Street,
                                              London, NW1 2EJ.

 A WILLIAMSON                                 Assistant Secretary, The Football League,
                                              Lytham St Annes, Lancashire, FY8 1JG.

 D HOWELL, MP                                 House of Commons, London, SW1.

 COCA COLA                                    Coca-Cola Schweppes Beverages Ltd.,
 tCnanhlno   S r h p m fl S p o n s o r s )   Charter House, Charter Place, Uxbridge,
                                              Middlesex, UB8 1EZ.



 GENERAL MOTORS                                                                Cheshire.
 (School Sponsors)



 CLUBS

 LIVERPOOL FC                                 Directors   -   24
                                              Guests      -    6

 NOTTINGHAM FOREST FC                         Directors   -   24
                                              Guests      -    6

 SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY                          Directors   -   12
                                              Guests      -    6




  SRC/SF/4
  27/04/89
F. A. CHALLENGE CUP - SEMI FINAL TIE


LIVERPOOL -V- NOTTINGHAM FOREST
At:   Hillsborough


Referee:    R. S. Lewis,
               Surrey.


Linesmen:


            M. J. Brandwood,
               Staffs.


Reserve
Official: 1
          --------------
                     N. Yorks.
                           NOTE FOR FRESHFIELDS




Semi-Final8

      I first attended a Semi-Final in an official capacity for
The Football Association in 1972, when I was head of the
Competitions Department.  Since then, I have attended a
Semi-Final every year, except 1984, when I was out of the country
on other business.  In 1987, I attended both Semi-Finals.   On
several occasions, I have attended F. A. Cup Semi-Final replays.


      In 1973, Adrian Titcombe joined The Football Association
and took over the Competitions Department.   In the early 1980s,
             became Head of the Department, directly responsible
to Adrian Titcombe.   Since 1973, it has been the usual practice
for Adrian Titcombe to go to one Semi-Final and for me to go to
the other.                     my Press Assistant, goes to the
Semi-Final that I do not go to.   During my time at The Football
Association, it has been the practice for the General Secretary
to go to one Semi-Final and for his Deputy to go to the other.
Since Dickie Bird's heart-attack in 1985, Adrian has aimed to go
to the Semi-Final that the General Secretary did not attend.    I
became F.A. Press Officer in 1977.   I became Commercial Manager
in 1981.   Until 1977, my duties at the games consisted of:

      1.    Headle spare tickets
      2.    Deal with V. I. P. arrangements
      3.    Be available to assist Club Secretary with any
            problems relating to game he might need to consult
            on.
      4.    Be available to assist General Secretary of F.A. „
            or his deputy.                                  .
      5.    Communicate with Referee on behalf of F.A.  Deliver
            match balls to him.

      Since 1977, I have also dealt with general media problems
and since 1981 with certain commercial considerations.  These
ofter include:


      a.    Press
            Briefing photographers and tv about access to
            dressing rooms; issuing bibs to photographers if
            club unable to do so; handling press conference
            and media interviews after match.


       b.     Commercial
              Resolving differences between club commercial
              manager and photographers over obscured perimeter
              advertising boards.
        It is worth outlining the process by which the 1987 F.A.
Cup Semi-Final kick-offs were delayed. I was not involved in the
decision at Villa Park on Saturday 11th April. I understand that
the decision was conveyed by the Police and that the managers of
both teams were advised. As to the match at Hillsborough on
Sunday 12th April, I was standing in the tunnel, I believe some
15 minutes before the scheduled kick-off time, with Ted Croker,
when a Senior Police Officer asked if we could have a delay,
because of heavy traffic coming to the ground. I believe he
requested half-an-hour. I believe Mr. Croker agreed, then
advised the two clubs. As a matter of courtesy, I informed
I. T. V. who were due to broadcast the entire match. I am certain
that no F.A. official would, in any circumstances, refuse a
request for a delay from the police.




Glen Kirton
24. 4. 89
         LIVERPOOL      v.   NOTTINGHAM FOREST   -   15TH APRIL 1989



        I travelled to Hillsborough on the morning of the match with

my son,                          and arrived at the ground at 10. 35 a. m. -



        I immediately made contact with Graham Mackrell the Club's

Chief Executive and handed to him, on behalf of the Competitions

Department, the few tickets that remained in our possession.             We

then went for a quick walk round the V. I. P. installation and the

dressing room area so that I could familiarise myself once more

with the layout of the ground.          We had a brief look at the pitch

at this stage.



        At 12 noon I went with             to the official lunch which

started late at around 12.45 p.m. and I left the lunch at around

2. 10 p. m.     I put           in the guest lounge and went with

              to see Ray Lewis in the referees room.       We stayed there

for no more than five minutes wishing the officials the best of

luck on behalf of The Football Association,                then returned, I

believe to the Board Room, and I stayed in the dressing room

area.


        At around 2. 40 p. m. I was on the perimeter track by the

player's tunnel with Graham Mackrell looking round the ground.

It was clearly nowhere near full at this stage.            Graham told me

that there were 20,000 still outside.            Calling to mind the 1987

semi-finals at Villa Park and Hillsborough when the kick-off of

both had been delayed at the request of the Police, I asked
Graham whether, on this occasion the Police wanted a delay.     His

answer was that they did not, because putting back the kick-off

produced all sorts of organisational problems at the end of the

game.    I would stress that at this stage I was completely unaware

of any danger to spectators and, to the best of my knowledge,

Graham Mackrell had also not been informed of any such danger.

At around this time I returned to the Guest Room and took

to his seat in the Director's Box, returning immediately to the

tunnel area.    I remained there until kick-off time, principally

because there was a great amount of press interest in Brian

Clough who had been banned from sitting on the bench for the rest

of the season but was allowed for this match to sit in the seats

immediately behind the substitutes bench.    I was in this area at

the time the players came onto the field, I believe the Liverpool

team first, followed around thirty seconds later by the

Nottingham Forest team.    Shortly before the kick-off, Brian

Clough came out and went immediately to his seat.     At this stage,

with the match about to kick-off I returned to my seat in the

Director's Box.



        Shortly after the start of the game I was aware of movement

amongst the spectators at the Leppings Lane end and my immediate

thought was that there was some form of hooligan disturbance,      as

the Police appeared to be attempting to contain a movement of

supporters.     I was aware at the same time that Liverpool were

attacking the Nottingham Forest goal and that an incident had

taken place in the Nottingham Forest goalmouth.            told me

that Peter Beardsley had hit the bar from a corner.      Nottingham

Forest then took the play down into the Liverpool half and I was

aware that the disturbance behind the goal at the Leppings Lane

end was becomming more serious with people coming over the fence
onto the perimeter and much Police activity.     A Police Officer

ran onto the pitch and waved to Ray Lewis to stop the game.          I

immediately went from the Director's Box to the pitch by the

player's tunnel and found Graham Kelly already there.      A lot of

people began to mill about the area.     There were Police Officers,

some supporters, photographers, St.     John Ambulance personnel and

the officials of both clubs.     Almost immediately Ray Lewis

brought the teams off the pitch.     I asked him how much of the

match had gone by.     He told me approximately six minutes.    At

this stage one youth ran from the Liverpool end of the ground and

stood in front of the Forest supporters on the Kop making obscene

gestures to them.     This evoked an angry response and, when the

youth was chased and brought to the ground by a Police Officer a

huge roar of approval went up from the Forest supporters.



     I found a Police Sergeant who was clearly under some

pressure, and asked him to put us in touch immediately with the

Police Officer in charge of the event for the purpose of

information.   At this stage John Smith, the Chairman of

Liverpool, began to make demands himself for The Football

Association to call the match off.     I explained to him that we

had requested advice from the Police as to whether or not the

match should be abandoned or suspended for a period.     It was at

about 3. 15 p.m.    that it became apparent to us for the first time

that there might well be fatalities.     Graham Kelly and I then

went immediately with Graham Mackrell to the Police Control Room

and spoke to the Officer in Charge, Chief Superintendent David

Duckenfield.   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield told us that a

gate had been forced and there had been an in-rush of Liverpool

supporters that had caused casulties.     He was not clear at that

stage as to how many dead and injured there were.     He stated that
in his view, the match must be abandoned, but that he did not

want such an announcement made for the moment as he had "a lot of

angry people” and he feared disturbances if such an announcement

was made.     He also wished to have time for the emergency vehicles

to clear away the casulties from the area.    We asked that we be

informed immediately an announcement could be made and left the

Control Room as it was extremely cramped.     I should remark that

it was clear to me from the scenes in front of me that many

people were dead and injured and whatever action was being taken

to help these people was haphazard.     I should also add that

Graham Kelly, who was recognised by the Liverpool supporters in

the Leppings Lane end was loudly abused by these supporters who

clearly felt that the accident was in some way the responsibility

of The Football Association.     Throughout the day, many Liverpool

supporters who passed within my hearing made the comment that

they blamed The Football Association's ticket allocation.



     On leaving the Control Room, Graham Kelly called a meeting

of all interested parties including representatives of the clubs,

the referee and the Police Commander.     The Police Commander

explained at this time that he had withheld the decision about an

abandonment as he felt that it might be necessary for security

reasons to have the match continued.     I spent much of the time

between the end of this meeting and 4. 00 p. m.   fending off

newsmen who were looking for comment.     I promised them that there

would be a full statement by The Football Association as soon as

the immediate needs of the situation had been dealt with.        At

4. 00 p. m.   approximately I was informed that Nottingham Forest

were becoming restless and threatening to leave the Stadium.

Graham Kelly went immediately to the dressing room to sort out

the situation and I went to the Control Room to ascertain at what
stage the final decision was likely to be made.     While I was in

the Control Room waiting to speak to the Commander, a uniformed
person whom I took to be a Fire Officer came in and asked for the

ambulance liaison man.     The Police Commander stated that he had

asked for one but had not been provided with one.       While I was

waiting, the decision was made that the match could now be

abandoned.   I left the Control Box to convey this information to

various interested parties, but before I could get back to the

Board Room area an announcement was made over the tanoy.             As I

recall the substance of this announcement was that the match had

been abandoned;   spectators were asked to stay where they were

for a few minutes and remain calm to allow the emergency services

to clear the casualties; and persons should hold their ticket

stubs pending an announcement of a possible replay.       The

announcement was greeted with a round of applause from the

supporters above and around me in the Main Stand.       I do not know

what the reaction of the supporters on the terraces was as I

could not see them from the position I was in.     Once all of the

relevant persons had been informed of the abandonment I began to

organise the passing of the necessary information on to the

media.   Graham Kelly conducted interviews with t.v., radio and

the written press.    At around this stage, I met Rogan Taylor,

Chairman of the F. S. A.   in the dressing room area.    He complained

to me in strong terms about the actions of the police.          In

particular, he repeated what I had overheard stated by several

supporters during the afternoon, which was that the gates had not

been forced but had been opened at the direction of the police

and that supporters had been admitted to the ground without

tickets being checked.
        I then gave my attention to attempting to reach people

outside the ground by telephone to inform them of what had

happened as we knew it and the action that was being taken.

                    assisted me with some telephone numbers in
attempting to reach Colin Moynihan.        I also spoke to

            «io was on Saturday phone duty for The Football

Association and who was being swamped by calls that he was unable

to give any meaningful answers to.      Among the calls he had

received was one from                 from Manchester United

concerning the possible replay on Wednesday.        It was decided by

Graham Kelly that the match could not take place and I asked

to pass this message on to                    I also asked him to

phone my wife             to let her know that both            and I

were safe.     The attention of the press was now turned to the

Police who, according to the press, had made no statement on the

situation.     At first a rumour spread that the Police Commander

was to give a conference in the old gymnasium at 6. 00 p. m.        This

was refuted by a Police Press Officer who knew nothing about any

such plans.     At about 6. 00 p. m. , a high ranking Police Officer

announced that there would be a Press Conference given by South

Yorkshire Police at the Central Police Station in town at 6. 45

p. m.    It was agreed that Graham Kelly would remain at the ground

and that I should attend the Press Conference.        It was also

decided and announced at some stage during the procedings that

The Football Association would be making no decisions on the

possible replay of the game in the next forty-eight hours, but

that a press conference would be held at Lancaster Gate at 3. 00

p.m.     the following day.   While driving to the Police Station, I

attempted to phone                   Ito ask him to open the office

for this conference.     There was no answer from The Football

Association.     Immediately afterwards,              managed to
contact me on my mobile phone and we agreed that she would

attempt to contact                  and that she would arrange for

the office to be opened at 9. 00 a. m. on Sunday morning.




     I attended the press conference which was given by the

Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Mr.     Peter Wright.     He was

half an hour late arriving and was clearly very ill-informed

about what had happened.     He announced that ninety-three were

dead, two hundred injured of which eighty-three had been

detained.     He said he could not say what was the cause of these

deaths.     He said there had been pressure on the outside

turnstiles by 3 - 4,000 people arriving no earlier than five

minutes before the kick-off.     He was not aware of any non-ticket

holders trying to get in.     He said that there was room in the

stand.    He then responded to some very aggressive questionning.

He said that a gate had been opened with Police permission, in

fact at Police direction, he knew who had opened the gate but he

was not able to divulge the name.     He said the gate had been

opened because of the danger to life outside the ground.        In

response to a question as to how many officers were on duty he

said eight hundred, of which fifteen were mounted officers

outside the ground.     He went on to refer to another gate which he

said had been shut to avoid crushing and that this gate had been

forced open.     After fifteen minutes or so he said he could answer

no further questions and attempts to elicit any more anwers from

the Police were resisted angrily by one of Mr.     Wright's

colleagues.
     At 7. 45 p. m. , I returned to Hillsborough with

    _____ of The Football League who had also been at the press




conference and briefed Graham Kelly on what had been said.   I

left Hillsborough at 8. 00 p. m. and collected my son who had been

taken to the home of Graham Mackrell by Graham Mackrell's

girlfriend.


     I drove back to London and arrived home at midnight.
                      REPORT ON THE HTTIfiBORQUGH TOflGEDY


I was seated in the Directors Box jin the middle of the Main Stand which was
approximately 100 yards from the incident.
I was not aware of anything untoward, although just prior to the match being*
stopped by a Policeman, I saw one or two Liverpool Supporters at the Liverpool
end climbing the perimeter fence.
This then developed with more people trying to get oyer and suddenly there was
such an excess of supporters on the pitch that a Policeman ran on to the pitch
and made the Referee step the match. Thereafter, I was aware that there was
still a lot of crushing. I did not realisethat people were still caiung in
frcm the back. People were still trying toget over the perimeter fence.
Then it became evident that there was a lotof crushing at the back of the
terracing and a lot of people were being hauled up to safety by people in the
stand above.
As the minutes went by, more people wanted to get out from the terracing
either by getting on to the pitch or by going upwards to the stands in order
to escape. After about 20 minutes, the pitch was flooded by people. There
were obviously problems since there were Policemen and Ambulances on the pitch
and people were being carried off on stretchers.
After about half an hour, a chap I didn't knew came into the Directors Box and
informed me that there had been 10 fatalities and that the match was to be
abandoned. However, he said there would not be an announcement for seme time
as the injured would be dealt with first. Shortly after this a drunk
Liverpool Supporter accused me of causing the situation so I went to the
Directors Room.
                                 M E M O R A N D U M


TO : Those Members of Staff who attended                                FROM :
     the F.A. Cup Semi-Final at Hillsborough
     or who purchased tickets for family or
     friends.


PFS/SKC/815                                                              18th APRIL,       1989




          F.A. Cup Semi-Final - Liverpool v. Nottingham Forest
                       Saturday, 15th April, 1989

      If you attended the above match it would be appreciated if you
would prepare a brief report of your visit including any events you
wish to highlight.
      If you did not attend personally but purchased tickets for
family or friends and received observations from them, would you
please put these on paper and pass them to me.




      /      jA S ^ ^    I(         *^ OHl C U JJU .

    ia j L z       ^                                                         , o r-      I^ d ju o i ,

   <AA 4 r X              -fti        F .A        ,                          H k       P. W . 6 A y O




    Oml                                                                 Ls        fa
    ,jL f i x                                 K/AjU~             cyO/vwZ,         cu-£ M          W      ,
                        C W w o                       e ( { jlA < - ,                     q t v ^ L ^ / ^
     h 9 0                rA /w s** j *.   ** —           '
                                                          s-x/iO».      /a 7Q d
                              M E M O R A N D U M



        FROM                                        TO :



        DATE s 28th APRIL 1989




         FA CUP SEMI FINAL    -   LIVERPOOL FC -V- NOTTINGHAM FOREST FC
                             SATURDAY 15th APRIL 1989



Further to you memorandum dated 18th April 1989 concerning the above,
there is probably very little that I can add that has not been stated
already, however I list below a few observations that I remember of
the day :-
       a. When I arrived at the ground at approx 2. 10pm I was
       unable to gain access to the official car park due to
       the number of supporters waiting to enter the ground at
       the kop end. These were Notts Forest supporters who were
       waiting in an orderley fashion.
        b. After finding somewhere to park we returned to the
        ground and approached the South Stand entrance.  The entrance
        was near to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, and there
        was certainly a lot of people moving towards that end of the
        ground, and there was an uneasy feeling which I certainly
        noticed.
        c. After gaining admittance to the    ground at approx 2. 45pm
        I did hear a PA announcement asking   people outside of the
        ground to be patient and they would   all be allowed in. I
        assume by "all" they did mean those   with tickets. This would
        be at about 2. 50pm.
        d. As we took our seats it was very clear that the centre
        paddock at the Leppings Lane end of the ground was very tightly
        packed. Whereas normally on terracing you can see heads and
        shoulders, it seemed that all I could see was literally the
        hair of the people standing there.
        e. When the match was abandoned, I and those around me were
        unaware of the tragedy that was unfolding before our eyes. In
        retrospect I felt that the entire scene events was handled
        very badly indeed. I do not normally criticise the Police
        but they definetly appeared to be out of touch with what was
        happening that day.
       f. It was approx an hour before any sort of announcement was
       made over the PA system. At the time the rescue was going
       on on the pitch, there were pockets of ill feeling spreading
       around the ground, even in the "best" seats, as people were
       unaware of the seriousness of the situation. A simple
       message, not necessarily telling the whole story would, I
       am sure have lessened the tension. I eventually saw a senior
       police officer walking around making announcements through
       a loud hailer! !

        I hope the above comments are of some use to you, but they
do not portray the horror of the scene, which at times I can still
see clearly in my mind, and which reduced my son to total silence for
well over two hours, which for him, an out and out chatterbox, showed
the extent of the tragedy that he had witnessed.
                                              Gwent Ambulance Service
                                  Headquarters: Mill Street, Caerleon, New port, G went. NP6 1XG
                                                                                        Administration: 0633 421521
                                                                                               Operations: 0633 420283
                                         All c o rre s p o n d e n c e sh o u ld be a d d r e s s e d to: Chief A m b u la n c e Officer



Our ref    LP/LMK                                 Your ref                                                                        Date
                                                                                                                  21 April 1989

 Mr R H G Kelly
 Chief Executive
 Football Association
 16 Lancaster Gate
 LONDON W2

 Dear Mr Kelly

 I enclose a copy of a letter to the Right Honourable Mrs M Thatcher, Prime
 Minister, following the football disaster at Hillsborough, Sheffield, on
 Saturday 15 April, 1989.

 The letter is self explanatory, but I am requesting that you use your good
 offices to bring to the attention of your committee my personal objectives
 following the tradegy.

 1.       There was a total lack of professional resources to treat casualties
          on site at the disaster.

 2.       No equipment or ambulance aid was available within the confines of                                                               the
           stadium grounds.

 3.       It appeared, following the injuries to spectators, that no control or
           leadership at the site of the disaster was established.

          Press reports have indicated that only two ambulance vehicles were
          available, and sited-outside the ground.

 I realise that the events which occured, and the circumstances involved
 produced a far from manageable scenario. Under these circumstances, with
 a crowd of on-lookers of over 50,000 strong, the presence of professional
 officers to over-see the evacuation and treatment of casualties would
 still have presented a very arduous and difficult task.

 Therefore, as outlined in my letter to the Prime Minister, I think it
 essential that both the Health Minister and your committee consider, that
 events, which involve a large number of spectators should be attended by
 the professional Ambulance Service, with sufficient staff resources and
 equipment located strategically to attend a group of injured people at a
 minutes notice.

 I must emphasis that the comments in this letter are my own personal ones,
 but I would request that you closely consider the content, and I would
 welcome your comments.

  Yours faithfully




  uniei    A m p u la n c e   Officer
                                   Gwent Ambulance Service
                      Headquarters: Mill Street, Caerleon, N ew port, G w ent. NP6 1XG
                                                                            Administration: 0633 421521
                                                                                  Operations: 0633 420283
                              All c o rre s p o n d e n c e should be a d d r e s s e d to: Chief A m b u la n c e Officer.


Our ref   LP /LM K                     Y our ref                                                                     Date
                                                                                                      19 April 1989

The Right Honourable Mrs M Thatcher
Prime Minister
10 Downing Street
Whitehall
LONDON

Dear Prime Minister

I am saddened by the disaster which occured at Sheffield last Saturday.
Under the circumstances the treatment afforded the casualties was carried
out by volunteers and members of the public, and without wishing to
comment on the value of such treatment I feel that the attendance of
professional staff would greatly enhance the availability of specialist
treatment.

There should be a statutory obligation for the professional ambulance
service to provide resources to treat casualties at a minutes notice,
both inside and outside the premises.

Additionally the ambulance service should carry out training for football
stadium staff in basic life support resuscitation techniques. My own
service regularly train junior doctors, nurses and member’s of the public
in such techniques, throughout the year at a minimal cost to the Health
Service.

I can well understand the difficulties in reaching conclusions following
such a disaster by sifting through the evidence of the enquiry.

I have not had the opportunity to study the final report following the
Bradford Football Fire Disaster, but note that no recommendations or
legislation was forthcoming regarding the attendance and treatment of
casualties should such a disaster occur again.

I feel it is essential that this matter is brought to the attention of
the appropriate Health Service Minister. I am writing a separate' letter
to the Chairman of the Football Association.

The proposals outlined in this letter are my own personal thoughts, but
I will ensure that the matter is brought to the attention of both the
Regional Ambulance Officers’ Committee and the Secretary of the Association
of Chief Ambulance Officers*.

Yours faithfully




 Chief Ambulance Officer
                                ME MO      R A N D O M




                                                            FROM:
TO:



                                                            DATE:    3rd May 1989
REF:       [jAS/189




FA Cup Semi-Final
Liverpool —v— Notts Forest
H i l l s b o r o u g h - Saturday 15th April 1989


 I have only t.o points I wish to -ake with regard to the tragic events
 at the above fixture.

 1.    Several Liverpool supporters asked me personally if they could buy
       tickets outside the ground.

 2.    »hen ! too, „y seat in      th e   Main^t,^at^.20

       o v e r ' t L T u t s I d e f e n c e s V o m the Iparsely populated side sections of
       C ^ g s Lane into what seemed to be an already crow e cent r . ^
       section of the Leppings Lane.          No attempt was
       supporters climbing over.
                        M B M O R A N D P M




TO:                                      FROM:


REF:   PFS/bc/517                        DATE:   2nd May, 1989




         Attached herewith is a copy of a letter we have received
from the Queen's Office at Buckingham Palace.

         You will see that the correspondent refers to the
security fence produced in France. This has been referred to on
a few occasions.   Is it possible to ascertain exactly where it
is in use at the present time and for how long it has been there
and how it actually works and whether the French F.A. believe it
is effective.
           I believe the Solicitors would find this information
helpful.




EMC:
            B U C K IN G H A M   PA LA C E



                           26th April, 1989



Dear Miss
    I am commanded by The Queen to thank
you for your letter of 18th April about
the recent disaster at Hillsborough
Football Ground. Her Majesty appreciated
your thoughtfulness in writing as you did
about the security fence which is
produced in France and has directed me to
forward your letter to the Football
Association so that they may know of your
approach to her.
                Yours sincerely,




                 (KENNETH SCOTT)




M is s
                                              trance
                                                |fr      o i+       i W


             fTlaje^Wj j

                             ,.iu\                                                      3 w-j a o b o m
                             <Yl. n a * n £ v/)

,*                               anc)     aV              mcm€                ^             1 |0 '*3
in     f r an c£         uuU x       0, i ^ n d n d

                             u)e. 3CUO W e               SUe^eU                   W r c r

 ^     ACU           TV/        cUann€I               S’ ^      o         b    ^        a   ^     q

 V U M L f o r V <* f r C A C ^ r r N a n                                 ,                            .
 S p o \c€            a \ooo\- cua                      V-WaV Wa Wa-o p&Veiakc)
     £ or        a    ^erice-     V^clV- to m a - c U               up        o|- p a n e l s

     v W V                      e U c l r r o * ^ 16^ - ( c x           manualtj                Hve.r€

     IS     ck       |paa)ir coV-).
                                               pnce          |or        Viup (|-e.ric£_ uja/^

     quol-ed           a>       cu-cc^cJ                        o oo              ^ei^Ulnj Hvoo».id);

      W          a     n o r^ a i.     ? iy e >        o \-a < iio n " .
                                     jy^ ^                   o t u . ^ VW g.\t V\€. U o .^
      CtrAW c U c > o o r ^ o o V b a U .                       ftsSOCi^Kew                     «trO
      LO'VI-------         I                                                        .
                   i   \ vl .       ^ /                             z'.       *£> Alii .
      Hia>- W               Wa_c> nV * - e c . € * c i              ^
                                         vje.         U-v.oo<iWV              V W r         ^ou

      • u j o o l o l - U t V-O k n o w                      VVaV             VW>/> [t '
                                                                                                  ?■ T 0.
* * > 5    CvAC> ^               yse ^
          T U       s/A*} o b s t a c k      io            u )W « u jo o
 Ofen     V^i-o ^ n c e v V             ryvolcU colU p«3ss(b)^
 V ic u o -e ^       b-e o V o p f > « < & . 3 d V M jW a V l a
 more       iwf>©r+a*lr           a.    FooHoclU           r*akU     o r

 (K   Uor^c*-/'        UjpC ?

                  "Tha^      i^ o o    [or r - e o A ^ g    ^      l-£-tf"e/


                 u^ p u r   Igc^ocl       oe^Q-A ^


                                            (M iss)


                                                  (miss)     .
Enclosed, copy of Sport* Speak   I
refer to.


                           a s -.Ffvt:

                             0 3. MN I?                                   West loski,

                                                             April 28th, 1989.

 Dear Sir,

                      Just like virtually the whole of the nation, ay heart
goes out to the families who have lost their loved ones in the Hillsborough
disaster. I Know from experience, time does not heal, you simply have to
learn to live with your grief and words of sorrow are merely eold comfort.

                       Therefore I write to you, not knowing the cause of the
disaster, nor blaming any-one, but merely to suggest what^ after hoars of
wondering and worrying, in m;.- opinion, for what it is worth, a fitting
punishment for the, pardon me I cannot call them fans, fools is a more
appropriate adjective, when they are seen to be making trouble, sort them out
and line them up for the only thing that will hurt them. Obviously they
are totally ignorant, therefore their mentality is too low to be hurt and the
only hurt they can suffer is physical. Even a hooligan would not like hurting.
Yes its the ol* old story, bring back the ’cat’ A few strokes of a whip would
make them smart for a while, and I am sure, hurt their pride at being hit
themselves. No I an not merciless, on the contrary, being a great lover and
follower of all sports, I wish to be able to continue watching sport and not
disgusting show offs that will conthue their vile acts until someone,somewhere
decides a fitting punishment. Mounted police, who unfortunately appear to be
needed at almost every grbund, armed with a whip/ and instructed to use it in
order to keep the peace, would, I am quite sure, sort the boys from the men.

                      I have just learnt of the gaol sentence on the Liverpool
supporters at the Eesle Stadium but I fear this will breed bitterness into them
and tney will return to take revenge at it being 'them' that were sorted out.

                      This week when I read the Sports Speak in our Calderdale
lews I was speechless. I could have believed I had written it myself as it
vas more or less word for word what I thought about the terrible happenings
and worse still the very last paragraph, which unfortunately, is again exactly
what I think. A week after such a shattering tragedy and yet be they Veit Ham
®r Millwall supporters, to be armed with knuckle dusters and even a bottle of
ammonia amongst their armoury, doesn't appear to a* to have reached them. This
being the ease, a horrific disaster means nothing to them.

    ... .              Might I urge you to think again and please think deeply
on this ftssue. These hooligans have no interest whatsoever la football or
any aport, they are possessed by evil thoughts and deeds and a good whipping
aajrb* just bring them to a aore eivilised way of life and allow those who
without*bei4 *n°danger*ofetheir8liveii?      enjoy * gfUDe' whatever it aav be
                                          Yours faitnfullv.
                                  SPORTS SPEAK                                                         •yJOHN OKAY
   A WEEK of moui        mourning has gone on at Anfidd and            tond rioting and viofcace that only Mopped Atm of
           ....................ini t e wake of * e terrible I-----
  / \ Hillsborough                                                       iM M dm lbby t ■tirad e.
x m .th a t ww 95peq       people em bed to d o * on the i                I have seen Leeds United's, so-called fens climb per-
^ it tem ces.                                                          uneser fencing like monkeys 10 gel at the opposition. I
   A ■"«>«« people asade Lfcwpool't grosmda Shrine                     have seen bagdes ftat are a -macabre reminder of
to the dead *ui the pitch and terraces were ooveredwah                 Munich 1958 wore in provocation of M tnrhrarr
flowers, scarves and other mementoes.                              _   United followers.                                      .
   While having evwy sympathy «*h die rekcvesor                           W ta chancc have * e administrators or the police m
the dead and injured and being moved to lean while                     * e fece of such (h a g n tif behaviour and such d m -
watching the scenes unfold on television, one thing sur-               gard for every moral attitude which was once the hall-
priaes me. How cane tU football hooliganism has                        HBrk of sport in this country
suddenly disappeared from everyooe’s minds!                            I was lucky enough to get nckets for a Semi-Final in the
   So aooo we aeem to have fagoaen the sight dr                         1960s Use game was between a Manchester United
mifiiwtinc                             each otbcT) n d nyoM who        team thttinc& ded Bobby Chariton and Dennis Law and
got in their way. So aooo we forget the cross-Channel                  a Tottenham Hotspur team that had Jimmy Greaves
ferries that had to tu n back because the captain feared               — I m i not inre of the attendance figure but it was sure
 for the lives of his crew. So soon we forget the horrrfic             to be in f* " ” of last Saturday's ill-feted game. There
 facial scars sustained of a pub!*: house landlord who                  was no fencing, no one caused any trouble and the
 was               and slMbed by so-calledLoadoo football              police were hardly in evidence. Supporter* of each side
                                                                       qppredamd the skills of both teams and it was one of the
                                                                       best football memories that I retain
   Al the ead of the day. we can blame the police, the                    However, football as an enjoyable sporting occasion
Football League, the Football Association, the adminu-                        for me when I was abused by Merseyside fens at
tm ioo at Hillsborough or whoever else occurs, for                      Wembley Stadium who drowned out the singing of
these terrible deaths but in 119 opinion the Name lies in                ‘Abide With M e", preferring instead to abuse with
one place
   Every football supporter who has ever nia 0 0 to the                   h finally         when I had to suffer 90 minutes of
pitch, has ever showed abuse at an opposing fan, or                                        a coloured player at s match at Elland
urinated in the street, or wrecked a pub. or earned a                                      1 90 MINUTES of a non-sup tirade of
 weapon, or            an obscene song, or smashed a
 train/or hurled a brick at a conch, or spat on a car                     So. let’s get rid of some of the hypocrisy and lay the
 should have thoee 95 deaths on their conscience
   And, while Liverpool fans may not have caused this                   A il tragic incident,
accident directly, ta n are, by no means, hly-white                    jwB
 when it come to having their frir share of thuggery                      tiooal sponanddragged it intothegutter
among the followers. I have seen them in action!                          Let’s hope that it wB bring to an end hooliganism
   Why is it that fences were erected? Why is a police                                   “ sporting
                                                                        aw) thuggery at all sporting orcasiom and a return to
 presence, in excess, of 3,000 needed at, what should be                the enjoyment tftat m  y on
                                                                                            they  once provided for countless
and once was an afternoon of s t rrtsinmrnt?
    What occurred at Hillsborough was an accident wait­                  ~Sadiy, the events at last Saturday's W es Ham v Mil
 ing to happen and k is a wander that it has taken to                   wail game give * e nm»rsa»on that a hope of returning
 long. Uke m ay football supporters I have seen at first                toheoer days is justpie in dK sky.
                                                                           1
       All^occer
       \ fans
      A REQUIEM meeting will be


                                          t
      beM « the Brecknock Hotel.
      King William St, Adelaide SA.
      this Friday April 21 at 5.J0pm
      follow ing the tragedy at
      Hillsborough last Saturday.
         A collection will be taken for
                                                    \0 — —

\     an in memoriam notice to be
      placed in the Uvopool Echo.4
         Further details a n available
      from either Joe Williams or Mike
      Furbcr on 08 212 4925.
         Header! wishing to make a
      donation to the disaster appeal
    . which has been
                  Men let
                       set up can.aend
                                          i
                                          .
      donations to:                       I                                               26th April 1989.

     The Manager.
     The Football A ssociation,
     16 Lancaster Gate,
     LONDON W23.LW.

     Dear S i r ,
     F i r s t l y may I add my s in c e r e condolences to the Soccer Federation f o r the
     re c e n t tragedy a t Hillsborough Soccer Stadium, along with the many t h a t you
     have received alre ad y.

     Many thoughts and accusations have been spoken and w r i t t e n over the p a s t
     few weeks in the media c i r c l e s and pub lic s e c t o r a l i k e , not a l l of them
     ac cu ra te may I add. Here in A u s t r a li a we have heard many version s and
     understandably so, the blame ( i f any i s to be given) cannot be l e v e l l e d
     a t any p a r t i c u l a r person or persons. I t i s a s i t u a t i o n l i k e " s h u t t i n g the
     s t a b l e door a f t e r the horse has b o l t e d " . Instead of dwelling on what has
     taken p la c e , we as n atio n s involved in any s p o r t must t r y to ensure t h a t
     i t does not happen again.

     I mayself am o r i g i n a l l y from the west country in England, and l i k e so
     many thousands of people here r e l y on our so ccer and s t i l l b a r r i c k f o r
     our home teams what ever country we o r i g i n a t e from.

     My suggestions which I have come up w ith , along with the many t h a t you have
     re ceiv e d , may i f a l l put t o g e th e r shed some l i g h t on the causes and may
     help you and your committee in t h e i r unthankful task to put an end to these
     awful t r a g e d i e s and allow s p o r t to continue to be played in the t r u e sense
     of sportsmanship and en te rtain m en t. While my suggestions are going backwards
     in time r a t h e r than p rogressin g, I think we may have to begin again.

      1. Have prov ision f o r t i c k e t s a l e s to be in d i f f e r e n t lo c a ti o n s in the
         c i t i e s p r i o r to the match, so t h a t no t i c k e t s w ill be a v a i l a b l e a t the
         gate on the day of the match.

      2. Issue everyone with a d is c (metal o r otherw ise) t o be shown when e i t h e r
         purchasing or e n te rin g grounds. (NO DISC, NO TICKET).(NO DISC, NO ENTRY).

      J u s t a few e x t r a comments, Money f a c t o r in employing e x t r a s t a f f to man
      s a l e s booth.
      Regarding No 2 . , i f any breach i s made p r i o r or a t the time of the match
      d is c to be taken away and retu rned to r e s p e c t i v e clubs. This idea could
      als o be in co rpo rated with a r e c i p r i c a l agreement to cover overseas matches
      as wel1.
      As I pointed out previo us, these are r a t h e r a r ch aic view points, but I r e a l l y
      fe el t h a t something has to be t r i e d .

      The t i c k e t s a l e s p r i o r to games works well here in A u s t r a li a f o r every s p o r t ,
      I r e a l i s e the crowd numbers are d i f f e r e n t , bu t more o u t l e t s could be arranged.

      I f everyone puts a small input to you, then maybe we w ill have achieved
      something. Thank you f o r reading y l e t t e r and hopefully you w ill be able
      to come up with a s o l u t io n in the very near f u t u r e , not only f o r B r i t i s h
      Soccer but f o r s p o r t the world over.

      Yours f a i t h f u l l y
 te> fU-e*                o '*                                                                                                        |CW«^
             £>h cnrt'
             T Ue. 7                                                                                                                  cEb- trv-
            fke L £j**c » t<*i
                             .'t                      re n t                                     4.A*/ex.

h? ft*e       S*
U vt N a S i* * * * feM *S4Jt+ ± #7 F-r*tk>~*+
                                                                                                        2 3'* V * 8<r
                fuSflecA+m CiuA m

  AA* F rr& to*U                  /H^«cWmh ■
                                                                                 IV

       £*>✓ Ai//
                           A -d & t.vu * /*         cU ^c^            *U ta ~ * « ~ c+ r        +*     A           t             m^   4 c*+* , 6

  L*use                   cJLLtf                               ruA*                                                                   ^
  4 s)      p ^ C t^ u X c y               H U jU k+ rt*+ tfn            K **,                              t4 M * / j       J

 ^tvi cJ*U f2f> ~                          £^*pc^< -T                         **-                ^      6      ^                          & *■      '»'*-

       «wM«A4aW                  ^7                 £) o*+Ar*\             <tV              cCtj^X q✓              £C«.                       .


                                      ^ g^.yt_              itf                                              dv          ^       ^    4’
                                                                                                                                       **■i                     ^

                           <**£-                                                                 L ^ v f^ L              S c ^ '+ t k .           fx U      u

 k^M ^xJU. „ ^                        ^                                     it        ^                                               3 U^


  ^                  «.          ***_',             *?      r ^ .        A-*~"

                 ^     ^                        « W              r*U- ,                    * - / A»~*              S«~U < ~~~

                                            ^            k ^ ,    ^              ^                             * *

            * * w            ^                                                                                       ^               ** ^          ’w

      Vt>            c6oi**j,         £©   /uru».
                            f L ^* JU U ,       J          f v t ^ S        ^ W       '     £ * >**»<■' p o i~ L »




                                                      -**>        a ^ e r r ^             h~,   &*

      ^V^IwC*              ^»c/fW<l ^»-

                                                                          y!<u^i J^UtXyC^
            1Q'-4Cs>
           s                                            M g**-


                                                  2 8 tu A p * v i, m m .

Dear S«$                      ^                                           ^
          Z cke. jv e n itn *
   rtpfrts (A tk£ t&U!>b&cujk
X         m s         a # * * *
r f        U k. I                    ° * T        ^ 't o       M      *   *
                       a *d                                 -to w a*z*




 r* *r* £               £ * 9
                      r Z t .
                                      — ^ s*
                                     + u lk         4a*-       Aaa        ^ ~ -
                                                                                    ■




 aJeeu*.            ^MJ^±
                      U>  °             r^                       ‘^ o■eiou
                                                                      M z e * .+ i~ -


    e tc        t o    *    "       u u v u a       itu .      ^ u s c a --^ -

    g      S           S        «        »    ■
        -yryl   a      I^OUJ             *^veL^t«-      ^ <^     C-       /


    l+ L tiu ^             ‘V W e       •*-*
    < o 3 e ,- tiu M .              M M d         **.      "*>     P ^ b U ^ .
                                             «         to C M .

 p & sk        X                                                                   ^ 5 ”
Z4*          ba**U + i>       A-fe                      **^s
nX ajuuu. t^uxd be <n*tt4*y «*y< p~>t>U.
K nU t        5-ee.                     ^               * “?                        £*£*■
 .
-to
         t      ■.
         ««** . "
                       re          ^              *°pr*d
                                                   ^  to            ,WL«. w            .      X
             S./KWI— 5                       <?                      ^


i~t.‘z szzni * > -“
" ' -r ; ^                                             . tj*
                                                                                  -r*
                                                                                   ^


CX7^                                *,                      b O u ^ jL A ^   o c^cA
r s X /ju s s o d c U JX           1/0
                       „             rtv/v^fc           - c ^ z ^ i crvv_c.       urmua
r ^ r ‘^ i * ^ t x ^ r s . a . . i ^
ltv           ^---V-'-                 "          ^      '~'^ c
  <f                                                     «'** ■“
^                                                                   A. S * * " # * '
             U u ^ r 'C c , t * *                     <” '-Ci

             o^.ott— ' **u*t c^nrt-ta *U<-£ot
^ i O i S                                             •'°
a > a ^ - T lu p                                                         i ^ — v **«•*

tUu,                       'fc     ^              ^                                               •
~X    (IU * U          & C *:              i t-       # * *        S * r > 4 r c r t- t y s # ^
 l^ tK         (X C L c > p it,d       it-        to a u A .d        in d ite .     &      u l.
lilw L c          b   p   t    *   a
p tfiic e ,       o ^c*       bo   &   U *   cm ^    t^

f-4v <y^Pj^£-rtio^S> -X ka*se- 2<*u~* So
P a y '.      X       &***                                sb * c 4 zo * ^
 &4        **%y i ottas o**.ci urtruA d                   Utc*, +*>
              /vtTUA                   /'/ J ; * k                   t ^ )

 w V lU r t                                  '
                                        •                                                        •
                                                                       Cn A.*~c UnH __       .                                          —        ?|
            frA*e         — 9                                                 bi>\
             siv\ b»^        -
          " fov- m o m ficfeet                           o   Uf        •f**'          "fcCiUfc                             A>r *«»v iScStl
                                                                      frCMM. lu>(ste«*-Office.                            hcfcet fcobfeftlofta, I




                                                    p m k (^HtkL StAvtX ktK,                                              y u tu c   s ta r ts
biwe           ^torts


  TKt               cot J M t timuytUc cmtd be operate# btj t k i                                            n* * * jt     *f'c*efc office,
  so H a* cvouj out                     opened a t e v itt. & Hit $p£CtM jy kad a. -H e lo t >' ^ £ * * * -
          jvoiAM^ u/*u(4                    If- #uu/ cUdn't kowt a tic k e t H u. o f t * * 'j* r f €                         cjrruJct
   o|2^w , uTUaOa., v^rtnMcl                tfUK^ofc                                      &<-*- b a o K erf £ # j l CfMuJL . T-f
   pCfUGt K a a ^ v       u)a*                   (JOC^            K        vO-ctva-XcA           <na^   ^ A aK     * t>              **rrik

  crve      S p c c lc v te * *   <M,       k im e ^ ^       0 CWik.               Sta*t             s«*~ bU~    ^ft'k ayvUtf b e    op****

   ■fts             p C o p tu    4-o   ^Ka.Wt»0(Ck      ©£              C>v*$ls..
                                         P ^ - 7             1_^

                                                tclr

                                               vu                  S o ^ A fr W

becK             A ^fr.    A'e l l y ,

                            J     O/ew/y /«£< '/ o M A /t                                -^/J4w,^


V^<- 7®*1/              *-<4o /o s-f-                    //✓#/               <(„/ ^//r              ,

           ^     ^>c/-<ijf                ^««vy              jV><«/i/


M e ^ o r .^ i ~ T ropky _                               ^        c * > ~ J e r t* J • &       ly
                /o f i-^ jj       r-tf~-./_ •P t^ a .h s 4 -s               of           /r^

C-'P                                               -&* of+~ :*><: Jay „ / ^

                                               .          ---------------

£-<•✓«*-«- '         is S-* 4-v f    •^«c/'»'</‘ ’
                                                 .—

       ^                   ■& < - -& > r y -/* a /e          c J * -et            C-o-**_   Vrv<
*2~i < J       l~ f ySg-rjcst !     I o S-m-   e\."f~~   C > fo ( T / ^ a £ $ > n a /

"{hey                      Ltas<-.                                   o/^ y/Ay'fnd
             yj /tft     p ltty + * r f     G ~*.d                       •M td *

JoT .*\t^   cti-   F .A * C jp     S*»"< -           *(   *f «    ws|‘^' L ; 4 4 ~
b to^J —           //■ we^</                                  /■£ > / .
                   /•/ c^ow/</ i^-c. «                        ^exy   +>

             C« <A                        **, 4^*> a      1 1%ouf-m~ a . f

(^/«*k^/«v ^ J !e .s * ^ r e ^ * i.4 'e c l               —      wi-/^
^,1         M.ri^                           e*f
uJU                              «-',o ^ •

                                  "/o^rr                       --------
                                                              Dublin
                                                                 Sire.
                                                                  26-4-89.


               Dear sir,
                        ■ay I offer mj deepest condolences to the football
association on the worst dissaater ever to befall British sport as I have
already expressed ay sympathy to the Liverpool football club and the whole
community. After all the setbacks and problems the game has had in recent
years, this must early have been the severest crisis it has ever had to
face anl it will take a monumental effort to improve the image of the game
and also help ralswe the spirit of the game froa the ashes of Hillsborough.
As many clubs as possible should be encouraged to provide all seater stadiu
as ayri haste should not be shone in tearing down the fences, while there
is a big change needed here, but the possibility of introducing the type of
fencing that is used in Prance I think it is, the one where every section
is like a gate     opens outwards on the pulling of a lever to allowsu
sufficient access to the pitch in case of necessity and at the same time
prevents pitch invasions, however that is a question for the clubs to
decide on in a sensible manner.
                                 It would be nice thought from football if
it were to ensure that those that died were never forgotten, I would like
to take this opportunity to make my own small suggestion for your concid—
eration. Although I think it would be nice but perhaps you would not deem
it possibleto rename the F. A. cup in memory and honourof the dead*
I think it would be nice if it were possible for a second cup to be produce
d and prsented along with the F. A. cup itself to the wining team each year
It could have an appropiate name such as — THE NEKCRIAL CUP, THE HILLS?—
BOROUGH KENCRIA1 CUP, THE LEPPING LAKE REKCRIAL CUP or it could be named
after one of the dead. Perhaps after the youngest victim the ten year old
boy,THE JOK PAUL GILHOOLEY KETORIAL CUP as a type of representative of the
niety- five dead. This would seen bj the millions around the world that
watch the final each year, it would be seen as footballs continuall tribute
to the deceased and the ideal way of ensuring that they are nerver forgotten.
Because everytime it is along with the F. A. cup it would jog the memory
and make people as well spare a thought for the bereaved and keep the dead
in our hearts. It is very important to learn the lessons to be derived from
this atrocious catastrophy and ensure it never happens agains.
                                               Tours faithfully.
■ ^     l :           t-bli .*&■                   >?'-4^-a
                                                          e ')'
                                                            2 , -t
                                                                 w tf        --•

                                   x, Ji..» ihs^y . - •■■ :                 '/• ,’
                                                                                 j
                                                                                     CrtUl
                     -?Y                                                    70-0
                               <^g.» fi ^C. •                           Q 9»>ru .»

 ■•i. w ^ * i -                         ,-*■ v*»»               -4&». £~Vc
                                          4 - W*. /nA -V w c-3^___________
                                          ^ : % '* . —  -£a^- -u

              --           -        ^         <fr~J& e*U2 ' \ j f 9 y                <Sr'*W-
^                                      •*                  YV
 ^i^vJL.r^U'VTflLfi^Ae ,\^SA. O U - A ^ - C ^ 7                         I      V 1
                                                                                 “"?
  T'A q ^ j * tf *                                     * T * r ® ^ ■**             ^
  ^AJfccxA A ^X . ^TA- O-                                            ^             V R-/tV^
  ^ * V ^ i ' V » 'w
                   '/'"‘—                             VLc. C-Cjp                     X-o-


    (^vJutt. '-• xv^CtJL tiflo                             <*—
            \\                                t ^                            C ^ 1— |^ IM~C
      ^ d        W         V y s -^ J ^ S ^ A ^ -         1   \ * £                           -

      - -^N^-                  ‘V-A-        ‘V 0          ^ o * O j31— — ^ - e t ^ C
    V_                                                          o-                         V
    ^tfv. ^ L ^ , ' p t r « )                       ©-0-*^~V"i-«.                    \pr£a^ t
      ■   w i         \g , 7 ^                                     :
      .                                                                  F p R t ES :.
          % < 4 e jK L Z             V U         w C J L       .O l f W r T E R " '
                                                                             suitable
                    Otc
          Kx,                                                      ^

          W          ticAr       ^           , U a            w iJ & iJ a d L
          •   ■ :   : '" g        '--ciw^-.                                                  '



      -                    , ^ . . .. J F C ^ . t . ^ ,


                            uj &       U                                 • ^ ,t j u f r -1
      ft v * iiz > k -Keoct •,                       Via      » nvcu^ji&Jc: b y j
      r’* *'*\ •        *                                       .• ‘     ' J i
       V ^ "       -JGc
                                                     U3u:      ^sb
    -. .ft b               H     ^ O t           E      /
                                                       • , £va.-
     U k                              iwj                      ^       , ;^ t i _ j . I
                                       or^           ^y©^,. c2^r^A|»^u<5» J?             :
■                                                    ^ v.1                  ' .... J ;
                                            ;«*                                    .;.
    A^rUl-CXo •>               VVv^Ou-7      Vpi^vC./ V "i\|_ tli g. ^
                                           o \                                     --

                      •'         ^    ; - - - ^              V c n A i W o ■• j
                                       Surrey

                                            i r ■ u -




                  c--~«t         /<s>/^>
     4U

                    / • *-« *—
                                                       >
                   r-                  /^rsr/^
          /   *
/
                                           ^/   v» •
                                                   .i
                                                    &»


    4/OvV .           ^*~      “~ /

    /&                         tfA S       &       ^

                  tu ~ 4   .
    &
Co ^
P [<L O ^oc ,
                                      7


                 J*                      Cftn            —



                        SL-v,   \AjiJ7-d u ^ c r X X /

C { r ^ f e ^f M_ x c




                                                    C^   K~
        '</ L'0-+~*JU ^yt~:* h ^ ^                   r-J L * ^
                     .          /              \      ^
f J t                          A-^3c^<sa--^»>v

                              ~ ^ V U £ s u ^ -J ^         ^



JL      tv * J K _




$ Z a // '~

                          CyLs*-*&-
c*/H-^-*-^-C^ / C ^ < —          •=V"N' 6 m




                                      ^LA-£^-*0       v/^ T k _ 0
 lo ^ o c &   j^ Q   je ,   W    ^ <   p ja ^ <   S L .


 y-




                                        ......




^we^e*_Y                        ^L-c^r<-vo




                                /Gs-    3 *
y^M < ^/                                  tC C L ^
                                                                        n ^JL
                          r 6 - ^ \^                                    ^ *i


                                           u ^ J ± X               ~ l'~



                                                                               £ ?



f
                                 ..£4/          (^       ^   ?   [J W   ^ tc

    S fiz ^ C T ?        C   r   -     ^    J        s   -   C & t,)




C^ * ~ ^ j ( f j U l L   < *£                                    7 ^*=>

f l l & t t T !
 T       y      i r ^      -               —

 /-?   U S L ^C       l^ s t_




f c      -      _,




                tf/\D   y rV ;                                   7




                                ^      fef     l^   ^   jh   -



 ■^^S,       /v-^O*^ V f J X o      c jl   /$«=>«=>,         ^
                                                               Huddersfield,


April 18th, 1989

Dear Mr. Dalgliesh,
I enclose for your Information and with compliments and support, a le tte r
which I have today sent to the following persons:

6 . Kelly E sq .,                        .
Secretary of The Football Association Limited,
16 Lancaster Gate,
LONDON. W2 3LU

P. Uright E sq ., C.B.E.,
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire,
Police Headquarters,
Snigg Hi!1,
SHEFFIELD. S3 8LY
The Secretary of S h effield United Football Club,
Hillsborough,
SHEFFIELD.

Yours s in c e r e ly ,




                                          Also sent t o :

 K. Dalgliesh E sq .,                     Dr. J . Ashton,
 The Manager,                             I™rnn™?r S l t y '
 Liverpool Football Club,                 LIVERPOOL.
 Anfield,
 LIVERPOOL.
b    . -J                ' » “ ■■■

            1989-04-18 15:26
                                      «-■ ■■=g»^ m y n a «lr, m iII

                                     MICHAEL EDGLEY I/NRTIONflL
                                                                      WP,   jtng

                                                                                                                            P.01

%
0'
            M ic h a el E dgley I n ter n a tio n a l L im it e d
i                                                                                                                                              /
                                             . * * " — ■<***>*«'l«»nI WlM— Ii .Hi I.«►


             IS April 1909
k

             Mr Frederick A. Millichip
             President
             The Pootball Association
             16 Lancaster Gate
             LOMDON WC 2 3LW.

             VIA FACSIMILE:


             Dear Mr Millichip,

             The Michael Bdgley organisation extends its deepest sympathy
             regarding the tragedy at the Hillsborough Stadium and Believe
             7     I*    ..it\ . e interest of the code of soccer that an
             invitation should be extended to the English Football Association
             to conduct this year's F.A. Cup final in Australia.

            As you are no doubt aware, we have several major sporting venues
            in Australia that have the seating capacity to accommodate the
            huge crowd that this final would generate.      The ground that
            immediately comes to mind is the Melbourne Cricket Ground, which
            seats i excess of 90,000 people.

            As you are now playing the semi final on 7 March, we propose that
            the final could be organised for you here no later than 21 May.

            We would envisage that a percentage of the income from the final,
            if it were to be played here, would be donated to the families of
            the victims of the weekend's tragedy.

            Our organisation is the largest promoter of entertainment and
            sports in the Southern Hemisphere (and we have promoted all of
            Torvill & Dean's professional appearances worldwide).  We feel
            that we are most qualified to organise and promote a final in
            this rountry at short notice.

            Kincly advise             us        of        your           interest         or        otherwise               as     soon   as
            possible.

            Yours sincerely,




                         MrWxmrw:                                                        I’rrth:
                         Siik* l/> llkair.i I’U/d            *.«[• I-.Ini n > T          ltil.ru       ■Vih-nii.i■ «..ikl
                         4#t-42A * . KiMa NnaH               It— MmUM*                   1% Pl <r»— Itmr
                         Mi4t>uurn>' Virt"n» SO04            •Vtl (im p ' Suvrt          Ri’
                                                                                           imtliilu*
                         rtK«i>: till) Jfit 879f>            .-iHiirt Vfl*' jn(W         Ui-rinrh          nlu'l
                         w-tt AA.Kk.vm MF.ivr                 I V « - : HU) S h t Mill   iVw: Hf)! ir
                         taoimHr to il 3i>7 .1W>1            1.1. v WTiMli MUST          T.+-v VVM.SM M U M
                                                                         M l K>i .iwrt   fWWiitiU.:m»*h u: i;cj

                                                                                                                       TOTAL P.01
                                 ------



*T\     O                                 ^                \^ {    .

                olX    fcr&ooU s u f p f c y ^ |
      i +             W * * A             ^ U i         U p s ^ J .
      VWUWouA-v              W    :   ioaiJ<       oltkJ   Vveuoo.
SWiul r r « ^ - W ^ s . | l o o -d <\o\_ -tno d \ o c W ,
a-o U w          0cr\A4 Wcwa. W o -p p *^ ode cuu^

            ^      u*- \ f H - ° *            °~           v< y > jti-
        I          *^2^<\t>Vajj. T V a .       CCa V o P
oujtsKM.         o£     •tXj,.    qfoonis          rxfifljd H o

W     lo o k e A                 U coua^.          if    tU       r\q U t
                       &ljf p s^ v:s 0^2- cUlffwacT
                W'ttCw           Sjjuok .tt. d u o o t L r
 rf\o     a   A   il y '— l *   \ -   iy v ju i j       Ql q jt ^

- W v                                           £ > Jc                                              _ _

                                                             .f*-~u«L                    2 0   uio^s
                        —   -^XOOiGW*'
                            -                                 rvcuo       (XfClaJsLu otvj O
    UN        ^ C ^ - U ^ u >                               +. J t                         rvl

                            vkafc              xkjL                 Q^oA/amjuot                kjw,
 V\CL/pi^Q               ow           ak©\-£. k.ooV«Q0ur\s ,\ £~tta.
    1-0           SOrvA^                  VO            urvWoiAxCadi                 rr^OAi -C/y u I ^
 ^ i\                       W           o L V - ^                   occ^d            t b ' a W
^^AiClvi^ . i *Ldft 1                           Oi» / a ^ L                 TV n
r ^ -T -                    Life4> ^                                ^ T V J L U ,
                    w       J ®         ' S         |        j u      u      i   .




                                                        £ ft. G ^                    | CeJ. H J c
              sV^o^d                  W                  placed , L^ X . a & J A
^                 rvcfc W J <                              lo'dtL W U i W                      |W
<r<V° L , “ "’' p                f'iu1 ^ * -                        fWouwin               SenCc-G^
              ^          f i t J f A » U                                             *     .     r '
IMLx!^             S Q o ^ e x v f vo d l ^                                          Gpiji ^
           CW.—                 cLouu. O p r .         -OUo-^Aiu             ____

S kjua X A *_.\_ (JUaA SLUw^Q- \irv«Jc a W                      c\xiJlD J>

Ocr-nCii/rutxi, j                                    ...sVxovAA.'tiUuui ___

uo\/x              luLOk^uJL,       U>C\Jujl \sJL -
C^O               , ^ T V aao                   ^                 Ajlx^jL
                           oJX       to        Qxtviksl. W      "blYrtVO
\jd3l).—   '\Anjcul^' dX<iq_C CX^nA \JkA£^-3<4W/-i\a^t-
\c*b^sAx^ .


  9Vocx-Qfl_             <5X\XS_ \ofQjCxk           U 3 l H — ‘br<XcLJlj^V
        v^o\ \\     dxuxafc- rvo
CjDrrvjp q J d s w       5Y       \X ju        W^olq ^       |n>ctuo/J2-o
 /\SU^         ^LeLoSY\ y           C U \< \     pliL0aU2_         ^-i STT i0
T to    T H e        SoPfoC T ^e           u>W o       Ccxjtx

 oojjuucxbjjt. OocLo >Ca_ .
                       V g y A ■C.I-IC., L U
                I«k                                                                                                              e
                                             $
          In replying to this letter, please write on the envelope:
          Number                                      ■•N am e               .........................................
                                                                                      H.M. Y C 'J'’G OFFENDER
              A J tin r ^                  /6 H - S t       •<>*9                                m iT 'J T IO N
                                                                                      B i - r m N :.oad
                                          /? V -*9          &-3C-+**-                               V, BUCKS.
                                                                                              l£H      __________ _


                                                                                                     r?* r u n —                         --

A /..-.         ,r # .r           „■                                             r * tf                                              ----
                                      —     ^ati,—             iftfr         Z ^ f *83—                                      £«"/—
   nJ             I ,'A ^t                 ace.                                                  — e — (*'                   . * '


                                            17                      ^                                                            -----
 ^              ,C,y / S * *,W                              / ^ r               Sh             r - '£ * — ^
                                                                                                         L^a£— /£— ^£-
-7 ^
                                                                                    /'V'             **•.       Srr< ■->C     Z l£ x -
 i r           ^ ti. / rri »rf.           r*yv»g’
   U.             61 -                                 £ /- -- 6./ .C.K .
                                                                        — ^                      J lA U i
                                  /          £'         '    ■          f>      *
                                                      S * s, / C      / / I S J s S s s 7 ■£    f—               t Z -----


                            /-? J >'/* / -'t/ uZ'L          r ^ \/A                            S&CiL
 ■f i         r" «f f ■    111                                                                                                       /
                                                                   cfef\yJ-Mc4i£ --
   / /                                                                                   Z                      . ^T'* <gn
                                                                                                                ,      x*,-v /-X,
     r//,y< ;frg-
                              /y-vw?              /ftf- J/^CACi                                                   S'"**'—
  _O o_




          £J£-
                                                                                                                       flSUitU       Jz-
                                                      ---
        /■>                                                             -X -—            * «'«              -

                            ^                     ^                     ^                   ^                           ^
                            zfe                         r^/pA                       , rs?r.ru< f                fc       /*<<< .* * -
 N o .243 ^0141 7/10/63 XPT                                                                      ^
   /                  '           )                     .+ .f? A sf? /a yr , <3>v/                     — s£^L£
        t^2ejr£                     A/frvif.                               As**           fcSL-fcj^s-a^— t-A e r f
       £ A jl     /o c j& ^ x y J / r^>. r v 'j ^                                     cf              un jj     ffo ‘t
       P y ffa              ^ £ u i,tr     /*V i      /n                    ^ttP'.JgAn       $y~      'Ci/CJS       C^A'jt

        »                        LCtfXf+ALL f         & U 3/---6 fe r t .</-& -£ -& 2 'l
        A«tL                 — (A*?— _/2,?#/
                                           » a 7r^o_____                   £ (X ',t. ' <yar->7L— f i t y j 't J
        /      f                           /                         . ■ ^      ~j_ v           y
  C y /'^ /c ^   fa r                    (J& r>ci.&q               zfe Zd* -- ^;rj^/)i?£/:— ft r x s J .—
                 -/y./       /£/>■                         t-S v.fsr __ ___________ Q&aL— gg^as
        c "          £Aa                           .J-?________ S/rs.^is. f;J?           &S-U-?___ t S f q jza r.... izSi-t

                                          /y i& ity        yS >=~-/____           y fu x zL __ <z&
   /? > .-                   fSr.is-J^ rJ            dsi___ SG*-nuKi£*i&u3£L___ Cjs.------- £m £2S£L ,£;./ii

  —ip/. i/ £^         s~-

                  4 tz                         ^ —         jftfr ^jg?r iy S & &                        ' fa — t ' k —
        (r ^ v            /-^> ^ _ u i.€ L .-c ic - ^.>                           _U           2 i— g:.^.
                               &-*?£«■, A£t*>U' ^c .                                                ,,-L/'
                                                                                                     -
  _£          o/w csif.               4&£S0K£2L:— ^ -- £/y?j:/c'ytii.-— ^                                     _a£

   £ j- ') c              -A:_______                       __ frC C z.’ -- c . ' -- (ZL-- A./tfr-.CJ
                                                    zf/ii— '
                  //~iCT, sl -.fy d                                 y ^ l^ .s                   7 C&-— 6 U3<.^—
                             >
                             '                             /
                          •ftr t*7i-;/>-./rC-/•:                   //'ug W\ f/,z?/-;^ f         ^        ~Mg        F* A
                                                                                                T
                                                               f-' V* *■/__
                                                            "7
                                              &fau»C?


                  z-V^isg             7^ ?-
                     m / - <2±           /s.-ObC>      kk.
-fo'?                       ~ec*>7       *fyp/t>/>+t*&i * Fbor<&«.fJ>___Ffr^O «_________
  i/
   P 5           ^        rWx                           T/^sy- p£z>fTJT                                        <T7vl'-T
        Ffcr-^     A<t /      .’Sie^rsrc^-'         i-j-i3ijt.r,     Caiyijj&ijrrGP       <7^ r        <aL A / r r ^      .
        srr        M s m r J -----------------------------------------
                                                                    '/ ^ A       .




                                                       *S 44 4 'S^A'S^A £erA?
s * c f/? c fc r ,                   < $       A            ^          i             2       '       i       =? + * £ '


 Aft^                       f / r / if /<*&£#<(                                                               J ss
     ' <7 , a ~                 A «          , < &                  & < / « * * .
 l                           „ « * * &             &       ls » A            y       ^   M       ^   v   s

 t-*         &             C***ffy mA^cAL                            ^                   AA^Av&y.
 & < ){ * * * - \ r t                    y         C o M fitf*               /g          "                       ~
                       t     kAt- #p *Aetu*rf^C^'!e-
           —y tr                 ^           y /L ^ q S /
        v/Lic/ P 7
                 ^ &e, c/&zji <b/ '^A&f /&&**
      7^W "A^AA^j A^c/ A^**^
     /%> *aq /~c^ ^   Ae fiAbset/ 4j d^yi ^yM^AA
     y      /W              4o
     S4& a^Az. f                         nro*<Je/ ArAeA
                                                      & Ae^/i^e                                              A^T 7
 QHtAtA*A~~ a^^tA 'flj                                              4** *°A
     i x   t ^   t ,        S        t       c <    ^ fy        ^                                ^       c
     /frcAtms*C
              L^ f (/°^                            /^ y
                                                  Acr+-A&/ ^A~/V
                                           ^tt^AAUg/ /2*t,AAcn^fTeJ vZ^A
                                /2<rlA "fasr) clo^m r-Ky *ic*jfe-A, .
Ol^ L J               /? ' / i s *
        Telephone:                                                                                 Warwick
y
                      (L sL ~ lsy^                y                    y‘£ ^iO L sC £   ^rou-o

           O l^X_
                                          /



                                                                                                                          /C/L^
    A c V /



    a-            a                               ■„                            ^        ^

    C-oAy^                                        o^     - jS            y U tx ^ .

    ■X^ ' - / o                      ^        JL ,            <^C jl
                                                                                                                          & /




                  l ,                                /                     /V-O-/        i£2_^'^p‘'o *-
     JL ^ C {^1 ?           o ^ /             ^                                 ,9                          s^t        <gj

                                e~ *?-<r-/               ^<V                                                       a- -^__^>f

    ♦^"O                                                  p        <5L-^-^^l-)L— '"                  ZX--<o

                      ■*-y(-4-*~         — <2 - ^ -         ~    <r7 <Lc~^_ —                             (^tv^       ^L x^_ s^

                                                                               pA,            (3C^         •r^O -Z ) y ^ /a u & (

v^ r )                                            fL X ^c          ^ t- ^ o - * ^ j £ ) ( ^    ^          *— o             /^-^Le.
               ^              k                                                  glJ u   -
                                                                      r
^                                      £*->— ^                  —tL-^>                         i

/< 1 'A -^          /**-*=>/^ £ e ~ * - /S             .
                                                                   A-^M,                                                   C ^L ^- lA   —




    Oc-^__          y L ^ r-^ -e ^                  p/-rx^>                 tf>/              /^r
                                                                                                                /            -y             '
                                                                                                                    v£j/C<? xL^
    jL.<XSu-<-           - ^ C - ^ i o £ < .-jC /                 * -^ -c

                              tC/~e-                y£oJ~      C>Ce-i~^t^

    Pl.'C^C        /^ O s V ~ £                                            —                                    X^~® ') / / '

                              *— ~          Q\--£^C               ^ '-C—* '              \ / & -^/c€ ^~ ~             J? 6
                              3                                       /d^t-              L ^ J ^ C 'S ! /-J L ^ S          — -----

              ^Cc-c--^— ^                  £5         _                              C±-                                   ^/    A ^ /-^

                                                                                                   g l -c   ^        y^-'^c

                                                                                                                    A -A

                                                                                                                                      *>y


              ^C nA ^C               y t- ^ - X            CU<OC- f       fr -

    r v O-n             <&.


    o-        /L -o -                                                                                                                       *t<Oc_U


     ^                                     /C U                                              Q^_J^              ^
                                                                /to                          ^t,                                  ^

    ^    c/t^                     a^C ^C        '
     fk a x j tr t-


      CJUJl.                        u_

                               C/                                                               Cambridge

                                                                                      Tel: ____________

                                                                                      Sun 16 April 1989


Dear Mr Millichip
I am a Marketing Graduate and have been a member of the PSA (-Football
Supporters Association).
I have listened carefully to all the views concerning changes to football
grounds, and its administration, in order to prevent a repetition of the
tragic loss of life at Hillsborough on Saturday, and I find it infuriating
to hear so many people give their opinions who have probably never stepped
foot onto a football terrace in their lives.
I have gained a lot of experience in travelling to see Manchester United,
(which I must point out has the largest following in British football), to
most parts of the country. I always stand on the terraces and I therefore
feel that I can give a qualified opinion on the necessary changes, or
otherwise, to our football grounds and to other aspects which would make
our N o.1 National game a safe place for its spectators.


1.   Ground Alterations


I believe that basically only the following changes need to be made to the
majority of our football stadiums:




                                     |WU*IoZJ~
                                    ft     at               karr
                                          A«_ (edtc4as/v CaiJ* roui   (odrr.ers
                               . U -V 4 ^5 tc a\ UajTitrs.

                          -► Ml ^ojr'trs \St ka-ckss'K'.                                      a.        bzkiM£A
                                                                                       SJxt.oi\s. "fKid C fe-
                                                                                               qaV<^ ul*e/\
                                        C l-
                      /^ 1 7                                                      v   ' as Zf-Kktr.     1
                                    I


                                               Pi-icw
I have already heard several people demand the removal of the perimeter
•safety* fences. I believe that these fences MUST stay if we are to avoid
a repetition of the football hooliganism that has almost been eradicated
from inside our grounds since they have been erected.


2.   Exit Gates


These must never be opened to allow supporters into the ground.
Furthermore, the lock must be unbreakable. It seems almost certain that
the opening of the exit gate at Hillsborough was the direct cause of the
tragedy that followed.

Moreover, the long term consequences are potentially disasterous: if
football supporters know that these gates might be opened then they will
turn up at big games without a ticket in the hope that they will get to
see the game.


3.   Forgeries


This problem must be taken even more seriously.


4.   Touts


At big games,     hundreds of fans turn up in the hope of purchasing a ticket
from a tout.     There must be stricter controls on touts and harsher
penalties for     this illegal practice. This will discourage them from
operating and     hence less fans will turn up In the hope of purchasing one
from them.

I appreciate     that this is a very difficult measure to enforce but at   the
moment it is     a problem almost ignored by the police.


5.   Ticket Allocation

This has been a much debated problem. There are two trains of thought:
should the club's ticket allocation be in proportion to their average home
attendance, or should their ticket allocation be equal.

In the former case clubs like Man.Utd would almost have home advantage
over most other Div.l clubs. In the latter, thousands of loyal United
supporters would be unable to get a ticket and so crowd trouble could
result outside the ground (due to its volume) as happened at Hillsborough
on Saturday.

I have always been a believer in the British sense of fair play ie both
teams should have an equal support on neutral grounds. However, unless the
potential danger of large crowds outside grounds can be eradicated then
tne FA will have to look into proportional ticket allocation.
NB Announcing a delayed kick-off would have gone a long way to calming the
urgency of the crowd outside the ground at Hillsborough.

It has been suggested that Wembley be used for a big Semi-Final. This Is a
viable proposition but the FA Cup Final Is the pinnacle of the football
calender and I believe that It should therefore remain the venue for the
final only.

6.   Membership Cards


I share the view not only of the vast majority of football’s supporters
but also of Its administrators that a full membership card scheme Is
unworkable.
I must point out that If this scheme had been In operation at
Hillsborough on Saturday then we could also have had deaths outside of the
ground due to further delays In entry!

7•   All Seating Stadiums?


PLEASE NO This would rip the heart out of football -the working man and his
family, many of whom would find it impossible to meet the massive price
increases.


To conclude, I am often of the impression that football supporters' views
are ignored so I would be grateful if you would seriously observe what I
have said as I know I reflect the views of many fellow supporters. We are
a n worried that, despite a public enquiry, unnecessary changes will
occur, and other fundamental problems will remain in the wake of the
tragic Hillsborough disaster.
Yours faithfully




editorial.f*el free t0       some or a11 of th*     raised In any
                               y f 'i



      |o                                            ' ^ f c l i !,     { fo ^ fr ic a J ls L


  ■Q clsCl* & 'C-^\                   .



                                                                     v/<=^£/e—

  (tCiJr          g u   <v ^    vji         sL--oc^cC                  -'&*«-




Xex^ervA^                      ^\Jd>c^Z-

                                                          c \o U



, 1        3—   * /v^ ' ' "       S^          t ^                ^
           |^/\A               6^0        CTbve,    ^Q Q ^h o             Ka^cm^

  tk ^ .            S          do         fc z         L r^           ^       6 ^ .
CL^'-^crW.                o i l / < 2— —^ > o ^ -      S ^ ^ ^ C       ^ te s ^ o
r^' y ^ ,               Q p ^cJ^        U ^ 3 ^ >

       „ Js              fcCL                            (^      ' J c ^

/^ a jl m J U a

u       c ^ A a ^ c                         k                                       •


_          J       (r ^ U         ^      C x ^ ^ -c A -                1 ^ ^

k r jJ io ^ L            K    '                          itu ,     P ^ r < ^ C

&    ^ a . —              ^           / k e r n    * > < 2-                     /




                                                                  iL    ^




               s \s \    S \J ^       l/v-A^-p>L      tv/v_C^1

    )teT         j>-^_ykl>                 n         j        i          <^ ~

    U-^v^v
                                                                           no   oddbQZ,^




'h s i.V A            *




 L s A t n                0 2 - . .                                  1 7 . ^


        *fe        5 <£l     W.^5


     'l i e                            gN^ u p v - T                            (s> a A v u ^ -


               l\G^S                                                        ^



        S ^ sJ^                0-     O ^ W ft& tfY x o ^   ^ U n /u v     ^ru fiL 0>^cK

(^iLx              f^^iv                 O ^ W L       o W k u ^ L     A ^ ^ >      OplXc*



^ itW          Cl -                         (jSjlTi\QL>aJ>^ U’'WV U>^ k .c u L A a M l




    Cci£tfvi>              \V S iiff     W     (ktf£     LiW &        it   TOS>W u®l\

              U )U         rti      jj^ e L      ^           Ug^

K             uL   ^ T W so         l\cnx    U u £     6\DlT\(5^i^     i ^ o J ^ L \ b
                      —        0-                    kJ'tt'-CTv^ <J- f > f ^ ^ _


Oik o c t a ^                  u 5 U k Cfl^ ^
A o       uj>sk        4       •s W p            .i t o t ^ .         A h <&

K jtk ( k n . ^                         (^       ^        W              ^            b
 0 ^      u   *   *   J    ^                         b       ^   v -


                                         a rt W k L                   &W a £xr-.o^iv

                                        « -{*•%
is                                  .    hsr-        6 o d       S     S*-W          9 ^ >


U -                                          ^                       A ^ ^ e .U e o .


                      fA       (W> & ^                                               (U )o ^

\z> a * ii        M>       ^             ' c%            C
                                                         \       ^        ^                    ^
 j    ^   U       i   o                              W   ^ -         ■__________ ,
                                                                      ssk .

                                                                 fHk -xgm-        i



                                                                                                                                 IwMHH

                                                                                                                                                          PRIE 1
                                                                                                                                                             ■#         <*■*


                                                                                                                                                     -.-..'V'-l'.-!5*

                                                      •****. *V~                      - ! - J V S * * . '* * *



                                                                                                                 ' ’; ? .; • ;   " -.V ”   ■> '> '* - •


                                                                             •^>-4              • •:
      April 17th 1989                                        :•-•...:;„*>■*«•'-%■■■
                                                                                                                  *>**.
      F u to:        *art MllUchlp S*4
                     Chairman
                     Football Aaaoclatlon

                     402 0486




      HEARING OF THE APPALLING TRAGEDY LAST SATURDAY MjY FIRST THOUGHTS
                                                      \
      WERE THAT THE REMAINING CUP MATCHES SHOULD BE CANCELLED.

      HAVING READ THE ATTACHED ARTICLE BY JEFF POWELLJ EHITRELY AGREE
                                                                                        J
      WITH HICHLIOT7ED PARAGRAPH AND STRONGLY RECOMMEND YOUR

      CONCURRENCE.




      Fax
4
 A
¥r    T«1
 i.
 k
                                                                                                                                                                   /
                                                                                                                                                               /
                                                     >*#£-
                                        ...   .y^.




                 . '• ' ■ . ■ - ' •'

                 * -V -           ■




                                       ■ -V .-
                     A second playing of the semi-final which beckoned 94 fans to their
closes down        doom would be an obscenity. if Liverpool or Nottingham Ftarest go
                   to Wembley over those dead bodies then the same in thfr c o u n tr y
                   will deserve *11 the disdain the world beajTupjaTtt.               ^
— P ^ e 39           However elaborate the excuses, no matter how cleverly contrived the
                   reasoning, there can be no moral justification for continuing with a
                  ----------------          competition devoid of all meaning. Money will
                                            have triumphed over sportsmanship and
                                          d e c en cy .        j
                                            T h e qu iet w ort if th a t In an oth er day or so th e
                                          FA w ill ann oun ce a resum ption o f norm al service
                                          in a couple o f weeks. I hope th is is n ot io .
                                            T here is still tim e for th e F ootball A ssociation to
                                          respond to Liverpol's m ore noble
                                            Sim ply by drferrlng th is W ednesday's scheduled
                                          F irst D ivision fixtu re w ith W est B am ju st a s th e
                                          season com es to its congested clim ar, Liverpool are
                                          Jeopardising everything th ey have been strivin g to
                                          w in w ith su ch style.

                                                            Arguments
                                             T h e su ggestion on M erseyside is th a t th ey are
                                           relu ctan t to play an y m ore m atch es a t a ll th is
                                          season, th is accursed sem i-fin a l an d S u n d ay's
                                          televised cham pionship show dow n w ith A rsenal
                                           included. C ertainly, It w ill take tim e for th is great
                                          clu b to rediscover its stom ach for a fig h t
                                             We can be certain of hearing argum ents             the
                                           victim s «rould have wanted L ivened! to carry on and
                                           win the C up for them. like some kind of m onument to
                                          their unnecessary sacrifice. It win carry no more
                                          en d ecc* than listening to tong-kot cousins turning
                                          u p a t t-fu n « n d i"  ncp e_flU ettiag drunk.
                                         ' The F a ’s duty Is dear, huge though tne Cup Final'
                                          contribution m ay be to tbefcr m m i»t incom e. The




                                                                             r
                                          sem i-final should be abandoned wad if they m ust b a te
                                          their day » t Wembley 00 M*y SO
                                          then Liverpool should play Ever-
                                          to n la a Memorial Final w ith no
                                          trophy, no medals, 'so appear­
                                          ance money and all the proceeds
                                         vgotng to the bereaved.
                                            Yes, it would cost everyone —
                                          the FA, televison,' Wembley,
                                          Liverpool, Everton and Fbrast to
                                          name but a fcw — a great deal
                                          in lost revenue ana abandoned
                                          am bition.
      m ail   .                             B ut unless it can be seen to
                                          have a soul and conscience at
                                          this tim e of its       trasedy.
                                          then English football will sacri­
                                          fice som ethin* of far greater
                                          L-nportt~-.ee.      J
                                            Its future.
                                                                       T«Uphone
                                                                                        $UfiBPX
                                                                                        England
                               Solicitor to the
                           English Supreme Court




                                                                                              ^ 7 V ^ 4 e>




    ^ 0 0 r~                                      <sa




                                  "* Z & ~

®                    /tfc a 'st ^            y    ^




    ft/< e * d k &       O SV T & ,                                '



                J & d          IV C ,                     **   a         & & &     a n + a te s -   « J’

                     O      ^ jj^ s jf,   - , #       a    C **i           4 i- * a M   X   ^ ty L i* l
                                Solicitor to the
                            English Supreme Court

                                                              <S>
                   '7 ?'£ > 2 Z & L £ .       3 / 9 ^ 1 6 ^ 5 .

/ t r* C 4 it* 9                       ^    i£ + -ez—               *»- ir—




                                                            S2& £~ A 3t*>



J     t f    &       td ~        /* % <

y /c M                       ^ ty c s iX ;

                      /          '
                                                                                     J h fr ie fy   a x r - jb ^ c -

& & £& *-

&d&r>*£                          ^                      *
                 Jp




^ T e c r/u J L                                         6 0 * -e+ 0 ^
            3 )           4 /&       S I.   a sd &          c J b ^ s       £ C z*                           ‘^ ^ f '


/ x T T          ^                                 x ^ ;             * < * -£ G £ fr *0 * * ^ . a < & £ 2 -+ ~ 6
                   $U s                                                                                  < £rf5m
                                                               T«l»ohon«:



                                                                                    England
                             Solicitor to the
                         English Supreme Court

                                                 <*>

                                                 c*r%* €.<.>&£-J in s S & ti* ^
                                     /3 0 & &        s + ~ c d o e * ^ & * z - ■ ^ c c ^ ^ ‘^     3     ' c       n



       *         J l^ /r A , a s iJ!9c&                                                                 srxm d & r-
   ^       ^   ________^                                                            £ A J rr£ &         < ^ f-

                             y           ^   7   f       a ^ * 4a^ >                        ^         -f* -
   K & ju J d - ,                        y




% * * rc -         L & L cO .                                                           <       ^c ^/                     -
                  /fo    g       #                   L   f < & £

  js fa o s U           ( fy r       &                              ^       2   »   w   ^   e     ^   i       W       ^
                                                                  m     i
      Ay/f . & £ K T          H   i l l i c u i         P
               -fm        r&      t r r r r F f i.                                   o Xpa/              .




                       'fZ e r c n ff'£ c u < A -e < * /          le f ­
t s ' 'k h u r ^ / f e " . ( q e F F t e i x J / *        / M f r o F~
 P/.r/ t iPLIME. /At Tl+e YogrJ C- . /S o fH /fT~ /A'V^L.
. / t v r> , / t f - , T / ^ £ 1 $ c & q ° L . . _ .7 & >
                                      ^ J Q _ Z ^ / l T ~ u £ a * ^ ..                           P ,
                                                /O y ^ c L ^                                                      ,

  tiJh + c .j£ c                                                Z o o k V /t^f& Z                  /Vo, A
/r^J?                    _ _ P £ y /L -         fA K Z .          T h e .
                                   S-O                           -Jr&tsr^ U t r u ^ ^ i o ^                   n
't t y     /i*sucj})      cnr J X jl r^ u C # j                                           yis> d v u ^ ri
           £Asr& /0                                 ^       t                    *

     ...   A            . -                ^            9   e tZ J C t^ J ^ d        c L /> ^ a tc J ^
                        t/_ K^.F,                   >d          If<t & err f 7                                    _   p
  fo / V D O           t x j& k & -                                         sk   ^ Z IJ   i   V - /V O       Z n n J rU -

a /~       H t L L i     P p i& O      t                    *
                                               Sq       JL o y V ^ f
7K
                                                                                                                 VjO l'
                                                                                                                      c^cA


                                                                                                                 \Vs



“IXeoj ^f\r CWOju

                                                                                                                                  I <a>aj*r

 uo ^* .       yes     c o o   ^    a   .   ck_   e d L * . * -« _ « J r-i v c .
                                                                                                 \
                                                                                        e**-rc^v-M        Q .\               V€'VC>"-ir
I              0 ' V                                       ft                                        —^
                             ^A.S(waXsur                                           <o                        cAo<^>'- . \r
 cA -C -a-.^'C       r^LJicX       <2k . ( i O k O w i          Cv     Q_/v                           K jo                  ,r« !
W^O^AiJT^                   >*WO^\c.^ ^ -K^JbvJ. ^      VjS L'Oc^O^1
                                                                   "VLI^-A.
 Vv'j-tA             ^sjzj^'-s- ^c-v-v \»4u<r^>oe>V .
                                                                            ^°u
 ^ ^>ro <d^crrr3* C»-fc^ V^o>i V'V^-.xi’     s-c
12.^2,^ ^ocwidI U&VJ^C- Wg-r^                         ^Cv* ^rcv-ie^o c>>
                             (-o k ^ a Ji                                   ^rcK Co—          {^/          ^
C^-i.-^ 5_^Co^«xX                                                      OV^ ^ ^    o^tcV .
                                                                                    >S - £>L2J^-* t ^ Vx-S^
 C^Aoi                       c:>~*-<- \\<X<^
           -    U c^ v re_     V €xc_r^ V c O o » .\ <=A-
 CocVbcJJ^ o"> o. ^oc-^cLa^wli ^
         o( ^4 ^ ^                          Oo <—               --3                     . V^o-t-
                                                                                             5     ^/O*-v                    & o—
                                                                                                                                *—
                                                                                                                                 1x . i
c x l L ^ ^ ^ \> 2                                              ,o^            .v-
                                                                                            C J£w>                                  C*-5S
                                                                                   oOJ- C ^ O         C
                                                                                                      OXU-AN^^N
                                                                                                             ^ ^ _ x ^ f^     ^      ^®f
         CU_^e prov«-
     v                                                 •        fS t-k -e    c lo v * J n
 \> WX^>^u2_<-\^c^




                                                                      C'fvAi.Uwv^ s^-^c^v<-r °‘-'sC^ .
                           ^                          ^eteviopow ffA ,




\fL    C ia lj
                    C M »«.

£ l
          *£.       sC U       ^ .^   u   -      <t U X L

                        ^ V c K^tOLy             *V*«.




                           ^CiV4 4               <L^LA,

        ^U > C & +          ^ x c < J c /^ P '     e ^ f       *

 1 - < ') J ^ U ~   d      C L .   o c^^o c       #
                                                                       l4 .C Q * jJ c d |C(|(^




                                                                           r _
                                                                          :r *




'Qg&S     K j X   W U L U c X / ^ - p            »

      X   -feel s o         W - r V         ^ u a c J. a A A ^ e d

Va-rtAJd gova> aaa & aa A/> v w ^ d a V ay                               V-uT
                G ^ e e ra e o f o U x ) ^ ^                               cJl> ^ w >

I J u           ZZ.%^  »>'*'x&**rg; V«sk.
                  Ue W « sU o ^ -» w
St                             OAXI < » * * * *                                         J


          ^ o K M A u s !n v & *~ %                                         s *M & >


     T -» m a \ax *     Zv U v e jp c c A                                    I/V^ v ^ i
    ' U cV                      W ^ a^ X                          frf




'     s     a      ^    ^         ^         p         -     S      -        ^       i


           V 0 j ? v i v ^ & - ^                   « “ ^        « » M A * v y ,

•h> a M A j cU aJo , ^AAA^ - ^ A                            .




                             H IG H G A T E . L O N D O N        FEL
\JU                                                          Wcl             v^oV'
UAwiLs^sfeLwi                  uSU/aJ'          V v A ( p ^ 2M a d
^ d o j r i ^ u u          « A ^ i        <^Wv\oubU-j             W^tA.     tM D ^
VNA^dfi          2 u ^ e ^ t r c V        t o    d U s C O v € 5 +Ufi- J ^ o t o

                 U . w^&dbL avacK iguvX JfaA A ^r
 t o   J S   u    j r f c v *       • ^
 ao, U a ^ o *        ©f                « j ^ o C A + S f f v v i/ S V u c ^ n           .
 e ^ p e c jto                  c o w > -w v & /w U                te ^    \ "    '     1 0

 o j j w t a p v e ^ ^                  . *00        a ^ A ^ o u ^ J r      o f

                           oouJL^           e    ^       a i c ^ - t o r    u s v s ^

 W      ^    S      i a    ^        ^       Sv a c U W            sV ow J^ ta
   tx > v ^ U o c L + o                 *e ^ 3 A .




     £ *>    to *         ^     a       , w          ^   g    ^      y
   3 ^ o v a M . be. ^ c o c L - k ) w e ^ a ^ 7 ^ -
                     W                  vaX

  ftj^ V e e U U                                                  , ,% S k '
  y r * * * *
   *U        ^         S v x p f tr r V         fr ^


       MC»x 2 U £ . vaa z^pcgn in ^ / v

                   M p vju G .

                                    Ms<
The Chairman,
The Football Association,                         Huddersfield


                                                  16th April 1989



Dear Sir,


 I would like to make the following suggestion with regard to the raising
of compensation for the victims of the incident at Hillsborough on Saturday
15th April.


      1)       Refund to be offered to spectators attending the match with the
understanding that any unrefunded monies be donated to a fund for the
benefit of the victims.


        2)        Replay of the match at Vembly with all gate receipts donated to
the same fund.


  In this way it should be possible to raise a substantial s u m in addition
to any other monies raised.



 Yours Sincerely,




 P.S.

   I   am not a football fan. I have not attended a match since the early
  seventies.
                                                                                   tq|if




                                                                    CHESTERFIELD



                                                                    15 APRIL 1989


THE CHAIRMAN
fflE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION            O '
LABCASTER GATE
LONDON



Sir,


I write as a father and upto two years ago a local football referee of some
fourteen years who loves a-nd lives football. I have taken my wives and children
to football matches. First division, second division, third and fourth division,
and always had faith in the authorities handling of the crowds from Old Trafford
and Maine Road to Chesterfield.


Today at Sheffield the true football supporter was totally let down, injured
and KILLEI by the authorities. (THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY).


Fences built to stop supporters from getting onto the pitch killed many today.
Surely now they must be built if built they must be with every section easy to
open in cases of emergency to allow access to the safety of the pitch.


After Bradford all grounds were inspected and money spent to facilitate a safe
exit from the stands onto the safety of the pitch in cases of emergency.
What case now for the true supporter who stands behind the goal an. the terrace?


Where do we go from here? As go we must and go we will. Life goes on but must
the supporters who were killed today die in vain?
fh» authorities must be trained      trained well to cope with large crowds and
to deal with all situations as they arise. (The opening of an exit door to release
pressure on the turnstiles is not the answer - the answer is to cope   with the
pressure in the first place and not let it get out of hand)»

Ways must be       to "»*** sure only ticket holders are allowed anywhere near
to grounds holding all ticket matches •-

Many semi-finals in Scotland ase played at Hampden. Park. - Surely now. is- the tine
to acknowledge the true supporter and play the semi-finals.at Waabley with the
tickets going just to the two clubs involved.

But that is of the future. What of now today?

The P.A.Cup competition of 1988/1989 must nowstand as a memorial    to the
HXSR'TY THREE football supporters who were killed one sunny Saturday afternoon
in Sheffield by no fault of their own, and now be ABANDONED.


The true F.A. Cup winner must be the supporters and any monetary gains by CLUBS
and F.A. put second.


TODAYS DEATHS/MURDERS AND INJURES MUST BE ACKNOWLEDGED AND NOT IGNORED.




A true football lover and supporter,
                                                                                   Q   j^
^        A j- ytrtfall

    *0 & m Y                                                          g o sm ju Z JL

                      p '- f ] ^       C up     Yu rvo JL     . iV - t    d w v fc .

          ^          /zMsQujid            U-L jO'1{)-^J-&c{ t o^> a.
         ^ / n J s u £jl-       /ter                  '^ c u r 'o /    ^v-/t_-fc: ib jlA
         0T\        S oJt      I S 'tL     ^     (XjfUMst. .                   ^    a/no
                               /t^ ^ u      m iu tc k j fa r           <uu>- ^ t ^ A s r ’
     Lsdstitfso                                                       ^£ u —            oy^ oJL^

    \M ^ l*c L        u>c                                             O vT rts^c]      (b s ,

d C c /^ J c            Cj c     enru •+ ^          ^n yr^o crU .              ^ lA ± .

    (X         fo       l* /t* r iM U y J J k              ifa    s tb y           C 4M -

    jfv c ^ Y                      /tjL c iJ —     'S M jtbjO CrT/(js fx4_ J              f
         crth >        c ^ f - t . j /Q u s f\^                                    -s C ^ c ,

    C /T D ^J-^n        dub         (r J i’/ynJhQ jU f y         O -OiLl                        i
    [rJ oJUk.          o J L o f > ’d tisvwy rfr~£
     (y-u JZ                                  ■'iy t^ C 'Y ~^U L& /L/3 - ^ -4 jL ( J ,
    fy ju p ^ L •^ firm.                 c*. J& Jl^tsrU G jY y •c < ijo p o y ^ u ^ y n
^eurv^                                              * -IdstruiA^j
      6 ^ x u n r^jX i^ -
                          U & Q **-                                C y tftr n * .

k a v ^ c a tlz t                   ,            r ftfifid            i S    h - ' 'Z 1?
 LW w                              0 ^ '^ '

                       L ocx- A^t (jt^ -c d : ^ G j - u k /U - ^
   J^rt'CL-UjLL                                      r s r v r n ^ IxcL £ ji.L ./Or
   X sr^j ^ ’r ^V rX         X'TVW Uj                         f& X ^y \ ‘y d t ^ - ) c"Ux_

  '^ f \ J    $~tj .          /y<? M.
                                                                    Ay^~     <
                                                                             jLc*

    i^''r^^5•/*'l-'>n•'c',               IV               /C^li^Lc-                 'JZ'-ii'C 'dx
    h u . jv iy js tu * 'O iio C ^ L r| &                    ^        tw L ^X ^z-rJyj
    I r s x i K<rC L,y^^~t-i4P C ik < N-c A/                                      & pJi*A-
                              Ls£yr^yr^ -n-4            /^£ K ji^u'} ^-l VV-C^/'■'-/. ^ .it J

    /C J/Z v                  «-        d * r * J X iL ^ L ^ X j ^ J              d f
    fk ^ n jX K .             o^    .     ■f a c X ^ n k y 'J u < ^ - / > x                 ((

     ^O^vCcl^                                          uCi-                                ■ ‘
                        f t JV^i. /C jU i->
    /O ^ J M j-o J X 'j      Js~J       l ^ j o t j ^ t 7 W v > f l /CV.                     (Z~^

             bo                                 ^-c~^S jJ ^ 3 /ch-*< c£jt~cA^

   ^-J l\a.                  ^cW           CtTfaynsSiXtl-                   c^t          --
A - lU     .                               '‘                                    '<W|
                 Lcc-e^-o-^ /g tu js *                 ■i^W-u/A jw vi^-en***-
                 0 J!
                        G .tic ^ A       tX o k       A& A M u l* O ^ r b J
                           ot               K g a ^ J U ^ 'U

  i^ A         h ^V     /C U & sy J C l* ^ . t o J ^ c ^ J       6+d u o

         bj in j-                    Jjut c \L        Ju L a . , &■ ^       fy
  l^ v r J U j                       , w ^ -          /C - u ^ ^ ^ L y y t -
               ^ W - c ru^*                                     r* * * ^    'h h -

  ,CLcJL                             flit's * *          ej)
                         .J l^ r u X k    ,L ^    ^                     .
f~- ^      buJU *JtiAM - ,
I^X jvC xX 'U ^.i ijC x J ^ t                                           i f f ^ j z ^



                    \h
                         !

                             L u a ^ i, J/V/t £)h*-<xX M^-Lc t-i'ik '

 <l'X<U\JC y c L u '^
   ^ u v -s ^ J L     /C(A - £ v !~ ~ ''j      c^ 1--{'                                     '|" irTV   '

   U;       C^vy)              "r>U- ( ^
              \ f ^ T ~ l /CU c ± y ^    'J'                J \ A ^   — -Q^v-^ / & V W ^     lvi2.*.K_

  /^ferucWU^                                         c d -t to          U K . W ' W              &
  ir-a ^y ^^             L i Z ^ j ly .\u ^ > ^ J i ^-a t * j & ■ j ^ y * J ^ o - - J
   ?tJj_                                                     A y^J             — /6v^ ti^cxk

  ■'SLr-C                        3-£ C ^ cL . a,sX


                    (2-c4>~^_ \7 ^                'Ck/Wvwi—               yy                    l'. c.

    C'rCC\-                             C'u\^ sjj7-\ '^'-£v>~iy /^ i-                        -JZk-*-
   4L(l\xJ^ _^jcrU^j                                       -vwC^      JoU-X'+J /•£«.■       — ‘^L_

   A        /OirTw.                      f   k^-                                 1-^.o^cK^

   .JO-*-*-*— - ^& -4 rxJiu K fc o                        4^jUUi                           ' (
                                                                                             ^ ^ u-
               /VvfTK>Cv--^
                         1 ^                                   ^             XaJ CuJu^k.

A M J c JL                    & *■ ^fTx^ejTXJ^o ^kvL fidAcuvCA- CK-
 J d jS ^ 2' A t* * ju .'Co                       /s-4^rr-*~ <;                                       •
        O'r"" u;Tru^C                       k .c u u . fa d -* -~ ~ ^ - U ^ j f ^ s s j Z ,
 / q      d u £ * ~ ch -               6 i<A.                            £n> U J t^ u J L j - ' I t r x .
  Cj r y w C Cu<- tec U . OJjl tiu.                                                    ^       Cn^ ~
  ( / j /ft^cvc                                                ■C u^ - clU^-l a l           $k*A ,

  ^H'^CCX' k ij                 Znjar^')-*-                          . ' PU~^x£                           ■

          Jt                 jl X^     A.    ^CaJXcx^          4$^                \-J-oi' -^es/

  /fW                                                                              M s ■n j ^
                f~Tr^-£--                   -X^olh~o-^~ok-~i
  A~o <!ivw- jX ^ J -                   ^-y ^       * y jc ^)<~r^i ?Q ^'a-^~'
   b          ■JV^v^c^-',(S^-A ^                   6 ^/. f ^ ^ J L           ^ h 'tA .
                    c\\J~ 'v V w                           ,       U l’- cJu. !><.                    ^

   A v ^ U v -^ n               C jlc, k ,                                 L ^ y ^ J             } $
    yttZc^k-          i t c ^'i^ji-njj<. jfyujA^ & 'A jj- lfi-KX-o{ "F^A^Y-C.
   /TfM ^-djL vJ^L A*^~ l c                     L* :U j            JX-                     cl_r-<^
               o./Kc^-i~ck X*-d^evC                                0 /Sl 5 6<-<'*■'- ■.

                6) k-c j^ccjjij                                ;              ^     ^"jo-

       ■t £    -?   •'M /V     -fe e   Jz^XJUL A t ^cA. ■ ( 1^                ^          k - £ t t ~ «_
                             1

/dUc<_,dUj^ ibtcJL' fa*                       UnU K**-

            ff.^k S kscuJJ^ liL-jj /^u ^cL c l^ C                             A>
A -4 4m ^>I' I \ l c i 1 £ i o u C 6A.(L \ ) !^>4frV*L M x>^~
fa j- $-*d£ju f c t s d . Ct/7u/-/_                      /^ ,t'
 fw ^X > Jl . $ uCUf s?VutblX<j.A4UA 1 1

     /LjevJLA Ur w*rfr
 fe io A tu L         &kA                           X-c
  ^ ju JO m j        A * * - 4- k v * J -                         < f^
                                     Uac                 ^ Center                    ^rv-C

       LJ_& * /^C. .^yl^                  x                                  (l/>—
\A ^ J C t-iCivLvw^AZ^-j                      Tm ^x S        £>
■ i w r ^ ^ ^ C c x k ^                       *W.        ^         ^         [ - n r iu ~ l ~
 /to                                                                     .                ,.
        -^ L o J i     [ J -O ^ j                        (-w^x. •'U^-rwL
 A A 'I          L c f ^ i k 'X '^                                 ^f-   ^
  r^w^[          '«H                              ( A \A ^ y ^ r — ^


           3 K M ^ m K T ' ^ r&                                ^         /C ^ Y )'T i^ y c
 J jL c J b Cc*ssJ( ftA 4 ^ 'L * < -J -j£ n A ^          l^ y U                   1a .
 K^U^CT J-ttyi^               a%_ fcM iroJS- /> t-jJ^rrklro ~r
  j-^u^jZYO            ^ \p jc      /t+^~>|^-^vt^^lw('             *%sOl
                                                         M<rv<_


/Q^jr*^aMj'tL<1   h> fa-*-                      ^      /fCcry(- (-

& t      £ X jl (X * * -            3               fie m r u i.


                           '/ J lA ~ & * -i A
                                    W                U .C L fO A J




\OlLCU. Jkusr-',
                       3        ju ro -u J L d c    J L a M jl, J t-o M-0 jya-te^r

jnru^,                           ^ ctvo                  C*J^ J £ \J L            tJjfl^O L su feA

V K frJ jL    J^_          J o^CcjdsUS* J ^ /U rr-y C *                       n M e ^ J :: JJL^e_

                                         ^ utg J L    . loLc               cU* ^ S - ju 'U l’u.vj-e

M jl X*> \                                                                      -
                 3 an^              <3- rvA-tw-^                     oU syjJi^z^ensdL -             cu ^~

^V-L'^C’
       Vl.                          crvJL i^r , «Lj          w4/>u+- . u ^ lx r r ^ .-')        U.’t u ^ t j

Jsc     ty ^ ju J z    CL^                                           b 'V -

J i^L    .''^y^'~J-< A-         >V^-£~c t     /Wlx

 5| iX^v rus't                                      Aj? .      (i^s,*         cL cl->-z.   J^'jl.



J i^ U C 'U ^ i1^ .              c ^ O -v -    <Ua^cA_               (L,      J ^ tn ^ ^ c

X r ^ Y 0^ . .            I’U       »o      /u- ^ ^              ^
 G^v^Ur*J/L                                                     AX^_ O’T^j s Qs' iasuO

 l<ll     (y ia y in ^ e ru ^J ^,       Jl^L e-^>      i/u-           £                    9-

 O/W^l^ru^s            JLi>       J^L eZ 'j-) >U*o       C*'’*JC                  df**-->-cs^/Q-e
                                       "t~ -b-*   /V     ^    .




\jbiUC~vT>JLS}   o i~~                                            ^

jU X X lr 1      J ^ n' ^ £- /^rv-e_                   U y rrJ o L


w/ r r U x i ^ ^ ^ - ^         wniX,

^     JU ^JU .    J jb   /VH^-    J y U rry L * .        ^   ^

1/v^^ ''K^-'C     ouL & ^-e.




                  ./l^gWvO                          _________
                                                                                                                N ^Vrn i L.'-'I -C'

                                                                                                                             •   tWf-
                                       i
                  f      C l'S
                      -t



   ^ i S f r r f S JT                  s^S?/?/Z 3r> **rzP                                 ‘S ■*'       S* ^ £ - ■

/A                                                            ~                                       /*?■               JP.

«_5^ / ^ c n t a - ^                                          A ^ ^ c f,                           **ssc ^-C                     /C k - ^
                                           Y
 / <3r> '^p               y'

                                   S &                            Z-         A x >/3iy'          ^L'~C'2'/Z<y?
   s
       ^               3c?        C ~n>                           T e              & < ^U r7 l           y z^

       /Z ? /-               ^ t^ S f/P S t                            (*£> S ?      //'~*-r/**£_            /^> ---


                                                                                                     V            *
           /// (~/'^/~ sy /                    .                                             o
                                                                                          /•& > ' S .r „ f ~ r

            f ^ ^ Ss ' j T                         > c -~ 7 ^ :

                                           S ^                 / ^ ’ 'I           Z//^-

                                                                           //V*             y y U - ^ ;'7?z k s Y'S'
                 y ^ " .?

                      t n / / s r /V               s r ^ /c                           £ /L ~ S           /9 //c ^ s J    .
                                                                          N"   (   f "   h
F.A.O. Mr Bert Millichip - Chairman.                                               2 lif
Football Association,                                   Cheetham,
16 Lancaster Gate,                         (r ^         Manchester,
London,
W2 3L .V.
                                                        19th April 1989




Dear Sir,

      I urge you to consider the following. After the tragic events of Saturday
ay first reaction was that the FA Cup competition should be abandoned for this
year. A s time went on I felt-it should go on with the monies raised going to
the families who suffered loss.   I now firmly believe that a mAtck should go
on at Wembley (with the profits going as suggested), it should be played
between. Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, (the two teams most closely invloved
with the tragedy), there should be no winners medals handed out, there should
be no cup held aloft i n triumph, the match should only be played as tribute
to the people who died and no mention of competition should be made as it has
now lost all it's significance.

     I am sure none of the players left in the FA Cup this year want to play
on, under the banner of "'A’inners and losers competition". How can anybody
expect any player to play in a knock-out tournament, how will the players
feel receiving a "(Vinners" medal, how will the captain feel raising the cur; in
triumph, how will the Liverpool players feel if they don't win the cup for
their fans, how will the other team feel if they prevent them from doing it.

     The most important thing to remember is the bereaved families, although
some wo-old not be offended i f the FA Cup went ahead, none of them would be
offended if it was cancelled as a gesture of understanding of their feelings
and some would find it callous to go on and they nave suffered enough.

     Call it the FA memorial match,    call it anything but don't call it tne
FA Cup competition.

     I am sure Liverpool and Overton can hold their own benefit match in
Liverpool as well.

     Please think seriously about what I have suggested,    I know you will and
I know you will make the most sensitive decision.

     I have sent this same letter to the following people:-

              Mr John Smith - Chairman - Liverpool.
              Mr Graham Kelly - F.A. Cheif Executive.
              Mr Maurice Roworth - Chairman - Nottingham Forest.
              Mr Phillip Carter - Chairman - Everton.
              Mr Peter Robinson - Cheif Executive - Liverpool.


                           Yours respectfully,
                                                                    p y                                          ’> ■ * ■ * i-
                                                                  t*


   ‘b ca s £ x s ,
   & ' l4ilC ik< ir(U < Jfb
                                    Cu>          M fU x & U f C J u u x ^ f             J        4 * *Se***(

             / » W        £ ~ * « v            -$ * * * “           '                            >1    L * * * ,* " *
 I v tA tU A                             H C ite U tj               *&       •* *           •**•»■*       A '-
                                   0*\ ~ZU*4Uy                                              J                                    ^
AaZP o ih s u j          ^oy       - w W /                     A c fU + 4 4 ^               *
f^ r         4 Ul           s i +!z L    *           fH        M *U .
                         P jL ^ L c ^ i          £        Ouux.     & L lp .        y           ^ C i/iA s J c iU €       4AC 2

 U ~»                                        *i c J M             u * #                                          + *»
M          lu £          -fa                                 Ju.kS^’ Jus                                    --r
                                                                                                  V T * * ' .                         A
^ * J ju      JU h                                                £ h lt * b * + o y j< ^                                 ~ ^ 'J     £****-

9 f -J u c     C L £tC £L t+ ^f         i+'Zsy                               .

                                                                   t& X Y < + * U o C + ix,           %

 J * ~ iu s ^             *+>      '£ •’&                                    ■& *


                     3     < to               V*-/ ~A                               ^        - X c W             j^ C    * j£ .^ ^      **\

  'j u       & /h c       M   - fa *          '< & * ) , CU%M * * * * y ^                                                        ^
               Jut        ky^c a              a** < u± £K criH U U c ( jv *                         ^ J A        £*y
              4 itM y             **4            1*ZGs < ^ £ + » ^ P *****              tX£U~*c*L*          t**>       ^ C Z l+ t    fy y C -
   AI~»        r t & J A*           c u U A ff^ t^ u a .                    TU      o e ^ ~ t~ u ^ >         0UIMU* <*u

   • o J fx ftA      '
                         & j M x k f * , tU               t* t l* t± ** e        * f + jm ~ J *£*+fj u*/u^.,             A M ^i ^
   A uU tdf tf ftu f A '                                       yuou tluJneA . J g '*u*^ ^ c ^ j f ipn-
   Couk           *< W *u/                   6 * fia * u J Z » K          < *~A     < K f* t* j^            ^+ c~ x 4 «

           u^?
                                         vi& \                      mT
                                   (y


                                            ri-iiUftpg^^                ***•

-Tt«           JU~I, .V                 S W ^ ^ . U b - f N —                        ^
/          H          ,    L       u »               W        h, f o i r . ^ t i ^
f a H * *» * » « • • ' J ~ >                               , ,    J, . J . u \
(O.H.,                    J-             <•               ^        * "



                                        ~                  « r H         . ^    ^
                               ‘   \ l; 2 r £                    t t
    f t o t «pK^ He { * » i* e * T - ^               \                      ^



      ii       c. A                 a c «Lj J * j ft+%                  •

     -n « fl«,H. l«*ir«»J W                                             J?£,l
               l«W K* to - r * f' *«*■ *"'1                         5


      ,«pU                         -**            ** * “ **
      -    m.    -v—               Jr         •           y ^ s v c ^ i,.


                                                         W « - » • • H ^ ' ,^         ‘i
                                                         G^F.c         **- • H * * * ' "
                                             24th April, 1989


Northumberland,




Dear Mr.
                      HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY
      I am writing to thank you for your letter and to ask you to
forgive me for not replying to you in detail. As I am sure you
will appreciate, a very large number of letters have been
received.
      All the letters have expressed sadness and, in some cases,
disbelief at the awful events at Hillsborough.  We join with you
in sympathising with all those personally affected, in whatever
way, by the tragedy.
      Many of the letters have made suggestions concerning
perimeter fencing at grounds, often with helpful diagrams, and we
are studying these most carefully.
       Others have made their views known on whether this season's
F. A. Challenge Cup Competition should proceed or be abandoned.
Either way it is a very difficult decision for The Football
Association to have to make. We recognise that it is a very
sensitive situation.
      Thank you once again for your interest and support at this
difficult time for football.

                                     Tours sincerely




                                     F. A. Millichip
                                     Chairman-
 T el                       |                                   \^C   r             '          ,
                                                                                               i
                                                                                                    NORTHUMBERLAND.



 %C ?vrtUiL A***eX*XU»v,
                                                                                                    U*                     MtJ •

 U©wi-or4.              ^



        tU~-                ***w         •***-                                            wtc~tCv*A

                         *«-        t - ^ T :               ^                 <*» * * j                -u -*:. ^

*«**.              ^                                            J     ~            t * 4           ^
i.      U.                                       !*>**«■•                 ^        * ^ W<           “ *~
,A       fc,       P.A- J o ,                         u i        b tu -               -l           fc*                       -
        ,-U        yfc                                                **                                                             «"*

^       ^          u < ^ -                                            ^ b ***• - ~                           • ir*"
u « —           *c-         -i-**            -f«*       —       *-                       *-* **-                  ^          *“
J u ^ _             fc. ^                fur -                                                 ^       ~J.            ‘r


                    0   0            i                 u. l l                  (a^U       ^        Ac^u-tvv-b^               -*
o»-^M          4 |,oJ5UA             U           **                                       .,                  7

3       iL ? uw -i ^                                    ^
               *                                 t c K ^                      -      ^                                                 ^
r * W          ^                -----
  1,0               ,                        «        i »                                                    ;,       tUvj c-w
d y w               t_ *         ^           fc* w *~ * ~ — ]
-J       *~ w * ‘                        r~ ^                   ***            u               Htt V                  ~ * '~           "
Lj,      k         U        »        iL-A, l w                  ****           “ *•

                   ,        J J T        2        r             ^              ^               H         —                       -
                        J U mJLA           b




A ju   cc   ^   t       e * * -" * •


            k^A              ^     ^           Wwo*v(m           «iuU     < * ^* U            l> «U 4 X ^ * 0 *

                    w        eta                             ,        is<xc     ~       ft<     F.a ./

                                           Uit^. ,               ^       «j~    * U - M         i*            —     J
t


                ° -'
                    r    -
                                   C«**»


                                   “ -     ' r    *
                                                   Al .

                                                         -
                                                                 -_      M.    *

                                                                               ,;
                                                                                    vj... , ’ -Jfc-

                                                                                    r
                                                                                                           te C^o


W “&*                        AA^. 1
                                     ____________                          QS^Lf
                                     ROTHERHAM


                              TEL: ROTHERHAM



                                                    1ST- Aj^v —       ['

           v     T ) <L i . c j     ' p




                                      5,'       .




                                           1 uSKf-C . O -L

loohiXe,^                locf'boU o u                 Tv /       i    voLo


 Vt&            p\£^^              o.^    d-^Qjws^           ^        c-p^_'
(^<jOS^cu                     to Co^-L-t-•■^vev_o             ML* t C e .          ^f4
C ju ^ d       T ^ 'A j q J    •    " F \o -t        u d '- |        I 'v y

                              '-fax' d t o          $*< c ^          o q   -^

                          j5\itc^-<cJ-eiDl-<_,                        ooJ^_cJ
                    TLvS      i^cs-e^s*. h o                , cxe^
 tOd. p5V-e)0-tC_e_ K-ccJ-                     T-i-asaJ U0c>^Lci

 be- pU^-'-^.cJ          'c_<. ^tgL.'tcxv_^                iLoS'e
  toU> k> tu^vdxU^ oVejd ,rC,
                            -<.sJ—ocid
 to           -40-^, bl-d                                      ti-o
 |^x_-fc. >\e_j2cM-dV^ I^           lo^»V b g J o ^ L - o i
 rt£-<fc>^^         c ' ^ -VCe_."

                     L j ^     LcO e           <cJ S o     J ^ l d C o c*

         tUe-     pLo-^e^^          u^L          L o J C dkLCo^r
 C5^ci       jS'fcope^                           —       orv=* H j ^ - e

      pe£2 _' Vo be, O ^ - y ~                        cx<— '
i^poVs.'                 'pz.S K o , __.
                    f\jo^ fcxv FV-e^ ■fs's.v- <fr-£e                   '
               ,f 4u e f A                            Uo^c
c^< ^j   G ~u ^               g ^ S , T \ . o '
         •                     p          i>



                  ^ o ^ /s,          l\              —f
                                                                                   tCJ
                                      2-




                                                               ''h r * -
  'p u cut       ? w

          C L Cl C^Ni^L -tX ^                     U*-A/^~- VxTL- i u i V v
 fu        P       ^       ^^v>   C. . x   ~   i 'V v >                   t ln .    \ ^ \ j,


 ,VvL              |>s^

          V\J t tA-^ Av^<—
                         >1                           i tv> iv' Ifah.                               ^
lc,t j.t; ,
          V ^ ,OvJ,               SJ '•.1/- V_ C"/ (A A (' C<                                       /

                    -      *r— S v ^            k                     T            cv"ikvV -
l-f                        \_ (US c v                     ;i          " ^ ~ H ‘ v ; i < < i_ v ,\

                                                                      /■\           J
      L    V.^    L.U > . A .         L'(_vu                                  C            v.

*>a-C/M^
                                                                r -
^"v-L^l^rvv             c -,      i ^<T^~ts -iK.v.n-^- i                           / ; x i u, j
                 CC^lA^           L^l-A •<- O                                 C""\/
C lji w ^ p U          ^     l    \-

          I'-'TiV i ; . K r U       i
                                                                       K ! g ?a a - £ Q >




           Kjj U»tMjl£Li.0& 4- M -o-C-^-Q. ■-»

                     -O^r-                «■-^ - /»V/, £v*. tS a.1^ '                 i_j
*£ £U& krb**JL xao                  AS* £*~JIj»~,| s+ flifjiX l-^-a-^-                  q-


H*J2. totUu , b fc b &                           4> JU ^jt~3*>                 M r tu jd ^
/ x ^ t /% e $ L ^ u / A w i w / ^ ‘^, ’b ^ j - ^ t L x s& vJ L A ± u * ~ ck

£ji&~y H+-Q-                           /o~±3C&
                                       ^ &       C        j 2   - I'J.^ ^           -1 ■>-


                                   £&**'*+*    '~ C
                                                  S   '            f           r             <


           CtcusA &Jc*+A-

 Mhoi i >Uj (v©- ^ i.C A * ^ e .         t^ tlfc b jL X     A r^Ja ,          c^zT

 ^ jL K ^ o S J L c d ^ A .^ *   /€ tt fcJt& Jfco     lJ L u 4 ~    K o Jkx. ^
                      \


                           to                               ^^4

                                       /ct J b U S ^ L * * v t b s > Q.te&<* «rk\aL

     A&tujJL £&. U jt^d sJ i (&iedk H+s* AjL+-+oJl
          11)*6lA         jk&boJlsCX+AX.                                   JtSU -utfJs. -^CU^Tv'IT



  J b tA iJ v hc*-4-*> r> 4& JLj                                  JL ^         C m ^j-J L b

  7©,Qo® ^ S o,oo-o
      ^                              "(Xj **                                                      <wfk^
                                    u J9*4j£*»»                                            t*>^-Js-€.
                      U S ^tL        f'€-A
 JhjL <*«-                             '-W >

            'iZe. U ieJU tL FTa.

 ^                                                   j& *o& Ai*JX©-rt2^-<s
 A ^ L p            M -A & J ltJ /* u , JOJ-C- i & ^ r y j^ J b u
                ‘ 4 Q-~   ■ j^ t i^ G * '   ^   O     $ 2 -^ C ^ £ . - (

 ]i-A £ o                          /^r"0-t*x&S> Ak^o'

■A jk ^     m    &\z                                     JbtLji /&£tuLMsfy /q *a % & xJLz . (
 c*-i£a^b e jtju C JtA j^JjL ^cA . ^                             tu te & J l Ae-r
     ^ “•^u^Tc-Cw                                                                  T^2*a A s u ^ £ J J ^
                                                    <**^3 LOa«.
     |$U 2.           JL t& jn k ‘jdhZnfatJt
 ii^jL " 4 & + J & *            4        & L        im^l ' a L u j l            4
 JL <X ulotj& /dLr^Ksa^                                              w          p   -
 u j& j2 J? in c. A ^ ts L    ko       e * y L u J& L c<             «**»

               Jyi& AcX*- 4 ^ ^ isy C t^!& ~ + 4 . *vu>»C b i

I‘Vvun-t^-tf^ A * -jfl       p L a/}    Jr£ft4-$>                           #

 \»JbccJ2- £*^*J*+s *4, *&. .\L o * J d 2 tt4              h + lt^    M & J&



 /t& jiu ^       /Oa^ L a q U L l^         M s    a*Jt^52i        K ^ t
jfa ijJ z     L ^ M   L      *£e«*£        fth u } ivro^A^. , ^ C .
         oftiJUeJLfl^yfcua^ c w L                         jKa    J ^ e ^ i

/•      yP                                  ; C&JL*. !<•&. '’"^ • Mlf4S>
                                                      ka^Cjl r^-€ A ^ c ,
j2^T M-&4L*. j^cZ H $ * 4 .                      no b*a$X jur               $*+*&>'
          A& & U &.J AO      u J ^ s T UU2- n o J zJ L J j t                **<
<Uja                           A@       jL c h s J u & u J Z .       0

                       ^ pQ*su<>          ■££s\Q e.+ '& .'£y^
                                                                                                                d '; tu, \^C‘




                                                               n -                  ^v*s
                 ^    • V(l ( i v c 4 ^ '

                                      LjJ2—       L«w%j-e—                             im S   -                 ^    ~ ^* ~


                                     <^ * " °                        *J\g*- Cvh<>4L

  Uja^yt i c o ^ .           O     1- ^X- Ur»^.                                          Ls^Xtr .

        J            ^                              <ct      v-or4»Jtr                                -4^( (fsX»>nrw^C

  C'~ < rik-                 ^                                                                                           -
        i^r- 4i*Jt- 4 ©                   Uw«_                       «-*■ «- g**^c-               c   I m J W -       -*x

 4U.        P.A       . ^        Ia u ^    j^   M * -      <^X                           *~X.



  ^r-tL. r.A.                ec^Ar •

         "’’’’
             [Cu-e^      ^                 <&^G_ r ^ s ^                — fLo-_    -^c-lt-( Iu^«-(l£^U*£- t

  uA"^ ***-&_ <v*--c^vs_jfe-^- —Vo fl-^x^ H’^*-                                                           ^ r ^^             c •


               ^JVAw Af-<_                f^-^.                             l\w.£Kv»fcW<. ^ j -

  gVwt -^c_ »wl*o                   W- y*-sc^«- — ^ -4^a- ^

                                     <*<✓\£&~              ^r<r^o— e\




                                     fW^> /'Iv




•K M^vvcLa^s.                    ^<2^r»            —    ^ r ^ t r 'i t l i L .   ,v*_0v*&^                   eSkx^
                                                 MRROGATE,
                                                 North Yorkshire,
      17.4.89.




      D*ar Mr. Milliehip.
                           I aa writing this letter after witnessing the aost
       aaazin# display of Callousness I have ever seen In ay entire life. Of
       coarse it regards the attitude of Grahaa Kelly aa seen ky Billions of
      viewers on television after the ghastly tragedy at Hillsborough on
      Saturday.
            Isaw the picturesj people dying in front of ay very eyes, rival fans
       forgetting their sporting differences,besotted with a coraon grief. I
      was brought to tears. And caae that aonent which I still have difficulty
in coning to teras with. Most people were still deep in grief, most that is
       except Mr. Kelly.ON television he remained unpeturbed nonplussed and
       worst of all unaffected by the upsetting events.Itsurely could have
       done nothing' for the berieved in particular.His lack of coaaitaent to questins
       could be described as wise given the short period of tias after the disaster
       buthe just did not seem to care His coaments were tactless, his handling
       of the situation was utterly tactless.
           I have to say he disguted me and I think he has greatly daaaged
       the F.A.'s already dented reputation.He should be aade aware of the damage
       to many he has done,and then disaissed for the ireperable lack of tact
       he shows topossess.

                  Yours sincerely




                                     (Student)
                                                                                  I P I lf -



                                                 BELFAST
                                                 14 APRIL 1989

MR BERT MILLICHIP
FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
LANCHESTER GATE
LONDON

Dear Mr Millichip

I wa s h o r r i f i e d and d i s m a y e d to read this w e e k t hat y ou are
in vi t i n g the I t a l i a n F.A. c h a i r m a n A n t o n i o M a t a r r s e and o t h e r
r e p r e s e n t i t i v e s to the Cu p Final. I t h i n k yo u s h o u l d r e c o n s i d e r
as it w o u l d be a gr e a t insult to E n g l i s h Fo otball.

I w o u l d like a full e x p l a n a t i o n as to w h y the I t a l i a n s got off
scot-free. W h y w e r e n ’t b oth c o u n t r i e s b a n n e d in s t e a d of one?
A f t e r Hy sel I t h o u g h t that w o u l d happen. I w as wrong. It is so
u n f a i r to all o t h e r E n g l i s h clubs, e s p e c i a l l y L i v e r p o o l as the y
are not a l l o w e d b a c k into E u r o p e for at leas t fo ur seasons.
J u v e n t u s wer e b a c k the next season.

Now the G o v e r n m e n t is h o l d i n g clubs and fans to r a ns om abou t
the s e ID Card s or the U E F A d e c i s i o n w i l l cou n t for nothing. Does
Italy have an ID system? I bet you t h e y d o n ’t. I w a t c h e d w h a t
h a p p e n e d that n i g h t in the H ys e l S t a d i u m in horror. I saw some
I t a l i a n s w i t h guns and o t h e r lethal we ap o n s . The Liv erp ool fans
were just as m u c h to blame, but as I said b e f o r e both c o u n t r i e s
s h oul d have b e e n banned.

O n c e a g a i n I w o u l d s t r o n g l y appe al to you not to invite the
I t a l i a n F.A. b e c a u s e I feel tha t the I t a l i a n s are l aug hin g at
us. I just w i s h s o m e o n e w o u l d see sens e and r e a l i s e that the
Ital i a n s shoul d be br o u g h t to boo k for t h e i r share in the H y s e l
disaster.         I a m v e r y a n g r y at the w a y the w h o l e a f f a i r was
h a n d l e d and so are m a n y of m y f e l low f oot bal l supporters.


Yours    sincerely
                                                        *QC&M>eO 2 o %



                                        Colchester,
                                        Iweit

Mr.Bert Milliehip.(Ch»±*man).           Phone-S.T.D<
The Football Association,
16. Lancaster Gate,
LONDON,
W2.                                             19th April 1989.


Dear Mr. Millichip,
W« have written a letter to Mr.John Smith Chairman of Liverpool
City Football Club today, offering our sincere sympathy to them
after the terrible tragedy at Hillsborough last Saturday.
We have suggested to Mr.Smith that provided Everton and Notts
Forest, and of course the Football Association agreed. It would
be a fitting tribute to all those people who died and to those
who were injured and perhaps handicapped for the rest of their
lives. If the F.A.Cup coapetetion were closed now and the F.A.Cup
handed over or presented to Liverpool City Football Club as a
permanent memorial to all those people.
Alternatively should our suggestion not be acceptable then we feel
in that case that the rest of this seasons competition for the
F.A.Cup should be put on ice until the start of next season when
it could be completed.
We have told Mr. Smith that we were writing to you regarding the
F.A.Cup, if it were agreed to present Liverpool City FoAtball Club
with the present F.A.Cup, Then a new F.A.Cup could be played for
next year and the following years.
Trusting you will not mind us making these suggestions, We felt
it was a good idea and hope everyone may agree to give the Cup
to Liverpool.


Tours most sincerely.


          and Mrs.
      <S|-fc.                   *W *U                 .          _           l*                n^



IU         &
               (■jiAl/ bgrtx^           ©It-- *                                       Qc^

«i-                 \Jt*Jc *fe                             ***+Arhf±         lfc-X-             ^*3 -Xv^c<_
                   oUv€, Po ^ p/u^vuUij                    ba«-u^ $           Kc      ><Y*A*r                   »^^fii-

       ^       "Ho- n ^ jo ^ io j     *J                   ^ tU         tW                                      ®h ^♦vf

        (!)I H*. fvrM. /){/\ 1iat. -feioS U>€_r€_ aAvt o-t-                                    «/tJ^ui      tu _s£k.

        t<.frftOHfll>t Tlfc| cf) He- -fcxiH^ ^Uaf Q>y1 f/U>A CMi^Cu*l^3 -
        l-li>U?Urro<-*^L>       ux* H e                      fv^Utj'^                                              w'u» <=^

        ^           3 ^ .       rJJV           «L. - p W .       xf        111,

           v                tU .       He- J & * - ^              - ^ tU U                 -Hie w           *      ««M
            fc^,          UuCUd            b     It


               I     AvkV              yw~            fWwfc^                                          ^                   *?

                      l^Hv      He_                            *>                                     a~A

       pVW^I^                                                    a^v4      oia4,p/^ eA^ “           f’
                                                                                                     **'v

                      U     ^         awl^            KWOMIS      9        *lj,“ vvS       ^     '*’»*6* ‘ P / W e )
        twL. ft             W J y - H<K s l ~ U v u » X «                  <U^        h^   _                         ^

                                                          *-               <1 * - j V
        V       W         <*< w ^ A X S ,         ■px,           Li;   «   cU.        •]*- K          U , ,s ^

                     r^ovt*A^ ^                He gl'fr^ *)            -pcx/Kyv^XW o ) ^ / L ^                            **•*
           por'V- ouw^          CXjorf .
Dr      t,                          <^SV |^4**P*1         «^3K      Or€L fU^flavl          jo 1*8- ’p"rt^-gk*,
                                                                                                             g> ^
                                ,f A~            ^        f* p t,
                                                                                                                                                                 *ecaJu>JBjc>

      s z :R %                           r r s ^ iR


   Liverpool Airport
   Liverpool
   ^  S®YSide                                                                                                      I                                  T e le p h o n e 061 • 4 8 6 • 5421
   L24 1YD                                                                                                                /f                                                061 • 4 8 6 • 8 8 7 7   Ext. 201
                                                                                                                                                               Telex 6 2 9 6 9 3 A IR L P L G




                                                                                                                                                              •fc /R e f.

                                                                                                                                                              Y o u r Ref.




N^ W r       1 ^   ,


         j             c . -<r           ‘U            S       t       o         1-1 .

                                                                                                                                       —                  £l«=t              -fc-

      <suJJ ^                     U                                        *L ) ~                                             4                                 -M             -^ V

                                            -s~o                                                                                  ^                ■=*“                                                                  1



                                              «X.t                 -J—                   W = q                                                                                        =&-—                 '^e -

                       »~yM                        -               -        i — '■*- -V ^                                                 1               *                                                              '


                                                                               0 ex^»e
                                                                            c ^ e —        '   cJ
                                                                                                                                                                             H.         Jcrv^i>
                                                                                                                                                                                          A   0



         I o^ m C- p o ^                   4           &                   cv~.be                                                                   ^e~~T                                                      •
                                                            OlU* - f                                                      -p -                                    J                                 - lik
                   ^o\o^                  ^        J2«r                                    o-'J             ^              v>k ^ w        « cS                                                                 «— -

                                                       ^                            j ^                                                          j                                                  - ~p„fc



             XX        ^ ^ » < .                               oj3                                                             “W '               "^D— ^                                                       .

                                                                                                       ^ U o ~ J                        ~^-t.

                                                                                               -K                   J\ ^OrC,ru




                                                                                                                                                                       ♦Aft.
                                 Registered O t ln e       C4YZER HOUSE      :    4 S I M 4 R > 4XE lO M OO M E C 34 BBP R e j - s t f e c ir L 0 N 0 0 N No 9 2 4 9 9 '                              ??   1C A A   ri
Mrs. Margaret Thatcher, M.P.                                   Reading
Prime Minister,                                                Berkshire
10, Doming Street,
LONDON.

                                                               17th April 1989



Dear Mrs. Thatcher,

     I am sure that we are all appalled by the tragedy at Hillsborough.
Hie loss of life is regretable in itself, but so too will be the recriminations
and enquiries which will be brought to the attention of the public through
the media over the next few weeks and months.

     Having been bom, and lived in Reading all my lifo I have, from time
to time, supported my local team which, fortunately, has not been in the
limelight of adverse publicity during the past forty years - if ever.
In recent years I have taken my teenage son to watch some of the local
games and although I am a "war baby" I have been appalled at the language
and behaviour of the so called home and away supporters at ordinary matches.

     I can only imagine, from the publicity over the past ten years, that
this is a pale image of what happens at large events and, whilst not wishing
to prejudge the reasons for Saturday's carnage, there must have been a
degree of "unruly behaviour" which may have occurred outside the ground.

     Can I, a non-political, non-sporting fanatic, urge you to bring an
immediate ban on all professional football activity in this country for
the next two years until sense prevails on the part of football administrators,
football players, football fans and, indeed, politicians.   Football should
be a pleasant spectator sport, not a weekly riot involving unacceptable
social behaviour and bad language, which is what it appears to be.

     Such a ban would indicate to the innocent bereaved families of those
who died that we do intend to do something about the current state of
the game and society in this country.

                               Yours sincerely,




cc:   Gerard Vaughan M.P.
      Tony Durant M.P.
      Bert Millichip —
      Jack Dunnett
                                                                                           *P(Tlx*X>c)   .
                                                                                                     cMsi




                    ot-

                          V     cu vw                       V^-e.

                                             ^ vSVfc                        ^ S ^ x j - C ^ U j^ o

oCb      '^Q^s.T           C^JstVN^           (                    oot)^C         -^^S^csJLSl

Vc?      ^€_        cc-Tv^IX.v^ v>-e^!>           *-'"»—■ Ov        ^       ^ V        C^\~

■^rvC.x^^Ovl-^                 0--0                                                        *2


                      Ccv^          ~..\_

(2xk_^         V'Gv.oQ.                Vi c£oo                         vJ-cl^o cf£     )


    C ? ^ vJIa^r<v.vw          W        ^V~        ^^-Vl^SVcTVv                   \^20V-— ,,.c\ v

^     ^ Q o o ^ ^ — Qorv'O^           -C-<h £jna\          ^ ^ I a C oJS c^           W

V^Lfi.    £^sOO^>          c>-^        vrv^ •v^V>Tv~'^         eJ»^>           vyg^N^.c^L-e          _^g\/~

          <X^C_g^                   ^4T


               <L     O V^.    Cv
                                          'S^ " " C k- ' ^ ^ € _   'W*0>'^>          }C i \ V^tsrJ*^£U

                     —    ©^    s-->SX>/^^nk><£)            SfcV~cys^->&'-30
                                                             - -      X —
r

    JUv)c ^                             Cu-

              W   V^c.   'Qn^r   aJo>         .
                                                          '
                                                               iV L




                                                              ^ ccua^ O               |£<J

Di.'.ur     (^w -
                 /

                       c:tn           uVi iiuy           to J
                                                            L -^i{               ‘"

                            ^rry         L ;
                                           -v<r; to               ka.Jt

Uu        ^Z'jj- V           ^                                y


      ~^-    lO<x/>    I C o^ x J \ j L M ^      Cij_    IL r J iif        I£


            fK£t1<_A    Li) i t i i    f iljj    ^ U a j s o o d C i, [               th
                                         /      .'        ty-fl'UMll                           \

                                                0 ^ lJj.n/1 hr                        (l/L l

                       J_      CLAK       C j^ J T J ^    j^>         y ^U l K   jI




^ AvXTUCl4 \^ I             , yvuy \- 1^ ' s J j * u u L                         L - t in
                           2   .




                           <
                           ^cu u cX .


                           to c it^ .         F ot-laJz / \\jx jj JLu L -

o-oos to J cIutulL c*_                                         k xjltirp^j-^

      liu tt         u J ^ q im A ^ t 0 ^ -tv ti                     IuuJjL

      c           a J t.       U3   su   ^ J lU a x L   /       r v u in < ? r y ^


°f~             Lcko           U ^ i 'ikjuu                 LUXL*>       cdt

                                    ;      Cu j .       n u u U t U

(Y e tu y , ^                            {c

               cLtzuk          .


               0 w                            a.    s -o J l   rbefcl        U\

bW


                 4 ~ »H L r s
                                                                                                         •      r     ' ’




                                                                                                                                               n        u.
  "1W ^Aati>«4K.
   fc«^feo-AJP OlkotrtJLoJiew.(
   \l> ^oL*v&a*J»*r- "€ja»fc*.
             UiO. 3 l-Ui .




  u ? a-r -& u " ,


                           3                             Jtki.                             cj    SaJLurda^                    O-t-            ^^*-^CaXi.rtV^ C<- clcuj J j^SJ
 f L u .- t r -        ^ r y J t                    3       c f ^ = J -              ^                  i -**                      - O    A    ^ U      ^                            f                      > »

                                    -IUcLi.c-i*/»         _^jL-r^co r< jr\cvt.cV                                    aJ~X <^T*v-ivcXa .                       ”TV\sjj        aJ-e- - X b J ^ X a - j
      jjjvjo^*,                   asyJ.       J: -w              A         OfWiuA                     JlA^Jc JLkir*                       J\Cu.-< f\A'
     ^ J uzl ^ f d L c o             ^       J tk o           O j C-cJL -L -     ■                                                 A ct                      ^    .



                        ii-       JL ,     ^-u^-                                            J-        C^oJ^         a ju ^ - e .    -tAeJ-                                  arc                    Ct/^-
 JcLo~                    £jUVC^,           jrs^k>>          0<^J          '-fix-         rtr^CA,-<-J •             ‘'I*-          P-ficj»X<-            cl^C         JUatl        -XX
   c-^ JtktY^                     ol^cJ      Ji-aJ ,                         irt\tf o rz^a rw a Jz^                      .




                         P \a j               -c -t^ p      a S lrv a fc       J L J J jjX       <=»■        S J x ^ a ^             cyv^          $                   ^ tr                   4 A ~ i-< .

     rrw^v, jjX ~ -                               A c^ cJLxcL                             CW            tx u ^ . ^£*o^-                                      ik*^.


                                                                                                                    ^eJd^JUL^




f .3 .            5a       Jtk< o         cteuj     <v*\J        a   %il       c<- ^ .                        /aJv^vJld -Q^cu A                        joAj* £ lr\c^    _   no    o'*-*         -a X c \J !^

         J^_ ^Jieuirs>Ur>jj 4°" "^VL/r> ^                                                                "J <'r'OT'*2                                                                    aX
         ^atLo                      no*: ^                            2&-                frfrJtL r-       a*vd         -fsuWuA*                JcWTr^K- ^o^-Jj& J^                        ,
                                                     St. Helens.




t? -v n Association,
         *     . .                            17th April, 1989
Football                                            r
16 Lancaster Gate,
London W2 3LW.

For the attention of Mr. S. A. Millichip



Dear Sir,

I am writing to you in respect of the shameful tragedy which happened
at Hillsborough on Saturday to good and loyal supporters of the sport.

What I need to know is:-

WHY - were Liverpool Supporters issued with less tickets than Notts
Forrest when you are well aware that Liverpool get an average of 40,000
at every gate and Notts Forest get only 16 to 20,000?

WHY   -   were Liverpool supporters allocated the small end of the ground?

WHY - did Liverpool supporters have to travel further than Notts Forest
supporters, to a ground that was totally inadequate.

WHY - do you discriminate against Liverpool?       They have probably brought
you more revenue than any other club.

WHY - don't you provide facilities that meet the demand, afterall you take
hundreds of thousands through the turnstyles every week, but none of it
goes to improve the facilities for supporters?

WHY - should people pay for the priviledge of being trapped like caged
animals^- to stop a handful of hooligans running on the pitch.!

HOW - has this action passed safety regulations?       It's like erecting
locked firedoors.

WHY  - isn't there seating for all.    Perhaps families would come along then
and the hooligan element, which is in the minority, would be less prevelent?

WHY  - have the hooligans be allowed to penalise true and loyal supporters
forcing them to watch the game from a cage?    Clearly these fences must be
removed with immediate effect.

WHY  - wasn't the kick off delayed to allow fans to enter in an orderly
fashion, most of them are still in possession of their full tickets because
no-one took the stubs (like my brother who was almost killed)?

WHY - hasn't a stadium, like Wembly, been built in the North to meet the
demand?

WHY -     don't you bring football into the 1980's and put some investment into
it.
WHY   -   was the organisation at Hillsborough

WHY   ARE 94 PEOPLE DEAD???

Shame on you and your Association.
                                                          Milton     Keynes,



                                                          18th April         1989.




Dear    t ^ r . N\aV>ckvf>
                                                 «               *       *

I am w r i t i n g to you c o n c e r n i n g the r e c e n t tr a g e d y at
Hi ll sb o r o u g h . My fami ly a nd I w e r e s h a t t e r e d to hear
the news of so ma ny p e o p l e w h o d i e i un n e c e s s a r i l y .

My p o i n t in w r i t i n g to you is to im p l o r e you to take
n o t i c e of the o u t c o m e of the o ff i c i a l enquiry. The
e n c l o s e d p i c t u r e says it all.

How many times h a v e tra ged ie s o c c u r e d in this co u n t r y and
pub li c e n q u i r i e s held at an e n o r m o u s cost, and all to no avail
b ec au se i n e v i t a b l y the r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s are r a r el y c a r r i e d out
main ly due to the fact that they c os t money.                            H ow can this
be justified, are lives so che ap that this co u n t r y c a n no t
pro vide a d e q u a t e mode rn f a c i li tie s for w h a t is the
most p op ul ar crowd s p e c t ac le . If r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s are a p p r o v e d
why does it take so long for them to be i m p l e m e n t e d ?

It wo ul d appe ar to me that money is more impor ta nt than safety.
Most of the first and second d i v i s i o n clubs have mone y and
could well aff or d to mo d e r n i z e their facil it ie s to p ro vide
a s a t i s f a c t o r y and safe place for their fans to visit.               After
all it is the fans who pay their wages..                   How many of these
clubs use their             grou nds for other purposes. I feel sure
that they coul d            be ut ilised wi th i n the local c o m m u n i t y so that
they can, if needs be find the money tor e f urb is h                   the
o b v i o u s l y out of date grounds.

To the o r d i n a r y person, its qui te o b v i o u s that b a r r i c a d e s
are to tally out of the question.                  Do the p e o p l e w ho sit on
these c o m m i t t e e s have any c o m m o n sense.      It's all v ery well
ha vi n g c o m mi tt ees and e n q u i r i e s w it h top level p e o pl e on
but do they ever have a n y on e w h o a c t u a l l y goes to the
te rraces as a r eg ul ar s p e c t a t o r or an o r d i n a r y man on
the stre et w h o r ea l i z e s the d a n g e r s of this scheme.

An o t h e r thing to be taken into account, not just at football
m at ch es but in any ev e n t w h x e a crowd occurs, is that
the ex it s sho ul d be cl e a r l y ind ic at ed and p e o p l e told ex a c t l y
w h e r e they are. w h e n you are in a p la n e one of the first
things you are a d v i s e d off are the s i t u a t i o n of the
e m e r g e n c y exit s and p r o c e e d u r e s to be taken sho ul d a
crisis occur.           Why c a n n o t this s y s t e m be i n t r o d u c e d
into other p l a c e s w h e r e a vast gr o u p of p e o p l e are contained.
There are so m an y things that heed to be c o n s i d e r e d wh e r e
crowds are co nc e d e d and s a fe ty mu st be the n u m b e r one
c o n s i d e r a t i o n ab o v e all ot h e r things, this m u s t i n clu de
vital c o m m u n i c a t i o n links and a d e q u a t e first aid faci li ti es.

A n y w h e r e w h e r e large n u m b e r s of p e o p l e gather, be it at a
football match, pop c o n ce rt or even the u n d e r g r o u n d system,                    no
b a r r i e r s should ex is t that impedes easy a c c e s s in an
emer ge ncy .         In this t ec hn o l o g i c a l age there m o s t sure ly
be a wa y of fi l t e r i n g p e o p l e t hr ou gh w i t h t i c k e t s that
does not r e s u l t in p e o p l e gexLug th r o u g h t u r n s t i l e s and
the like.

I a p p r e c i a t e that some peo p l e today do not hold
such moral value s as in years gone by and t hat you will
get an e l e m e n t of v a n d a l i s m in eve ry w a l k of life but if
s u p p o r t e r s of clubs w e r e t re ated m or e as a p e r s o n in stead
of an animal and that they w e r e members, p a r t n e r s or w h a t e v e r
of their p a r t i c u l a r c lu b then perhaps there w o u l d n ' t be
so much v a n d a l i s m w hi c h re su l t e d in these b a r r i e r s b e i n g introduc
in the first place.            It's no use peop le sayi ng that they like b c i
heeled t oge t h e r on the terraces, for m o s t of them, its all
they have ever known.              Having said that, I do feel that
the clubs have a duty t o relay to the p la yers that they
h a v e a r e s p o n s i b i l i t y t o p e r f o r m in a s p o r t i n g f a s h i o n
o n t h e f i e l d b e c a u s e in s o m e c a s e s t h e y c a n i n c i t e
t r o u b l e on the t e r r a c e s by t h e i r a c t i o n on the field.

A l l I a s k is, t h a t e v e r y o n e c o n c e r n e d in t h i s       enquiry puts
t h e m s e l v e s in the s a m e p o s i t i o n as t h o s e p o o r      families
w h o h a v e s u f f e r e d in t h i s t r a g e d y .  How would          you like
it if it h a p p e n e d t o s o m e o n e y o u o l o v e d .

T h a n k you for t a k i n g tbe t i m e to re a d this l e t t e r                which
I h a v e s e n t to p e o p l e l i s t e d at th e b o t t o m .


Yours     sincerely,




Mrs T h a t c h e r
Colin Moynihan
Lord J u s t i c e Taylor
Bert M i l l i c h i p
Garth Crooks
Daily Mirror.
'J 7 M V S T N S V E R B   6
      AlAdW EP
'T o H X p r m A £ A & J '
OtL


                                                                                Pretest,




                                       0 >-2-odb




                           o-jo <
                                s j ~t£ .dL    *-**4^ —c*~lc.                          <_f>pcj
                    Jkr\o-o^ 0 -It          o ~^Xj => ^JOfi
                    O. C-0-^-T'^- Gfc




 CV   ^   K j V - v e '- t .     P < ~ V.   C£-   erv.   - L - t G_

      “!X_          • 'n c v o                c<'v   c^f—'            <"v-   ; r--o ^V->

                                     w O                              O-^-TUscx-fc,        CV
                                           tc        Wc*-'




                <spr>r-,                                  op Pn i




           pW-rf
                   4 > —


                           V!       s> -
                                                ad?
                                                CX    <"<=.•
                                                                    w t
                                                                    £ .< c

                                                               Q*--^




            cp c&~>

       /    i         4         J

’r ^

t
                                                                                fc ip S lS L J
                         \~T=\1



                                 I J 37                                    I
                                                                           ____________________
                                  'h /                                              L b /V p g ii




oXw's
                       \     Co^so           <d o p p 'U^         Gor\ ( j L r O & d       "to      hjE^*"

              d -X          A     C               C onn^ © fcrtu--”'                         O '^

m cw j    be           C o A -U d .                    d c ^ i.     -tj     livS-      W iU ikcrvav^ L.


" b r 'e j ^           S^cL               <x                                v-3 U*.^CsrT^%             J    CUf.

 (jo^fc                    Co_A       ^-°         ^         a>~r'C!3        cvaJ                     rw>jt>c_
 tk c         ^ 'a z s ^ A s ,           C c r^ lo l      ^ jo       -to    CUc.       b    c - ^ ' c j^ u tu j,

          1t           rv>\^s^A^                         , <xncl            -StuXi         ojt^\    (Xcjg^pUj
•6 UecKid                  ood           Vvyo-.^vtd           ^                        cx                   ^lo^i
-%=,      e_VCvn ■— tU^K.                  £0 -        OO^Cx_-U^r^             &■'■£-        't'S'Jc 'TJ fl--S_

CoWipc^ri't^^-              ('°       O i'ixzj^
          k    J$-     <m L j                  fks.               fviAruj S u^Cte^ors                      ^ U u

Uv ^ey\i>i-iy Jnut                         ijy'' FU-*. ciu-ioS                      (_Utc.
 rtrrra-s-t cxrJi                Cbwvs. 3E yW ^                           t*Iko kove
Ixka.         Ujcm5       "fe                            W&fYli^U^ O n ^ j                     "tb &««- '-A-
 ISvcyv'Jn. koo>.ck:            crv tKe^r ^XC£S •                        iHfi. *S»n%£.              U^juv^
l^ a p p e v t* ^     C^nTk         H e ^ s -e J     i       fU ^ a ^ d    uj Ov^         tka_ U lA /j^a. O^d

dj£ a r u ^ * -           J=*\^U~k               oUiaS                    J j o ^ ^ 'Q f& X
                0»r\ UVJU.wi<U. •
          \^ Ux^a. £”• A • C«^p l^5                 Co j o   esXlaxA ll\SK\ -So &W4J
^vV o^.          l~-'NJCV'pce>U.         L a A ^ u ft        p f c ^ ft>JOrv(vvS'        )o^~ ^ ' ' ’" ^-^fi.cl j

 0^4          I Co^rvJ^t                         Q^'VV                                     Ovo^fc. ', KykAk
G3YY\£.e, J^O-cK              "bp                  pcyvrvtr — . A^'cU O^toVvS'j' ^w^»3p©5
            Wl a      t'Uoo     p u b '-J' c'      ou'e,        p(Tsvid              C3u_r         1-" 'A ^ p j

  o Jzs        arua,      h\A^cL»"cd ^jco-vS                         <5^      uL     .




   Oj'-e.             x^^=r1^r^                    c*4i«rwJ        Os-                         -Sp=KCa.
    K^?
                      t tUc,        ^ jo c k .     Vvoo         ijofl-fv H Lr^xi^-ci                          ^

 ^o^loxU. • ^£>ydt CUs. Sln^Tvo                              f^vust                 °'r>-^ y        L'Jl2
                iacxcX          and                      Ucfc       tkasfi-                              fvtA|&.
  (jl o    (-< s^e-                   u u        tK * - ^ • '- e o j b     ^s^v v c^
fo
 ffc&
    XX>
      >,V
        6^               j       io        pVjLas**-   ^o^jc\kXa.w\c-(v.   V*k v
                                                                               V .

 ^(\£jtx<^ ■         *
                     Vr<\ -S-o^r^.          W ts       oiVvat       tLs_ \ocjftoo. C
                                                                                   c\
                       Wv/&-
(SpJX-S                  4 O^KAfc?>A              <XO A>L5J^ \ x ?         \jOvf«A
V>s£-     C\^TV\£_    OsO    «   w   0 ^     V i V <^JO •

                                 ^oui^, r^3oJrw^-yX\________________
       C             —t




                                                                           /q % t-


                          & (r&<K      /(ftCA*. L t \ l j y ^ ? i ‘- tJ    <-^*-

f^ t C a M L           ZC4.CL i              *      ~££st^C«i&».
V                                                               I

^'&-e. £^rCK^ £r%e, x j ^ t                 <y                             O ^X

^                       c^U   */$**.        d& sa /InjxtrtA ^U

 ^     - ^     /                       .


         ■1b7/*C/*4^ ^              ~C*£. i~CL^-'      t$\& . 1/

     ^.A ~ .       ^*7^0 £t^£k^S« I'llfO&U.      ffj               ^(a -Ow£ s &*

s k ~ c & u .^ j£ /,l'4 j('     O jjrA s tc<0 y        A m t C ^ c ^ C &J*-A

-'//^-0 (K         f o o d ' fjCAUuj8^ OsQ C&<j£jL AS?

     S u fo n l- M * / j ^ * ,                    & 0U . j          £ u /tfa tC

stv C J U iJ * * * . A - o - ^ u ^           fa * '* £ * .^ 4 4 * . f ^ y
{fcedr                                 fredf> & t*JtA         y U ^ l^ lC

         N ^ l* jr j+ j y fa j ll,                       0U *J< ^ J ^ - * jtJ

W            #Xtr*~t*Jt                  K>oi*j £ a ^ 4 * * l

 &                tj Q    - ^      ~     C   L     C     kA       <As \ aa *>

 ert* 5*i                 'fy jL                    tZ JU -

 *V ( O j^ L & y         & If A J L ^ t c         & £< *.l C a-^,        (h£



            & 4JL aU jL ol & .I'tX               cG&cCo f a y ^ c

 f< *£O L p/v       ■€&& A^trtx^>(                     h ,.

                         y>y u ^ o £sc^          ca ^ l & v    ______________
/4




                O'                                                              Ik - 4 y f
      - ‘C\ i




 t ^ i X L r -C i u            H 'Xi-rL.Yi*.(j(_ ~ f re-* y                   0 ^1      (j[_




/V C-Aj*.,           i' b .s s J c i.       -X'-t'+        i j j^ r             J&Tt-1^ j£t*

                                  c(        ( ”"4   w/     c ji £-<i_c{ JkLtc-f" J^CL
                                 r st - iv-c~ l~d~*              c1 I    c--C A C c/o^ ^ f *.f
-/w                              I X(                    i-^-Co crt,>.111 c*-!-* C

^j.-V<c'c( . i~ * * U jw ioL                                            .(           4~'~~^~rii ,

C' V ^ y v J                            .


  C'-ht \ L . ^ l l x       c*r< <~j £                   i / ^ y cL<     C c ^ ^ U 'J

 J ^ jX L              '^TT'-C.U.           0 .^ 'i.u J r {

  70 ^




                                             (
                                                                            4W E >

                                              '*                    AprU_

ll^FoctiLraU. AsfiocLotioti
Ticxv-* Sc«iy
                   TKa. clA cLkum     a * +© vyKatKx»- o\* rxcrV 4toa. Lu^e*^>crtH. /

KjaibTcrveM. 90^ , dtfxAa^d 4+^.F.a Col^> Mvruld <jo aJruuuj<^htruk)
fee TTOxdfi- Ju&isieXy h^-U^L v*«ah4 of -VkfiLurujju-vti 4,00Kvunrrt e \te -
W*>uK<i-          '^25 vvOL bQ_-Uvi_ crruio i r ^ a£C*3jui .
      Ai a- focdjeli          jDrruXKik/^ oruj cy-u£v%\A          vwCxMt&cx^ 30
clK&oxI '-n- ttviUruM*^ c^-4-Koia y\Avo At-»ai . vf cV do4r>^ vvVvod- a. VJcradii4«J
Q.anta.u.e/A' vwuUjbfl- 'if Notto FcrKifc aye^-ba jAa<j44ta CjO."nv£a3
 Ixvec^cTrl cu> <x "ti-iLruiii, +0       4Kc&a v\A\o Ka^a              , AVuruxyK.cniv^ i f-
fcka -fo-rrv\Xao a 3 -t-e.o d .      "Thjo ccnAd.bc. ikn Pj-JsL ja-w a. -fev L lv ^ j^ c ^ I
 4> v o ic
             I Kcpc. ye've d o rvc* fru,Y\d Yr\e. unr\jpo^t.n.y rrv^ v-Uj/ri (jy\.        .
TKCAfL*. -no       -tvlq A   +0 ackncwk:dfij2 -VVuo

                                      ^fcAxb ■^cuXh^uiSLg



   P?, .      \ wr%*id Uiu2 4ts              a Vwrvdju£ui j c \j (YVj - U Jd^ <juLci tm
             SaXx^tLcuij j a.Tvswsa^jT^ So mo-rru^ c^ua.oUc'no               v^rvtd   ttwtJ
             Wv* ^            vMUtj A J ^ u M c C
        TEL:

                                                     -^-TrPi                        M id d x .
                                                   \<3o\                                             -----
                                                                                                     1
                                                                               n      id }


            e^/N-        A^A/V I
                                                      t X
                 ^                      '             ' ’              /



 jfe-          C - ^ ( v ^ A ' ^ 4^ —                                                            ^


                                     A ^ t                           'L ,^              (s




   . U               C                        ■   i-Ur^T                           ,Cfcc




>tfc ^           Awvttv)                    .|^&4cL v ^ ^ d          Av^fo

 C ^ 'C ^ y^ j l .        aZ ^     X ^ '-tc -L ^ <-w<— ■      t'Cv-v        ^-{- i ^ U ^ j

(ft v-fJL            jLs^JU^V^C w-uUvt ^                    l-J-CTLy C-             ^
                                                      /         '                    '
    \\£ c t = v C ^ V )            C ^£ X S > ~ - Uc'L<- j z i z .         ^ ^ x k rk S^C -

                          ^ e ^ r                 eU * J X o ?.             /- b v .- c ^
                    4         xki                                     ^         yJi

                ^                                Xkf              I/ j o l k - r '                '—       A       w   ~0




C v w J ^ W ' ?                                 C ^ « - C 4 ^

  /.            ■(______                            V ^ T , _____ .              y V C r^ J > -k                       ^~

  I                 ; .                                   CSJ-2 ^                        ^            '1


 i                             (            '       C ^_*
                                                       U.                 C i£ (                 x tc

  1      /?
                          \\ •••U,
//|^Xjj\n3^v

 sx
  /

            {           A -        /            i L   «       j       L     c        o       ^    ^            >

  _ ^ U X                      -t^              ^                 .       r .                          I .             I
       ~Z                              jl                                                                          ^


                                                                                 ^       ^




■i   r^TV^v
                               a L L ^ c ^ ty - •
                                                                  Sheffield
                                                           Tel:


                                         li»       C L f^ U .       1189'




                       4           AA*
                                              T '            ^
                                          < fw 11

            F. A . *^Kyv ^ ny» fc/u 6 » >w                        OL»9
tfU srr*4L *~4t.    9^~                    ^           ^

                             P^+44s%s& +r l> tt^/. ^ 1 »<WA*^/


                   ^       •«*>.


                           /K«^^
               *^r44U^>

      /   a*»»U/                                           y6 U £        «/&

                   » ^ » v ^                       J * - c U r^ U k J L
^•* ■/^ 4                           -^4            X i r w iV tC;
^     ^ C ^ , .                                ,                  /.
                                                                         o


 frteuaavaUi-




         Sr,
          GxUO Wu 'dCO ^             OA€ilQCtf                         VjOU*

(UxW AwcvoWs Dkc        t u p   Aiv^ipool / N o C w ^ f t w   /M#to\




                )ouJi    T^fttOv/alUj /
                                                                          MdtecluxtK
                                                                             _ ^ O

                                       Vtf   Q      .SHfMCj              piv/gt . £ o f V\
                      liO t fihnnlrt PrMlH(>                                      ^       [{g (

             iy   |         *                      1 -* " ^ ™ "■ ' ' ,   Vp* ^    Ml \   S-    ^

             T ° .! ° .           y <UfffA U /'r 'n .y )UJ1(j -luo

              -W ? \             ftifl       fltt        y-Jnqi            (^                          c<vfflfl( d o /
                  ■USJfi*— tas—                  bfi-rffKh               pm   ?   fm      jnjpj         ,tkin/{|)

                                                                           -SQMg          |jy)i(         ^     ^

                         ^             y          J ^ iW                          a Ct{^                      nrviivoiIm
                                  ..                              ^                      (M(u*t»             th a n
              1^        3         U        ff’       ^       O W Q i i y T t ,~w                   S    jguiirrt          m p ~



                                                 -— A A I \l
                                                 ■CdW ^                                                      ytoro I k o

                                JHOiM
                                                                                                             .(£ iftfulrt upt

                                                                                      J^uM__t£iult 1/w rvu? £,r,j ^
                                                                                                          -ftflfri.(rfntj.a_
                                                                                                   Lhat                           m
                                                                                                                          W -
ftUe   te>
                                                                                                                                  mao
                                                                                              Jb       mhl/d          J
 eac.af®
 pUxvt
                                                                                                                                                     tr k .Y 'k

                                   f-^ T )/ h a 4 J                  rTL% >C jC JO L/l& Y\                                                                     /r /< £ /f * >




                                 / rr y fv D r ill/ i/ J T                                                                                                                      1—                         ............... ...
---------------------------------............ ................ ...................                 .....                                                       0         v



                                    ■                        \lfr                                                                               ---------------------------- ----------------------------------------------
                                                                       »
                                                                           /jT           A /lx i           n J ^ J rS S S m > /      SY\ SL          6-ry^sf J -lt *                    h u s iJ u ,
                                                                                                                                                   J                                  *4
                                   r U s )I              C /ftA               fL u             v t j^ e s t      ad         n h -o 'd r u .c ^ tT r t ------- P * ^ * ^ -------G A tA -fL ---------------

                                                                                                                                                £ * /< .             ^           c ^ A .^ .               ...


                                                 /       7 % . n )ir                                  A cu/        jZ tc        A c lm j J -               A t * y\            Ce                S’ / £ d t .


                                                       i-C O Z i.^ /                 A 011-4       & £ £ r^        /r r -    /c u . * * '.

                                  i/.v?-1                 cru.J'               ^ ,16ti.’                              — au/_/Ct--------------------- /L m -d & ef-

                                   /C*               U C(t<±2k                ,4ai                 C JZ —           CSC
                                                        Ci _J__                 o<-j //,>^J.               2     / ’CJlrLCi                          — zL                                   -XV
                             .    c d l * f i ‘ £>tL                 /~ f n U               ,/TJ*/. C C '^ ^ .                                                                                  <> ^ / .

                                  X CI               £L___ T</f &**1                     ^L ?A.—
  /J -       'S f< .                 c m /e /     £ * __ JstJ aL vx _k j-.... & __ c ^ r .
 'S^<fll'pe ?tpc/      e /u r? SL
                                y __ 4ZCi?>njt£                        . ^Cj       c\                           Ji .
«.*/¥          rsvu/j       SL2&* (        -6     /at-zJl                    .__4 ‘_4x .           cc^^rsx            -----

M ,
       /■^     /ttC H£              y? y^c. »-»-4__ C^'trL.. J~^C _. Q&ZettJ ’fC 'i^                         c ( S!
                                                                                                                        y
 y/^W                                        -    __________________



      //x£     f V // cJ___&&i-U /cf                                   Zcy^fy/ce#/      £A^I ' d    £?//          f£*r.

j?6      s n ^ t _^L __X- /A .?__ / '7           -rfhs.           -T^S-LgX



                             X .
                                     S ' 'S s u ^                                 ^
                                                                                                                 y
                                        CC              ii



                         )£ u / j      ^                      ^ 7        -
Football Ass. Lt*. ,
16, Lancaster G-ate,
London, W2»                                London,__________
                                           Dated:-17 April'89 .




Dear Sirs,
          I like everybody else was appalled by the Hillsborough,
tragedy. I have been thinking hard about the barriers that were
responsible for this tragedy and hare eome up with an idea that
would be simple to «snstni«t, easy t« open in an emergency, would
art require keys or suah like to opea and I feel would be nu«h.
easier and faster to open than the Frenah system showed on T.V.
If you are interested, perhaps we„arraage a meeting either here
at *y place or I could aome there.
            Roping to hear from you as soon as possible.


                                         Yours faithfully,




                                                  7
~ L > t S v Q .                                                        __


A     b . ^ a A M                         _
                                                     vfel—   >/
      _ v-           C jO J *
                            —3^


                          ,                ^      ^                   ^/S^cWS
           4 4 ^ e o w - (c.       ^


=     gV      ^ w / . ^        <       ^ .s ^ e £ -                       ° ^

,-r   T u ess:        C A ^            -a * .
              a     Cc ^ W S o w                G « W
-rwc.        % e a o a £                c ^      *     ^ ' £tT      O'"
    <=si^os- qe:-r=.                                  ^ E,£tv' 'rv^ ^
                                                u                  C30-SO£^)
C A ^                          *v t v c a i ^ - I         ^
                                    - T V C             c ^ - r e o ^

                                                                  ~4 ? T . o
V r-— I


            \i>o


          Yoo^>
                                        VrpTrz*-«-*f
                      007

              y^S J~ 0 CJt0*~ /0* > /
                                                       W   ^ ^ h /z d r //




                                                                     V -


/    •




    Z^)




          J    ^     -
                                         l ~*. .
                                               '_

                                         1T Z -
n   r* .

                      y ^ WO"   j» ~ ,? f y v ~

           ^fc*<^ -^e»■«>■<-
                                          zu c y w j> q a /




          S'/A,



 £&*^h';iC'C                  y^V'o      cPesilS           -f-A
              \Ajxn



  /
          /      ^v^L-/'-'^   /^ - O     (^CL

fl* c -                 / f    . H £7w      o c j^   L ; /v^oe, .
                               u
                       ia c p |




 bSQU     /Vvu. R**£m,
    ^JU JU t, '& & * jb c t* + - - w < « / v / J& JU l >

/3Xvvi^Uvv^-tJ ,                 '& ~> *oC vo~*          jl Cc   . a * , pn& vo O u*J~ c W T V .

         V. fctvX                         .l\A fft|Ctf/ W V V U ^

                                  *£©                     -XL^XJCk*^ /(aM/j2i                        i

 & JL /fx O ^ J U      Civtwj3                   flJaov>C. , pXc^o Hot,                    aJL a^ o u m

A sA JU jC is*t^ -* c^o&vC^Q^Ov^ ^Vo to fcui ^ + £ * 4 * 4 , <^ ^Oc£&a££



     3     ~4a X A aJLJl        JU M jl     J jo                    a.    /< L u ^ e e £ lc ^ ( a o a,

s'tAj'i^b a. -4*«vcc*v*_ c^ ^pc^ut££. /0 ^i*,fa|QCX-fg-»o . ^&4<a0viA&2i^
9              t^JcC Jufc. „a**dU&*o ^u-of* JLo&jidLtu fck«, <3wjp
              «A«                       i ®"* c A m < jt£ B o A . i           J L y ijjL    3   w<A>Cvcl2dL

                                            ^         t          flL^ flj'’                ■Ri^p/ ,           (Lm» f
jQ&JKC&a* j        oJULocoJ& d* fco                £X_                    < /lt. Sl£A*j*ML*
tlvOOA- yL>&*C c L U j- o*N. -^A-G-uiiUuj -a                                               O&tfe j asifd.nOQ.
/3^X a^ p J ^ O ^ » OaaA - a J U o                    QjO    ex. yM t+ J                                  .

3                                         ^©©< 2*Ufc           cJL ^X i K ^ (|cw                     0*0^0*.
                      L^A^a£. to L u #«-»^0 0 C.|                                    ^CwAOilx .0
      -Av *A a**j       ^ '►'O   m / k JU       CL*      |1 o * q«J&£c.   (      ^         feUfc / ^ U o f c

          ,    J   a a J ru X   ^ Ovifi^j ,         O jtSL ^ M « V M i o to                     to    £u£f>
^                 t-eo
                                              ^o    fc® t u i ^   i   to     ft|t
y^w\j~0Pof Ini                                |                       |
4 JU * .J JU ..   **      3 p*“*-J                jBLAOp^ /atop           p 4»*04«^
6uUA*tUs*A M**aZ40 OJr JUl*A< Q*SUma «* W^*^V‘*2                                    V*^'
                         £e   >£«■€<>4vA .          f<U>   ^OtvUtoVi (
fa 1^ ft.                { ^ ^ t ^ o o t «^fl«U^ 0*V “T*. V •     *j^» '&4AM0
K>ax. ivOwv fcu*, cLt+Ji f                   j^*>e+f4>C& ^AamMA, M *aA. O^Oam. .
            y                   >i^O<A.   /Ut€&i*   JL4A**~Sj     fa*** O K < A m , C . ^
                                                      < % r>
Dr                        M.S.. J.P.

□                            LIVERPOOL

                                           2-4.-4-®Pi
     17 April 1989                                  © I O

     Dear-^lflw^
     The Overseas Doctors Association is very shocked by the news of
     the tragedy which has struck Liverpool Football supporters.

     We had a meeting in Sheffield last night where Chairman Dr
               and President Dr              along with seventy
     Overseas Doctors stood in silence in the memory of the desceased
     praying for heavenly peace for their souls

     A resolution was passed to convey the sincere condolences of
     22,000 Overseas Doctors to the grief stricken families. Our
     thoughts and prayers are with them in the memory of the devoted
     innocent fans. Overseas Doctors sent flowers to Anfield with the
     Vice Chairman Dr

     Overseas Doctors Association has 62 divisions across the country
     and we extend a helping hand to you Sir with the offer that we
     will be very happy to send our members in the numbers required
     by you on the occasions you need at the grounds you need.
     We are very sure that Overseas Doctors who are serving the
     British Society will be delighted to serve the British National
     Sports.




     Hoping to serve British Sports to the best of our ability.

     Yours sincerely




                                                                        #
LONDON,


16th. ApriJ , 1989-



Dear Sir,
                 Watching         the Sheffield tragedy on the television it was
evident          the      fencing was the chief direct factor causing so many
deaths        and       injuries.               Obviously there were primary causes and
other     contributory                factors           but the fact that the spectators at
the     front could not escape the crush from behind was due to this
fencing          doing         what     it was intended to do -- keep them from the
pitch.           Seeing         desperate             efforts       of many to escape the crush
made     me        realise        that          the     application of simple, common sense
design        could have prevented it all.                            I enclose sketches of some
ideas.           These are not working drawings nor drawn to scale.


SKETCH       I
                 Some       standard            f e ncing m es h on a s t a n d a r d        frame,      with      a
strong       support.            This    support,           however,       is   to be h i n g e d      to a l l o w
the     fencing           to fold     flat       if it is so         required.             The   lock     fixing
the s u p po r t       s hou ld be c a p a b l e of b e i n g         r e l e a s e d by    re mo te    c o n tr o l
from     a        c en tr al     c o n tr o l      room-          Additionally,        its h o u l d     h ave     a
manual           override        to e n a b l e a loc ally           placedpoliceman             ors t e w a r d
to r e l e a s e     it    in r e sp o n s e     to an i m m e d i a t e    local need.


SKETCH I I
          This              illustrates               the    optional           direction in which the
support           (the      hypotenuse             of       the    triangle)        may      be hinged and
indicating the different factors involved.


COPIES TO:-
The Home Secretary,
The Secretary of                 State for Sport,
The Secretary of                 the Football Association.
SKETCH III
         This                  shows       a    plan       of    the     suggested          barrier.            The
collapsible                  sections          should be interspersed with rigid refuges.
These would give protection to police or stewards and afford them
a     position from which they could manually operate the opening of
the     locks           of      the        collapsible          barriers        in     a crisis.              These
refuges            would        create          a slight funnelling of the emergent crowd
but that in itself should (a) slightly slow down any attempt at a
"charge” for freedom, and (b) allow an expanding space beyond the
barrier to absorb the swelling numbers.


SKETCH IV
                   This        illustrates            a simple device for withdrawing these
steel         points,           whose          real    purpose is to threaten to impale any
person who challenges their function.


SKETCH V
                   A format          for    s e t t i n g c r u s h bars.       The num be r          may     appear
to be e x c e s s i v e         but    in f ol lo wi ng         such a format         the d i r e c t        forward
thrust         can be g r e a t l y            reduced,     almost      to n e g l i g i b l e    proportions.
There         is        no     possibility            of   these     thrust waves,           so o ft e n       seen,
r u nn in g         from      the b ac k of       the s ta nd in g     a r ea   t h rough        to    the    front.
Any     su rg es             would     be       limit ed     to a c ro wd d e p t h of           th ree      to four
per s o n s •


                    I    h av e no e x p e r t i s e       in this     field,     but    this         seems    to me
to     be       a       case w h e r e      straightforward common                sense      is e q ual ly ,      if
n o t m o re        r elev an t      to the problem.


                    I    trust        that       you will find these ideas worthy of real
consider ation.


                                                                     Yours faithfully.




                                                                                             (Mr . )
du&z*.   1.




              CO®*?"'



              Se^ly     «-*••"«                * * *
              ^fck local ik«h u a I ©wnrf4e.




                                     ;+
                                     i’»
                            Of=     T lM o       ALT€*MATf'fi=:           C O N T « O L I_ ct>   -COUL* PS/W<3«     ftA R R ie«S
         S1t>£       11



&




                 v




    A

                                  <K^   tM   /» * »    • r lfC .l   < w                                     L ***
                          s£*rO




                                             /                 L HC-i) CL^-L                        ,




        At
  fa   R|CilI>   \ \

n(5    RE Fuse    u p
                                                        coi.crt*r/£L«

                        COUUA p riB t-t
                          B A ^ < <ere




                                          9   - - - -
fa   /ftL^^UUS       sO&A^   ^   **   C*&*jlA*4L


+    /^      W

          *7*££**.
      t




  1
  1
  1                                                            1                      :
  t
  1
  1                                                            i                      *                                                                 i
  1
  1                                                            i                      !                                                                 i

  1                                                            '                      '                                                                 1
  !                                                            ■                      '                    .                                            i
  ■                                                            1                      1                                                                 i
  i
  i                                                            :                      :                                                                 I
  »                                                            *                      !                                                                 1
  i                                                            *                     !                                                                  1
                                                               i                     *                                                                  i

  i                                                          T                       ;                                      .... ............   ...... •..................
  i                                                            i                     '                                                                  i
  *                                                            1                     i1                                                                 •
                                                    ------ ' •------ -------   "       — .. ............           ~                   -.................i ^L
 ii           1i 1              i                  \X X ' !
                                                    r                                I                                                                   I
          K   K      *    K         X X X                                             '                                                                  I
 1                                                                                    I                                                                 .
 l                                                             •                      1                                                                1
 1                                                             *                      •                                                                 •
                                                               1                     1                                                                  •


J ------------------------------------------------------------- L                  J -------------------------------------------------------------- L
 1                                                             '                     I                                                                  »
 :                                                             !                     :                                                                  :

 !                                                             ;                     1                                                                  :
SENT BY.’BTG United Kingdom                :18- 4-89 ; 14:31     :   BTG United Kingdom-*



                                                  © le t                fas'^

           BTG United Kingdom Ltd.
           □     Internal Memo                          □    Telefax                          No.:
                                                                                              D a te :
               > . ..M       l

               F ro m :                                                                       R ef. no.:

               c.c:       fr«t e ~ % .    v^»uv»c«<p         *F A        k .jb A ^irn .       P as® :      /

           J ! ? .L _ .E A .         C-UL.'fr .




                      U te u J U ’ J l            ^                       eu d



       \                                                _                                     .            ;
                  I                                     F - A . M & t t 6 flu A* L.           Cu^a



               Jc tfV ^               ^1     .

           Kokj^u                    udL                                      )

                          N^iLL-C                           P A -     C»A^>       ctk*te<^U^                   ^




           (JjoM              -(LsUr          aOr      ct^      P A "      £«*.. S * ~ ‘


           p a                   h     ‘I' >^*-~'       l^w v    •


                                         Ntoo-        ■ & " l«-                           w        N f             •

                                             *
                           V|QU>          S u ^ o i ^
                                                                                SutMX

 D«At>      Hr.               ,

                   \       usa<5»             conour^         «koufc ■*«.                 4 ^ * * ^
^       ^\i,Wou^               o~             fetw ^      an                         ^     t

V»aua Wvv                                   WV K tf**          ** l \ c#a0w>. \ V*0u>
     3u^   <x V'aJcunxA                 difeaafcar cdhitVx          c ©cA3       ^       W^Q^ac)
        . tit. , - .
                      ^                     S5P<a. C^oid       o f (orcco\:«jd &\aJc *»<s
ma^>   pto^u io«uia                               ^   '


a                <~T°' “ “ *■ * " » «•*» « * • *                                         w * va
 ^      **«M*                                       W i ?      *»     *         “ “»                «■
»A      OTiWrta            ru,               \                 *“ •* w 3*
^                                                   C0°4^ ^      W    ^   VY**^ W l -

Kv                              W       *W     i0—        —
   a                         • * -VW«\fc AW v u * H x o l\ -VWi ro o r^ A
GaoVtaxV\      Vvx^        alV.   »** *    \)M:»eOi<\ dLuNos            <&•■'
n^L        cfodtMrrkS         Vo            aW      <a«aVs     eoy Co*a*VT^               V'fco.r^s
YV>t*.\,       V^JKVunc^4 U o u O           Vx.       ^C«5t2A>N8oa>«-*          So S u ^ o r V
Q X*f   CP>A    «O L *?\^2)    ® x a ? fc    ^                       \A a * .                  V \C ^ ) ilv \

W                      ^           cA       **-      nx* 2      ‘**•»*               ***&
w v a       <*«**..-          rwWo^oX             <*>3«>**'     ^           UK-’i c U *            ><'
ftlrN0^^«.yv-v          t~>        * • > “ • «««“ •»'>.

                                                     \\pp(>(Li^
           X w as        t>\9C\OVT£0 -W Vvlo^-                              v* fr©-**
O^-   tk   t€ k v i» K     O om M as   € » .0 0 0   p t& p l* .   u » u \9 ^ 'V   rrukta.

a. d^arft.vnce..'' W£Ul_      rr DID
                                                                                                       p. i




                                                               C'4*£S#'s * £ -

                                          /\




              /w-

                                                                                                       >f




^                       ^                 *■*     - < V * ^
                                                                                                      ^ > r
      /*£~                                                        -*2*^        mp ?


    « .       „         C   7   . ~ ~ < - S              f    U    ~   y   ~   S



-*,       / 7 ? ~

      ^   y         .                 ^       ^      ,        /u ^ r           *=
      7^4         ^6<-y.«-f-




I
I
                                                                                   ♦ * * E N D* * *
                                                                                                                                               \Plfy
                        Jr\      ✓/« .( ✓         o f             bL e.          ^ « c .e n /           hs'<*^e*efy
I                                           f* w             <«(eu.$              vJ k i c^L                       /e-v^c?
    A t>         ( rv \ jO /'C Jl/e         *v\ «L 'ft& T T j ,



 v ‘A             f-4 STKtLf X                        a a          P o o i~ l> & //          b lC 'h &            fo
    f y r< \. / < k /     f-'o                        s^
                                                       j                                                                                         >.
    ^ /?o         c-/i/^j                        Jeers                                      AK«*           &i>y/fjs          ^ V « c«*A*-> J

^ o                                                                                 h-e. Lt<n.ef               A^-c          y o a / ?
     f       .U                                             f/*OS~S                          A<-e                            * / /-»m.&/4.tj


AJo              i> < j          m a f-c s f.               f-o         $ /- ( * * ■/■          ht f /         /^ tfr c A L -
    S **■ ^               G'*'-' S                    a. Z1            h \j < a s / i '/* S        / l * <J-€~        c / - 9 £ ~ / 5^     /
                          h k is            ^\lf    ps-even/       /- h ^       jT                                    o u A/    * ■« .           \
         /? < j7                                ***        w k ls t- /* . i>/*vss                                                  A tU . Z 7 / J

U//(e^rk                  6<-             5ie e// <rw                                                 ^        K 0 Jy^c/            / J>
 n •£ Osyr l^j                  f u //            1     Aff' //             A^C-             ^-C »/? A        «/■
 - t ^ o{                 of          h K e~           ^                      *i i*n*       ^ o-o • {  ^ i^ w x -e               A /e -^
 W ouI                                     Vi cP^-C               Ac        «-»\o                     f *€ S f           c s o
    (A


 P ot              ~                       /^ y                        0* -ti"              //IX/ 6 ^ .            A-^e
     S O               c X r /V                              C (A f \            S "S\°J       K    Q >yy (?       A-o                « W >7
     O-^               e >rAv-^                  h ^ r^ e                b-e l '^y           f? /l* y ^ s f             ^J~C^

 P oft C-Z.                A>             Uje.          b/r€a.fA CK fy                             k i 'f$            dn
    f **a5
i/^a/ a                 a.(I          f     h     k     u      f               f-tc-Ae/- - /*-$£ _                       s
    lA/t                                   oje,f~           (/\             Q-          ^     f OJ r\e^f         ,/\         Oi *
     c i                   j/ a./)c-e.                                  .                                         .
           £ S o ^ ■e.                     s                   *~h\.f\ L   h ks^y    u/i'/ / i e   / e ^ / »-v
        j 'c /s A A?                k*-e.f?                 hk*. ^ ? -e * c e f      c*. ^>sf    f-e
    ^                              oof- o f                 h it ,     ( occ^f    t-0^s>^ c e *. / ' A€_ j



    & <\ f~ V" ^
             y              r         ^     A\£             {■«.*> {             b-e, /( * u <,           /"A«-/       an
                                                  ho<*S A i/c                       mc^jA                         ^-*^A e^?^v
                   /° •C-Ojp/'^                  W k.0             f                         ho jO       6s.          U v\C>bs~
    t~k-e,                S j ^<jfo^~\                 0 i>^* f c/ov^r<                         4'UO^                  AXrJ
        COJ/ ( ixf              f-e^-Jr           f~&              A.       W\ofo              A !&Ct-S>n^p
fd O f\J (                            « «i/e-         fa   cu ccA.                           » /■*
    £Jv-</                  \ f        frk h          u /^      h ij^                     C ^M j * a / f * r y
    {\-ZJU                o r\zS}
      «




£ <\ C-0O S <k Gpz                   p-e~0-f?/-C-          f-0                            ' *L4,%r/iy
  fa y                .               c n*m.         ' {* < - -     r ^ u f-e ^ ,     -£ *                  * y i^ y ^
     • f V) C^/C            «t ^       V»/ £X         77/ >M»r-        Al * f~cr£.



  fy!h*r>r                fii           *yfA*e w \,            u/A.«* KC -    l^   S o *\ e ,
   /"» U> n *                        <\\/*y        2 '*^'^•9 *'£•*      . .odcstc^^-p
   C C^Y\             S\of                         j-c       < w_       A ^£.     At) U/ n
  -€ *u A                          l'u/U. «*\       o -a .£,     h fa jv            «.     A ^ t,
             a        je,

     14/A.^«r                «>-                 (~csb       «J         C'.cc //<e- ^
     £ y              u /« a A /« ^              c e-v^c/ 1 /-i o                   ^ ^
      ^      Pr Ps              ov          f^iAC.         /-o      f?o/~           c*.      ,\*s      * /txj
    s <y^s                c>u        tv d       b^.e-iv'         &A>r<2S             o f\.
          i^ o a <s/5
                 (^         "T A. ($            wt f/       S<*<s^          M any              ^ u A A
                        'V.^*?%sfe43



                                                          Cheshire,


                                                          18 April 1989.
               5*i>’:
   Bear liX|                 -i-.                   .
                                                                            -   -J   .
   Please accept my condolences far Hie tragedy at Hillsborough.
   I would like to recoamend the following suggestion.
   There shall be no FA Cap in 1989*
   Instead, in one years tine from now Liverpool shall play Nottingham Forrest
   in a semi-final match for a place in the final against Everton in what will
   become the 1990 PA Cup final.
   This will give one year to pass as a mark of respect for the feelings of all
   thase who have been hurt and berieved, and most importantly give the players
   an emotional recovery from the disaster.

   In 50 years time from now the record books will show that there was no final
   in 1989, and when people ask why, the answer will provide a lasting tribute to
   all the people who lost their lives. I cannot think of a more fitting memorial
   to these people, even more formidable than the most grandiose statue or plaque
   outside even Liverpool football ground.


   Anyone who argues for the 1989 PA cup final to go ahead is I believe arguing
   solely from a monetary point of view, especially the directors of the clubs
   involved,




                                                          yours faithfully,




V '\.'S                                                   4 non football aogporterj



                                            •• •-   V~-               A-•                '•
                                       mm
                                                  UiflOA

                                                  L^o



                                                   fipAi 14* W H

DeoJ Sj,                                                                   .

            In        <s>,0cud to        tta.              'O rlJW3<rrau^K>
I U^Lrm.. fccU^p AHuO <>j Q Pullie- I ax^uIt^
oac)   u a JUL        auzL Jt       Jb                 b^N L



             VcJt       ao      a   Jot>il?aiJ ^v\j cv\ E v/'4fJtfAA/x/\

J*>        uao    oJt V d k Pa/J< - I             a f f f c j to   uou to
nLmO         /aWJb        L W * j           to tKft.    <U/4JO0£_ jc5Di»S-U


^      ’         It             /aaflr\ u/^jcuf - iaAA-k ^rnitiAao a li
 it iaarvo t)vU: Vxls^oJb Jeoikedio hJ aaj Jaociuio -
vo                  QAd       t l 't t * .   ttasjt          c cxa    <^ot6    LoulcuLjjQ-

  axao.
          Lie oil kavG. nuuch io taxm jpcrn tiub
cLoacJbl/ axJ Lam          raaaJL,, J Joiu^C- fyn&J 10
(o I2&. cwrruclflc).
                 X It^au tf'ai. y<ju do                                    ^®-k>         thfl
fcluo                     iJxlJL      ha>/fi.                        ycu. to    (Jvjs. t^fiw
ao Jb         Kao uo          oJLL. PLa/ac. Lab'v 1© fckajs.                         lJ^o <i:
s c o rv )   fxuoJh. o J L jc u ^ )      L fta f   tJ'vfl.             '

                                                                     iau,C ^{ACfrQ.i-^
              v-   -   i




^e^cr    tVLr 4C<l IL^


I          w o r t b c i ^ t o GsKft-OjGTS

jbo -bUjfi. ^oo(rioduCL As5ec4uajfcc*ervv-               a/vi.
|_iv/6*.^ooc- ^        C-          ^sU a . trh«ueA£j<<    aJc
4-i ^u^5t2s®^Pi3^fi,                          <j a   SoOtwti^u
/5fak Af(CxL~ 1*1^.



 i LxjajcLfi^-et^i^tfL fci^at C£»^\£^<-Cltz^0vc                 t-«

           ^ A J k O ^ 1=0 C*K**£JZUUs\^ fct'V-O Q •■A -
C v u ^ -btv«-o               qls a- v^cu-k. ^       i-eo^ob
t-o fcU*&e_ o ^U j& cLua-cL .



 |                         a . ^ocfc^aoJUL   Gajpfo,~&r~ 'S ^
&£>     U^S» > ourwL u ^ o u l U L U k ^ ~bo Sa*^ \ he^«-
tjptA.           Cxa*dol#\*uJL> ujsdtu.               fcbvA. bcwu-rtflUMfiit

O-fr 0 ^     &LL+& fcUflfi*- t-o U o ktfU>0- c L la JL        u C^-U j L

            u*s4>cb&cL •

Uocoe-u»-e-r      (   \j   s o u   AjL   Ci km- h o    Susjj^ZS b

           n-**v-^ p r ^      tfci              £|ro*v\      Ui/uL,

nfiLwu=ut<r^>Ajci A^J=ci\jg^s ]^e_ dCa^uafetft                    ho

fc=^-e-                              ^ < y bUtf_ loe*e<uj>e<i^.


\             lA^Sv—l. v>3 «JjL ce«-o Cd^c*~            «*<<^
 S u-gc\g^ t p p v A . C » s 5                          I^ T p <?-L~

 oJsoLKLfl^^u-ri-dl -bU<, Q A Cx2? ^oULL k tt. auv
 ufioa Ak ?    £?©'&uz_ J j L a d L r idt: cv r\Aar^ ^p.

 i-e^fSecir •
                  u^r<>                         _________________
'L ^ jTi X V u              .

                                   fe> CL C ^ T aA ^ & zJ'•€- 6lVs5!^ ^ N                     -

'{jA\jO -i                          (*} 4\1aJvJ-C i A x ^                        i^\c4'

4^Vp^v^ti                   Oy-r^ §c\JCt<vK/^v^ , C * * J k - W~£'^

^K/^./^\\1l^ .          ^       ll's^L *C\                  il_£^YJ&- (h\J±Jl C\^^^l£v
                /                             ,         A     ii            ~
fc^~v    1 \j        ^ ^ t3 /O N T 7 -n C o         f   ^     U V ^ J C     ^        u

                       ‘H \ k /      tlvfi-       "H a ^      h < j^ M i\L ~ 4   ^

 d ^ c v A k tc ( i c ^ y A ^ cvjt.,s{>vJ ,'e^( E
 ^ J ± ^ / t w 4 W r k ddx G U v lk -^ r uu ^
•iUjL. |>'eUt £. . ^     -f ^ Ol (f^ r -K r O nUU^j
                    (%>ox^nj^o^        t w fs i-±ff.\tL (k f {jKj ^ t U

'ti.dkeC*             v/    K 1 (Vv (>vJ.'. \ c[/^y\Jr                    IfViU^rO

d       bSrTrv^             Ajt, ■^^S4r\ir€L 'bo " h u J ^ h                             ^

        Q&n^fXiL ^ • e .i) fc o tc^ I W V £ h h ,v ^
^'©''TK-CZb^/^ '4^~2^MN-i                                   6-yvX £X_ ^ Zyf\gJi          (o

 tUji-                               ' 1 ^ "tCouvX                 tW   K xjl^ j 6-^-/
tc^Cei/ -'tv ^ tiW ^ Z \ 'C ^ s V n L r '±<rJl
\                                Hm>Ji               (AAfc CS-^Ljd.

                  vi^ -(t(vV\-C> c a / \ j A s o d                    'C^t ^   l

u^ tLv4. ^ \^ d f(L cfC S s U M ^ I ( <3^\Ll ft^_
!>-(HaJD^4       ^ ^ - i v       fc^-VuL “ [U*. 'OMj*\\krLA c f

j*»^W-C      I/nHs-xL-A                         “t r ^ U V O p             ^tv

(a/\j D'v^L ^               trxi* S x d u C   '(^Ji c ^S ' i ^ L

C-£-^Ait-iA. ^            w \£ w 4 > £ -c *     cT ( \ c-(^t'N( ( ^ _

tu ^       W t^ . &^         3     l^ i^ U v a U                  <Vo^
^   e            .^^Uxltv 5                              a        r * ^
^ u . ^ L -               ~ .X                       ^
         IX>6-*C^    ^T     T^,(                     ^   ^        T   ^



b N ^ * - ts,^ C l t v £ l 7 K S T | V i \ . £ £ <           ,t        „
        ^                         (X n W

d       cA a- ^ <     u \# i u

           LL^          W        t _     ^ k w -^1 U -fc-Pic*
<e ^ A                              ^     ttM.            te < 3 k

                      K n k l v ^ T v J ' ' ASi'tV-&*/taU'Vvv£ '

                                _       tv*                  ^

 0       ^                      pu^jcv^0


                                tTVf^




     W       ,^                                      t        e


to t f w J c      ^     y   ,   W        LV      I   ,r    >- u      -
 u    (v            H                    > - V ^ i f a ts '^ t^ u
  ^ - h ,«->j 6 p j ^ p ^                f r r c o u ^ ^ . 11        ‘
/ ■

          < 2 ^ ^ 9 P l                                  Co- VUM^.




                      Wavwia                        w ta £ ^                 ^ t£
tVzU^            £C-&*X4       cJi^   W jX^'bcrsrt^im f X               h^y-e

                           i                             S/IvK/i/ifk,
Vig^p           -u    ^ i^ k j            c^M| 5wJ>              <^Vc^fef?




to      (fo t     p it ^       , *h J L   ^ r tL d k j        W         li
                     W vt                      ^ r td £ i r «r ajL

U ^ t             U ^ i4 -
                     ^urj^e        ^Z£         rnZrd&jbf                0JtrJi

id      c«nrvvuia<i (_                    ®/    n^O       f ^

                cJA. 4 ^ x m )A                 ^         fyw sifo
 Os^XOud^             re^vvdvej.
         'tU^rrJL       'ttlAn        U a ^ h

                                                  & <kM            -^crro
^l£                                                   b /f

                          C o^        it/t< w € b       GY £^i^ti^ *

             A i^nifeU tj        i   ^6         yy^ t
             ftfoA       ^ (U t^              / bjc       6v6o (m Aps

M ld Z ,                                  I     W M U T A j, * 4   rw t     ^

^                    picA        ^fvoAjl/C                         ^
Ca   m   ^   pX i    tWy^        d&JUb         wC&).


             ft 5 X         i£^ ^                            ftrctWX
               CivtX        AuJUvc^to                 ®< -^T^d
w^              ^      <%V6e -                ^tVu^r                "%£
“jj&rvce^            ^Uwr> (         or                                w &

lO^Uyr^             t<k|& L i£/       U |^ -fc^2J2                        <>t
                                              |J6




                                                                                  UCLYlCb




c$ncir djml\' i G u m
                             $ cum.           a   3 k    ue&rolcL                6 uM       u v t v      (Ithlctco
S u M jo f^ u r      (p tu r       M    lt    oO icub u 3       (>
a n ^iQ /it o f                       'HamX          _ . r,^ 7 .
      a 8 luuK                     dCcr ocwnmwncL \Ifiu on CtAePQrCjCut
cUqrLubj , o m h b M u u c r r i              Owck      oyrwrrvtrn. suunJut                             (fa&t
urxiL jJvmjw< Lurv Ufa drfucjL a t tyHcuk JvftMMsM.
tuyid CLGtiMAtiUf.
              3
                                          ,
                    J ir r Q n jf c/Y itu U xxr u M L
                                                                 ,      cu         q,           Hq m xclt
dxin o&lat JJul dUMd Jvu+jl Mju \fuo4uCJL S /itf Onf-e .
ai^-Lhid^ J& d M £c^                             ocUmxjz-
ld\iHUp^j (j^7Uvl $ Ju/xTctd,ru&ihdUjLod& uZoricj (Zhju
F*f\ ■ osnA. UeHA'KUtt dor vdJtijubjrri                                m         (JjiJUiHAU/ri) <y
can onCu               txJMourt                          SdiU-' (jcrfitra-t                     Clyu I
tjyxO^yWL.             $   jtriruj           w i a £     U ^   j J j C yiiu )     kj    ^   k     o m j   L'tl
dMJjLcL a/nd a/mxriimojUiJ diwr^M l ctnc( oJ£l/*\-
J/7'tyicj dLYYuMjcmjoJ;                ccrmm^J:                          (jtXhjiriL                 h&aJL
          *   S uJ M   jc M joyi       JuiH^rt M O * t        QM,yYiLrbUAJl
y          t l ClU , $ oCUVj cle r GDTudjLLCfjL                      M lC bt -     M (fe(A sJ<
V L jiM lW s C s (X £ T        YR a A CTUuYl           U m X ^ f V^CL
vtaipM
    k j ty ujU
\y^A j       u L . cU/UM           ctihji Kst
                                          ifoL'HrnJLJZ'r
                                              ^ /-v//    c^C/nc,\ajci*cbj                       lA f'    CXJZ ,
oik-Jio& uM jl . 3 Jycuv* och^JicdjLd tier l(jUz1 faciZaLL'
tb t K^MJt dLtLZfr ULytirdtfaj JlcincU oA- cthji^ OCcc-yit
''uMvcfJiM             ipAuck,          $ JaJiL          Ud    d^Ji, & \ J ^ j              (xvuj         c£c~
         ]mjmj dj\^ {i^-ioiroUMc ^i^uJzo^ o/r ^ oJlL.
         .cLuimd [JMs UtU> Mxbuuro U£jCL,*6,
                  M-Vj CCn^ratuMicy^ tjS r ^O ^-
 _     ~                <2
  > 1 ‘H         ^

 "Jo     rt-0-

 ^1L*~C S mjko .
            (Vi              CW/     ortJUC o^j                               *»L_ <**
^ w V W w q Scu^\i»hflO? ^■'"'■^                            \                     JtjJ-
T'-8VbU>     Vvs^                                          6*t>                    -^*-
                 icwcLo' .-U<L usvOji                  >    W
ftd|^ V ^ * L                 Jtt~* &-** j U ^ u « M ^
        Ua^j (TvvJL 4a-«~-A              J^alivJLd              O c    '•*-K^ -    <K**~ '***’’
XxrrAlt^J^               MrvV"              CK C U ^                                    j M   -“f5
           °JU-A             JU^Dul             0^5                    c U )            C O I ^ ’
       4 ju^ , ^ A                 ViuNwicU                      1 c*-—           *
v~^,k*Jt<_                         -&+                          s^ve>r            hr - ^ J
       ^ K 0 ' ^^-L^JC>AA^c)-e. *(*s b C ^ \ J 3 O ^ * -
^tNWXJtX   «-A-Sw^ -wjck,        K\ow ^ J L ^ ^ 4X vM^j4^€-d •
TLv                    c W u ^ s V ^ c ^ j i • V ^ J ^ M rv^(


                             ^ Oayt         C                                      0*
                  10 l ,                                                      ^      ~^~
        ytcJL 0 ^                    J> i a                               ^             W A-
J^vy    Jbtfi.       p & 'U 'a , •       hJAAX*   v&   I L vJ m ^         ^       J ijL

 (V^fi. *tW                                       c)^ aijl4 ^                                 .

                      ^JUd^-TUa       O^J-        ^         w-OS“A O        '^&^ r L
       A a^k q        CT^-Aa^ nJ ^■A>&- «»a                               -tX'-Ni-O |VviL
                     &+&*->    V W         UaJ^XL jd*j3Lt             \              CK^-fc
JgrO&k                   O^aJK^vvpA. vixvuA^                \V- Wvi>v<i*.
      Ajj&tsj&a*   CAj^Qa                          .m/C
M t w A x*K)X wASrtv^JL                               <wl ^           ^
j j & jj, ifca^ o^JL- tftuLelejd                   vW'^x-




 V-jfc-   ^U «»*.        ^    J U *^4'
                                             -     ,* ir s
iT l              <Wfc                   J r.**-          r.      .
 1   ^    .              _W *5          « ^ v       6N.   J - ' M .


          T t K       x u !^ ? ^
^ _ A ,          -» . ^       "T * ^ T ^ u T
V ^ f 1 J e w 0JlL JW >J- <*W*- «*~jK J^ U1-

                  Jfa,   0   ^      J ^ W          < - ^
                             -^ r                ^    c&^       ji    ^

              L    ko    ^       ^           J p *** A
 U W W L                            ^    •
                5 4 - 4 ^ 1


  •^✓Wco- <^TtS*

                           ^      Cl            ^ **X^            |/V      /N^yOo i -•«
   ^         £ « > m , ‘£ £*.                               w ^ c A.            6 e yCfc LC

   M*                               ^                                              Uai            tJ 4n
 &LuZ-c£         C*.£            *-t• fir 4erro-tx^ A.

                      /     £/«.//e ^           ^yo-^SC- i^^                       c. A cx-o ^ «*-a^
     o //c-a cr K ■OS-^r                    c\a oK          c.6ci 4- o>    c ;c>—^^ **c
  C*-< o~+jr   ,fc>n^.                          <■*••     ^-Q >%**£c^C*.cl ^erv- fc
   /')c\.       «O^       c^* J cwto                     Awtc ^      C.«»vc/<* /i© L ^ cl-v**.-
 ^atu.          ^ O'T C—^ g_g_-V         ,'>            A^-tt ^-*A-ckJ^                      _o     fL^a.
 ^.r-cf.Cj a_cJ^            v^jCKSZi        *~£-a         /^s&joo-^r /4 U2               ^        o-^-
                            ca.             ^                                            Al .^-
Co^/-tt/y             ^eAa^urw                          4* ^c^.      Ao_<s      Ce.o(         ^c
                          *\oL         Aeu/-co             «-*•*»-c<o *-     cont»m                yr—r~
£5* tt*JL*rS                      *^q                                       £La-r\i~a t*. n rJ cr*\. ly

   t^           Jo/j"          (X w u - w 6             «««v^        T^ta      <-,.      ^ ^ °^*
          a c c te ta ^             m ^cL         * o 4.                        S4> a.

 f^OLcL         OVQ-fejl<3-g. .■                <~i       c*L<.'ci      Hza.
y ^ r r     O   hia.rrS.     4 r<
                              n*©
                                      *


              ~*9                         ^          6^'             ? > ‘V           * r/     y°        P/^x*-9
                   "•> ' » *© ->y                            ^                    ■> III —^               V ^ -% * * f

         "^w©;*                           »*»»                   -*^/       **“*7 ^ -vw
                     ?*°                                         ^                     O y **        ^(/oac/
                                                     ^ ■ y^*-»-©             ■y'3<
                                                                                 o-*>              TVwy
                    k>9Vb « %y
                                                     ?           V ^5v          ?ou                     r>)-**r*
         r 7i 'srs>> y »
    4^70^0 cJ*S*+-t ®-3                                      >            - r * *»u                  «7/       *?
                                  *»9                             f%                           Jj -«*^ j

               s*y+                                                                                 y



                          t/'*v i*y * *>                                                            i/2 ? immS
'7£>“*}*r>                                .81            "^1         Ovvfcy f * 0‘
                                                                                 S             •&    n 9-si m o ?
                                                                                                                   /O
7    /    *    *      j       +       f         " * * ? '/        /& /" * * > * * >    /

                          V               «/       yp~*e             y?~°                     */    -r*^yww>-
                                  ^           ^xr»                *f~>s**c/
 SECHETAItY OF THE
 FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION.                        EDOLBSEX.
                                              17th APRIL 19«SO.
< 9 4 - - 4 -o p |

   B = o
 Dear Sir,
           lam on° of many people who has been deeply shocked
 byJEHf the tragedy that occurred at Hillsborough on Saturday
 15th April. It was an appalling incident involving a devast­
 ating los~ of life, Dreviously unknown to sport,and English
 football,in particular.
          Speaking as one who is an enthusiastic football
 sur-porter who regularly attends matches (and therefore prob­
 ably speaking for many thousands of people) I know that I
will not derive any further enjoyment from watching football
this season, P.A. Chip matches or otherwise. I would therefore
ask those in authority to seriously consider the abandoning
 of the remainin'; P.A. 3up matches,if not the remaining foot­
ball league fixturesIThe sport of football will gain nothing
by continuing this season and I believe the cancellation of
 the outstanding games would be a ri{^it and fitting memorial
 to those who died so tragically on the terraces at Hills—
borough.Life goes on,and so will football,but there is a time
and place for everything.


                           Yours faithfully
                    V /   V"




                                                                      (7 •       H
tu .a * ' fv v ,
                  I foic^N                e x p * * r r my stf»ip%*hg to i***-
6 ^ e » v e ^ ( pc*p<£ o f
                    £ p *v * We#w\r So 'b/N iM a m a ^ c r     tu e
                                   +f a                    ** (M ttb tm g h ,
                                  "fa. W r                              W > M \       UfrXlK
 C i \ M p f f 9 < % **e( t j 4 4 ^ ^ b ^ f t r * i i e P < * * U A   6 c p t o y u l , prrtfrtoOj

 ftffcv- •&                        ov Xb, fk«,                                             && 1
               -far-thou, oyho cU id <\H^ •>« Atee^pfr
“(Ut h t iu f -(uasM*
                   VjttMjbj'ty r ^ M S A c     ht           WwMa,       ■foy' i k u   tpcciM
-(yJb<vfc.
                   f4r ^ -{tot fwfv»r* — Kuo , Sf& tilriiy C&xffvu^fetf
                   H^frwX S< 4% cC i(Jun\S           H vu& r   b t              U lfa & k C d + \   fcc
           ^       S ^ W 'A ^ v                      tUfern*Ctoi»6 frw *,                uXvu\ kR
  arf€. M/4u*»M4( -fo               C ^ u ^ e e ^ A . ^V£*( (                   Q o i w & p i m . M.\H4m   z   .


                    y iw /x                      ;
                                       Vf




                                  ^               (X^cstrt ef      ex^fc^

        £L-df~e~/        £&■£■*      /&&■/’ a f /■/c^s£s-6i~f*~ctj'£-

 c/ -es/’
        -c~r <r/^yr          J                                     Sv t+r&£*

 tfr*    ^^ye^J/^y                    e£ t y ^ ' es / ' c/>-''

         &J-/r *^~e-         A       OJt^-e                C-4.     re-o
                                                                  ^,i

J-tu./' le^'                  A-is-VT^t/              >*_ ir*-~

J?/sr-c±St/     ~^<-e.     COM Pi'l—£d Z \/           &             o /*—




              >1_ ^ f u £ ,~6-*- -t'-tu./y/u^'s ~ /!-£

O-/"   V^rtS-frtL                           ,



               jf        /*&,£•-£.      ~6<£-^       £<1             ^t’Sfi'/Cf

>f7'/t2>/UM         ^      /-/-^-/ t/*-r£f u-4-e^-e                6 o Olfi-e
                                                                    (0SC2)
M .                                 ^

„,„/?/             <*■"    *    f/~ ?    /        ***   Z ^ '

      J t& 4 ~    s * / ~ ~ '~ r jr r / " /T
<o                     ^        ^ ^ 7        ^ ~ '      J '       ^
^         -
          j ~ ;    -                                      ~



                           </ /0-*J-r4 < ^ 7 3~               .
          is'e>                                          (U a -^

    /n*



                                                                                   tsst^



                                                                    .AfteiL i t * - A S 4)

    / J<£jxA        tjU S                 -

^                                   J          Our*\                                        fu J
)ajlJzL\ .        (zl\'-Q.        £*.&..c,K ,           0 (~               Q-£/yjuz*\

 /Jz           Iz u S r t S L < U             o          <x^ & y/~

                 60           <Zc*X'              (sct^ck^s.        O*-^    Usk-L       .pJLofL


                    L'       3
C3y£                         t*^n<-j>-        d ^              ■O   C L o C -h s

u         SS
          'S          <- eUA&crvCj
                      Ceu4j5>crvc.                  vlf«euS<?w          t ^ A^-e £' A . o L d ^ / S

 C\       s'yg,o- /—         -p    t*X> (e

On          1*Jlc.A          . f         Ca^x           Klo C~        iS<■£-•■«- •_ 6'A<-
     / 7>.                         ^c.A                             Lv'cnr' A^/v^


                                                  0-0 ^ 1      'Pc^J-iPuLLu,
►



                            //•eW
               IS J 7
                                                      fg-T&st
                                                      6^-lS
                                     1   9, APR £9
                                                       te.       r-»



        OiAT




                                                          /^o-t^~-i_^*,»~«- Ac~«*V' ^




                                                     s^-«- « /<*^           ^ -*-




1 ♦                     ~
.     4*-               mr*+.tLm+s       iA^-
                                                      oL—-*jk.             ■U^

" '   C^y,. . ./.
                            *•         -J**rt f r a «toa lewitiite W        «e**d*e
-anything, mo natter      f]|         bcigadss f             ^
iaten«t« and will               M e t i r l iU i & l l ' t € ^ v‘ " ‘ J
p rlwi ttw. M m * mmrm padtiwl
ln> u q r ia this g n*t — c t dt)P m i d doqr i f 8f l l t 1 lM th a t the victims would
with Liverpool to carry on and win the Cup and th e League?

You way find tin attached o f interest.    It evoked no reapanee. I m  u t o u n h d by
the craaa m a r k attributed to Downing St. on todays lfwu
reporting an apparent intention to press ahead with identity cards with the
explanation that they "were aiwed at booliganisai not crM^d safety?     Itis that
kind of thinking that evoked the firstpolice reaction on Saturday to pathback
would-be escapers f r a the pariaatar fence. The two a n indivisible and
indissoluble and        concentration on the one disturbs essential balance. I have
regarded perinetr fencing in its present fora as potentially Murderous since I
first saw it.    Look at the picture in yesterday's Tines and Observer of the weeping
girl caged in a death trap. And bow often h u the government been warned by
those of us who know f r a experience that providing barriers to entry will build
up uncontrollable pressures outside th grounds?

Good luck with ynur sensible efforts to govern this nighty pasttiaae X3MOPOOEX
VfltSNOflBNiraBBMIIK and with your opposition to politically-inapixvd
interference. I was at Villa Park an Saturday.
                                                     Wigan
                                                     Lanes

                                          •'-IL-r    29 Jan 1969
                                       •
                                       — *»— IV —

                                       1 9 APR '                                                I
                                                                                                1
                               -   r

Dear Mr Biffen                 ' "                                                              <|
                                                                                                $
T am ewtooldened by the less-than-committed attitude to the Football Identity Card
prc^osals displayed by you in the recent BBC TV Any Questions progrwiitto seek to
persuade you to oppose them. It seems one of the few things I, a frustrated and
effectively-inpotent ordinary lover of soccer (and liberty) %can do to express my
wltement opposition in positive fashion. I seek to curry no favour thereby but it is
inportant to declare my view of you as of truly liberal attitude and conpassion. I
would not otherwise bother to write.                                                            $

T am 7 1 .
                     Since 193Qf apart from those periodsfI have been a regular
attender at soccer matches, deeply devoted to the cause of Everton F.C., whose fortunes
T have followed home and away, though nowadys rather less away as age takes its toll.
      3 years ago 1 stood, of choice,on the terraces, whence derives the deepest and
most joyous involvement. Now, by virtue of my season ticket, I sit grandly with the
other grandees. But, save under duress, 1 never miss. I have visfced innumerable
grounds. I can still enjoy watching kids kicking a ball about - and even join in,
cautiously!!

Ky objections to the proposals embody resentment at the assault on civil liberties, my
civil liberties, at their discriminatory nature and at their threat to the viability
of League football, the joy, pride and consolation of ordinary men everywhere in our
lam!. Wl>o would lightly dismiss the claim that here on economically devastated
Merseyside, pride and vicarious involvement in the feats of our great soccer clubs
have made a significant contribution to social stability? And it matters in Hartlepool *■ -.i
too. And finally the scheme, in focusing on exdiding the hooligan from the grounds
a<idresses a problem which, if it ever truly existed, has been virtually eliminated. I
refer to trouble at the grounds.

Most of the public conception of this is mythology. I have never seen a serious
incident at a ground in 58 years of regular attendance. That is not to deny that
incidents have occurred. Football arouses great passions. And occasional eruptions
are not confined to England. Should we then ban or severely restrict Football? Might we
not more sensibly ban motor transport which maims and kills daily? The problem is
exaggerated aixl the Media is responsible for much of this. It is fatally easy by
concentrating the camera on 4     people exchanging a few blows in a crowd of 40,000 to
foster the inpression of a riot. And somehow the use of an elbow in soccer is more
reprehensible than a full-blooded i^jpercut in Rugby Union. Loutishness and bad manners
are rife in Britain. I share the P.M.'s distaste for graffiti and litter. But we are
a divided people with an absurd but acute nost&lgia for Entire. Good manners will not
be inculcated by legislation and to offload society's problems on ”the people's game"
will solve nothing. Rather will it be counter productive. Mrs Thatcher talks absurdly
of restoring it as a family game. It never was. It is not for her to seek to make it
so. And I suspect the family of the lady Tory M.P. who"used to frequent the Molyneux
ground Wolverhanpton'never did •< ''Families*" are not deterred from attending soccer matches
because of soccer violence. Any true fan would scoff at the idea. It has never deterred
me and I am no braver .or more rash than the next man. ' 'Sadly soccer has never been a
family game/ T wlsfi that were not so but the reasons are deeply sociological.
Throughout Europe and in most     other parts of the world its class base is much wider.It
is for English soccer to make     that stance not a msiguided Tory party via discriminatory
legislation.
You Addressed your syRathy to those living near Football grounds. I have long since
shared your view and have been grateful not to be numbered anongst them. But how
will excluding the potential trouble-makers (even if you really aould) from the
ground solve their endemic problem? The Police view is that trouble, fairly readily
controllable within the grounds will be transferred to the outside and become more
difficult to contain. Haw will stank the easily predictable problems at the turnstiles
(Only we football followers know ttat problems of great crowds smeteing last-minute entry
through restricted turnstiles - we have suffered and we know) help the near-ground
dwellers, liow pleasant is it I wonder to dwell beneath the flight path of a
large airport or to endure Winfcledon fortnight if you live close to the All England
Club or to live close by any centre of large-scale public entertainment? These people
are dependent on the civilAy and gentility of the users of these facilities. They
will continue so to be with or without these measures.

Unless of course we close the entertaiments down (we ban the motor cars and we kill *
no-one) and in my view if this Rill becomes law many league Clubs will die. So far
from portending success even the ineffable Luton Town's gates have fallen since they
introduced controlled entry and Plymouth had to abandon their scheme.

I resent this attack on Football which has enriched my life. I resent having to
produce an identity card before I go about ray harmless recreation. I resent the
increasingly authoritarian behaviour of a government which pays so much lip service
to"setting the people free" and appears not to know or not to care that our
particular form of democracy is essen tially based on alternation of power and self-
restraint by any long-term holder of a large parliamentary majority. Have the Irish
troubles taught us nothing about the abuse of power by a permanent democratic
majority?

T have contenplated refusing to apply for a card and abandoning the lovely game as
a point of principle. I probably won't but so many who now attend will certainly
dn just that. The feeling among my fellow supporters is strong and their love for the
game not strong enough to counter their aversion to the ignominious identity card
and its distast/eful trapping*. So far from attracting to the game new supporters
freed from the constraint of MStOlOfiafX the fear of violence as the P.M. so gaily
prognosticates I have no doubt that they will recoil from contact with the sti^na of
identity checks. Isn't that a normal, healthy reaction for a free citizen?

I have rather gone on. I hope I have not bored you. The issue and its attendant
indications mean much to me.                                             At every
visit my spirit quails a little more at the evidence of a society much more quietly
democrat.ic and classless than our own aivl the gulf is growing. I hope I may have
influenced you a little in this matter and T hope you vote against the Bill. Thank
you at least for the time and attention devoted to reading this note.

I enjoy your appearances on T.V.   Please accept my good wishes.


vours sincerely




Rt. hon John Biffen Esq.,
1louse of Cannons
London
                                                    <St
                          c^4-4-cSc.




                                                                        oJU
                                                               t«»| v*
t)**« w

               ^      AM.                                                   fcJUL.



         UsTC—                    ^   ft*. ^                                   ^w

VU-                                      \                   ^~JUrJ-j

          i t * *   li» » l jL               U - y   |0   P i l^_ ^ . 1 r       j |

" M U * i '*»* f V '*>'*• ^to.-i»~~l s~* fe £~»- .
     W      w*\       \     w —   . - -A—       .         . U-JlM^-jL

              * • ^ ■ I S C X ^ «■>. | | r f n            odr“c Ia . —        •. -

\~ iI                  I                       t~^r-nXax.<Ti           r-i—^ ti^
»,                                      *Kt, J u ^ ^*JfcJLu.
          k*                       w » H w ^ .A

^ * \ 0 y«p|l»        jww                        »*».X   ( £ k yt tiC
*TC»h ^ m^

wJdLttk p>to .i»                    tiLu ftJbk imm fiL, I.
b       (JLA.tL

W « * ^ w 4 i ^fc>« J U | ^        U W »tftlL Am ^ A ^ U*»*« ■

    b                      , <b>X «|*»                    Y«»         Ml^iT

    w^«»» N /»*«*                 .++**+» , \ ^      %*k%%   (| 2|ML

               V%*Jl ^>%j 6 X |t < ^ *tf*j                   t t u J U « tf
                      W » * » 8n I>% Cwd^M*HM«li2 ,^ V * >« W « it

•—                 *Tw     yfc.          .—    [^*^-1 ~fa- v " * ^ ~          •
               W W » iMk                                 U < y|i ■■

^        vk>   U    t« .                     odfeJL tffc ^i JLt< ■
               ~x ^                 £ z t i. a f r j.
                                    JtL '- . i* w i ( (U >
                                         ^      Wfc .^ V«>I» A # t
K 9                y M .

                     Jl       o j t a|      A   W*«» l n   nj

      V\*^l4 l k   «NU i^»      .
                           vJ ; t* jq jt4

c*. c .   dLkP ^ JbdU%. ^
                                     1
                                                                      Tunbridge Wells
                                                                      Kent. ^
               \ © c ^
                                                                      16 th April 1989




Dear    M      tb d l
                            11 i
          The anger,   horror and revulsion at what happened
last night will, fortunately eventually disapate. I am lucky,
for those people inlvoled life will never be the same.

                Now        is     the time to tak e p o s i t i v e             step s    towards
making      football       the    safe and e n t e r t a i n i n g game         it u s e d to be.

                      As    a p u n i s h m e n t to th o s e s t u p i d p e o p l e w h o c a u s e d
this        t r a d e g y t h e r e s h o u l d be a ban on all f o o t b a l l           matches,
qu i t e for h o w l o n g I do not know, ma y b e t ha t w i l l h e l p p e o p l e
r e a l i z e the e n o r m i t y of w h a t has h a p p e n e d .

               S e c o n d l y e v e r y p e r s o n seen on v i d e o fil m s            climbing
into     the g r o u n d s h o u l d be p r o s e c u t e d , b e c a u s e each           one  in
th e i r own w a y is r e s p o n s i b l e .

                A nd    t h i r d l y the g o v e r n m e n t , football associations
and s u p p o r t e r s clubs m u s t get t o g e t h e r and w o r k out a w a y  of
m a k i n g the game safe.

               B a s i c a l l y it comes d o w n to i n d i v i d u a l s , we have to
care a b o u t our f e l l o w h u m a n b e i n g s and if the ne ed        to w a t c h a
football       m a t c h is g r e a t e r than the n e e d to p r o t e c t life then
this f o o l i s h n e s s s h o u l d stop.

               My   feelings       t o d a y are one of      concern       for    th os e
people      in h o s p i t a l who,     if t h e y surv ive,   w i l l n e v e r be the
same   a g a i n an d for tho s e p e o p l e who have lo st lo v e d ones            in
the name of a gr e a t game.

                 I ha ve sent this l e t t e r to as m a n y i n v o l v e d p a r t i e s
as     possible       in   the    hope tha t   constructive            dialogue       may
follow.        W h y does it a l w a y s take a d i s a s t e r b e fo re p e o p l e put
th e i r h o u s e s in or de r ?

                                                           Yo u r s


                                                                  /




                                                      1
         rv <;ra/lMi/w HAUj                                           ^
         CK\X4        f V'-t/tvWi-                                                      iQNDQN         ’




        "lu. ^■o'W wkA K Ais<n-
                                                                                      \ r - 4 - '          & S



     J iy tiU       ft (      *• ^       .

                                                  1   ivTVfcl         ^         I 'if r V r t

        V\AM                         I        d v ^ ^ p < n a /t > X V t :              <*A         t’k.-C




      (AjU   aA   v m v   .   c/j,                    ^        ^ v ' U / t v n v                ^




      C'-v y K k v k L-       ^ iA v         H /.         f    (\ ■             C ksf



    > v t /\o v \

®                             0 rX           o m v        n /V n             < ^ tW l/v i/? (X


    1 /K /ft/t    ^                                           <A          IW W V K      A.M v 'X.
                                                              (


    ^ < *fU               O fv tl^ /S M                                            K /^



     IW v u A ,               I^ K A iJ lA    m                             p
*                           t* J L 4 W .       IK-   J j 'r£ 4 / t       w   A K     A U ft.

\A J ( M                  AS S fflV tih w                 tW c               ^

VvrtA                    J'Mv^       <?(/^,

                                               ft 5j ^ n v a /f c ^ tv^vt^L

e4LYW          tfv        J rT > V t           ^ (M A /                          f l^ b u .



r t A jiU 'b         {     iA,       f4 u A ^            to                               ^


    ( ivvo    -V k a A           S ^ /A /\/v \       «        c ^ 'iv ii^ v X r M x


                           ^         t \$ l \ A A    iA }                        /U 'W   t



    v'VX     GYf[A-( by                                              fVVWl\/Cs

                     )       few           <nJ ,              ^ iA

      (> /7 W M V j              r v v lW U J                        ^            ^ u A lv c



     M W         £ u \/k         V                        ^



    '- V t ^ T V r U W iv L L              6                             ^        v A v tA v
                                                     M. A . LL.B. B a r r i i t e r at Law.




                                                                                              HICHCATE,
                                                                                              LONDON



                 |) w A V v u            Gj c   l         p u /t ,               K




W V M j                 U         '\ l          £   ( u Y      V   jf i^ id         c ^ -J C Ia /



                                    h         o W A > j.




C v^ Cm / y v                            tu              jp


^   a k   4 kA    a         (J\          u    A-              M v A t                 rv M r
                             (/                 ^



                            r t /J a v w        ,


frV tt           ( h /t f W f v      V d iA ,'                 l^ k p r ^ A ^




                                                    -v
  M   jc u a      .           o       M /W b U i/v }                           hV   H

  M jC V V K y                W /K /l/A '                 (7>W                     ( /J ^ W S A <


     ^ <    aaa       K       ^       j            j W         j           ^            e k u iu h                c f


  % A ^Jk A /                 |v A ) r e            K .                                 U v M y IA /V t£ * 4


             W wAX/                           ]^           f <i\\M s                     ■

                  It              V\              M>               &C/TK.

 ^           MOW                      f > ? o v it Y W


 WV          5 O tv v l                       c V l/V t            M x - W A A .^ ^ ^ /1 x


 ^           (a M         m                        iA;             ^           * n ^ w            n W         V    '




            ^vu^l                                                                                         -



            I k   t       |( x a A            iA          1?uA r                        ^             ^


> v n o           s U     a       a   *   A   /          v a           l       U    ^             '   ^                 1 4



( U           u               w                    p       1^                                                 iS^ c
(A^ v / n ;               *           C U A ^ ,                        -U


y v n v iM                    ^w              (w iA ^ jj                       ^^w      k v   M                               *

<Vv/^ r t             c ^ t> /U M e                                    p
                                                                                 M. A . LL.B. B a r r i s t e r at Law.


                                                                7 (^ v c W lA
                                                                                                                              H I G H CATE,
                                                                                                                              LONDON
        A             o r-                 f U y /W                                Jb c


                                                            V M v fr                    oup p                                     tsK,


                                           fC i                  iv    7/ y A / A s                     *) A   a jl           m       A   j   A ^


                                   M jO ;                   \v h A               'J ^ -


    c U v Am              >


                          It           m       *u                                                                             ^

                                                                                                     • .           f sf
k /fV K J                          " K /V t'                 R 4VM j                 jJ U ljA L



    \A A M A /\\A i4 \                                          i\a W W /A                           ^

                                                                                                                      M /f/           \z iA T

                      w W                                   ..............                                     ’


                                           ( M A iv V l                                                  s c ^ -                  Y       *
U       w       t A       '



j           K       / * -                  M        j   K A ,         t s           <       w   *   ^     )           ^




    \   t       W     v        \   u   w                S   C   ^      »     A          .                                 ^           Cv,v
                                                                                        S 'p C 'fa

                         )    (\sbA                     [c ^ l
     U         - t i t        v       u       ^                                                  'U U ^ ^ j

    (j ^(nMx^K. 5k^/Ut IrC
    u    * M      ,          ° fv * M                                     o ^

    1*UK                     M l                  C tu A i                    A ^ ^ W - HL

e A w M y                         U                   5 b M       ^                              m ^        7 U     /W      '


                                                                  p       r r v w   U   .




g /w U A u a                              r           (kAi ^M^ 0^                                                   H£

    rt^ T             fA jui\,'(A A /                             .   -




                         1        ^                     "     *           p     ^            (   {   ?      .   "   ■   «       •   »




v    m          (K                                    V *                                              ,.

     ->                           ~ / t           ^         U         (7 V \C < U X ,                  ll       ^
S ^ v v rv                   ^                                                      H       j u M           m       t u k *



^                     la                                          M
                a4-^'<3=i

                           vsss




        W /f     M     ij ,

    U ,    £    (U A \ £fly© l i / f -   $ OtAPj         & f r ^ / l rw                                                               » *


                                                         .......... .... .... ■ ■   -        "                        f if ** i *                 (

                            S \ > .
                            ^       /

           __              _                 - i         \ v .q a +£,                   t^ M r .    J x ffi& tw b c L -----------A - — --------




                 eMs 0j OA i^ ~                      AV AAA,giyft )/V- )A*uLed exJhuk                                  \ C\le£> ____


                 D\tes*~c\M')                 ./HA^ J                                       ^ p o J CvfyL           \Jbil'                        ...



^ P l W ^ h 0                                      ut    - Azaof c                  c2 5"        d eX$£A              ^aXwrMUv.^



iJLe yiki,                 j> ^ U v u £ r v              rk ^ ifN          &r\^b &pi\t\KV0VSl^ tv 'U U                                                  . ... .


 ^ a ^ v ^ 'w'W.                             ?      '£''&£</*'                                     -Jl . I'-'V'vtiit,^ -c*kjl£ s



    C-PV-3                          <rrv yive                                             e>                          L5^                  ■Ltd'


5
^   .
                          j,^____ i' ut. ^ I t          i^ ln f                u^>        . ''VP a^        iv !,' l | ^ v ^     __         gswjL
                                 _____                                 Jo^Kj^t J > * u n t                         ....... .

        kuJlt^                               r>i^j O                         iV ^                           ji>_C           t '^ ^ ^ i ,      Z-nj^
                                    £^V5U)_^t^_



                                                                                                                                            -jfe


                           fa       y<CisMk>            fc>                                         q % n S 7^ ^ V
                                                                  tJ l s t e ^ a r r e O v a d l v nf

                                                                                        >/
                                                                       i - V A - i '. i ’V iM ia lt—
ktZfLD               £fi           4 ^ J < .<2/             ' ______________
                                            < 2 /))f*t%elG7 7L                p h & p /U o
                                                              _____________ -rf-OZ-fLM     W tt ok, fh & itU '

oLujj'-            t i- j f f i i i y w                                             yn*/}4e                                                 ^ > u d :
r
r

t                         *Jc y t .....


                                   L /w d k -
                                                 *i         >                           <+’r ?'%■?■"*■ ’

                                                                                ,)% a * * £ .
                                                                                                       ’V1*-*-



                     #

                                          -*£-
                                                                     #                           lu
     -

                                   /■                                                                 r
          I * J’C i'Ha ^ jp .


                    ■£ & *




                                                   /lift.                       S h m !

                                                                              /?
                        /,
                      ,l&      u      if-'0        tv^ __&?£■.
                                                                    s t
                   i£il
                                                                /~>
                                                                  IU S *   7 L £ ')l.    S       >     /   .




    2 £    ifoso     ol                          /;J?              £ £ ^ i £ / y / n ± j2 < 2 ? l .


    L> / ! £ _                                          Z-KA       ...0                 tf




                                                                                          L
                           p . ' * ’ ’* '




    yeou^

               4 * 0 *1 * o * ^                      ^             ^ J ^ A U b ^ v
O^                            ^                  J^Jit v ^                      «*>^
O a^ L       O vj /    ^                         ^                 ^




X        ,       w     t     M > ~ * «      * “ ^            ' ~       " * ~     * “ "

CL^teJ" ■u^O"               l»A.'M.Cj-vO^^J'

         -Q.          tU    b><5   P^^oOa                C M *         S A^    fo^f

tw l T . s ^ 1 -                                         ~                       ^
tW,          e**                      b     s-       ^        ^
%\XJ ^ 0**M <>             o! a    OO^U/S*.

                            <ttowH    big    L a i m a s , pr*b                  ,


4 , u - O^A M ^ ( t                  fl} tL i        f«opU.
J   ^ fJ U a M   iv d c s . Cl x K ck+-   c k l^ j
                                  Aylesbury.
                                  BUCKS,
                                  April 17th, 1989.
Dear Sir*,
      I writ® to express my profound sense of personal loss
after the tragic events at Hillsborough on Saturday.
      I feel sure that, together with the m s s supporters of
all football clubs throughout the country, we i n feel it is
a case of 'there but for the grace of God.' *
      I know that you will all appreciate that we all feel
loss at this time, and that we should seek to find a fitting
memorial for the 94 victims of this tragedy. I would like to
propose that the FA should consider the possibility ofliason
with the Football League and the clubs to arrange that the
92 League clubs 'adopt' a victim of this great national loss,
and provide a suitable' trophy, in that victims name,as a reward
to the supporters player of the year for each club. Tou could
then also provide trophies for the man of the match at the
FA and league Sup finals in the other namee.
      In this manner, I venture to suggest, these true football
supporters will remain permanently in the minds of all clubs
ami their supporters.

                              Yours faithfully
             avi-4 ~e>°i                                    |
                                                            ---------------




                                                                           hi. xtkJ-K



                                                                    n r i     A p J     t w


L) e^v *■    £ <r-

       I               w i l y           U      Ti.                           »/

z ^ - J L r\           -f~f^                          ie     °^'           7 ° “~    1"” <

*,Uu.          fcu-'^JL         / ~ ~                                         ^       ■*.

 j^iLU-              *~.fpc-£ '-

       p . ^ i L          I     i i k - <                              **~£'


                      - - <-    <         “Y

^L          TL-*Li        tim.-f        TLi <_                                      •^-•«/,^"t
 , L J J .                     I U «         ~ L *         r£ ~ .     ;«       -«




             <^Y                       A -VcX                  '*      "'O
                                                                                •/ ’
                           >                    «cf                      t/-i & a # ' - s           ■C            ac"^

                            •*/   L*c L.         ti            <*\«j , ■>. ^          f l.it       x-c*. f c / ,

                      /■        a           x t« . tc ^              x                                 tvll J(.     •'N.©'^

  CO " <           ©vN                           i ©       *v» «.                              <k «.              ew .r

                                            t           •*<v/

            i rL S                   r td               Iv>i a.’/         /^c^yo-e''-*.{/- P'V ^<x-"fv-'thx.y
 Cfecea Occu-<^ ecT^
         f     c       t          Z:\ov               ^ /c^

 E^Oe"/l            «.<•»<_         oij"^                                      o   '*>-<.?'M_       /(.«-X ^e>T^          "Z^

~lo.(k       'fo       'T^t_^           OL*vc*/-_                  t«V         "^»             LaJ^          Ttu^      /jjlv. ^

              "fc          iot.y'                         e < u - l <-^.                 o-~      p£i-<   Ks.p*.?.'^          >i

 i^ ^                      *j ^-/v          /         £ «c.^      7^f                /     .Xc<-         ■#c        T^Ok^

 *»'.«.-v^'            -t®^ 4               t -N                                           lit,        G &     ^«.^-\ KL^f,

  f^. A . t            f~»e'tL O.U-                   L*o*.yuJL           « -^ X           C                 d-i^Ccto'- 5,

               'vo                                -c^p ■*'wce -vc€_                  Q-j    kji^e                 J-vo’thtK U-

'^■'■0''V                  kj                   o't^t/-                        7^_          «v.ou.>v S.~h~^e/~

     b lL                         u<                                u
                                                                               ,           u       <




     U L t         U „/ u ^                ^                                          ^                 (
   ^••^©•V        ~ L-Ct       I '^         -LUr«J*           c. I       +
                                               ^ ^ 7          «-Wr,                 « .x       ^

  y«4^           o U      /                       ev<^           ^                         ^       ^


       ^                           '"^      «-* /(^>c                z^_        7 , ^ ^                /<)-7/

          ^ '^ • ‘^                      #“ A        OL J        /            *r/
-e         I*.      c.
                                   V *          i-Vf't-*                4           ^-;t           *
                              *c          w 1A*^-T       o^          4,■*“'     £/«c./,.c
                                                                                */■
           **U        cc^-U         i *     ,_/ ^ v
                                                         «o^ .          '4,,           ^ <JL-v».£
^ C ? u L .(




                 ■ - C / o-
      £
           r/*   ''^~x                      ^        ^ < t ^ L           4



                          y.Cu.'-J             .Si-vce
                                                            /
                                                     Nekctoic AWaofc.
                                                      Dew.

                                                                   /^S1

 DQxj M*\ C m k u
                    >



I vU ikJo -O ^tO t \MAj m /JL M -             4*0 CA^jh*lw*JuK,
tfj- tw CU-p B wa Z <»j4o Jfc«                      SktjfnAl-

(Shmdu lath e e b v f             4                  tea oUfcd
to   j z   L   i          ^   S«*j[>c^tjjLA *y k*i           .

 I LupC tfcl far Onrt,«jS£^."W        SrC£-            deceit**.

 \& Ufrtt/J,       ow^oC | out*. -t^<- ma^ ^        r&ped&L




 "ftTWU JUA&,tXv| !
          (favi-e-eh




          l<35>7




< ^ 5U‘       S lV
                     /

                  U l^           ^             p \a ^         n^c
o         -       ^
0 6 / ^          ' lo v ^        -'t-i C T j P c ^ i    JfW(A)r'


~v^          .              T,   L      ^to        ft     KnT&«~f£

/b                        ^ « d t . ££                 u j^ y ;

< ^ °d                                  c n \> J c t
                             (^1 h^vCo ^ C * \ T               /<

r ^ v v o e              g^yKr^         (-s^jIq           ^   ivwi-s

L tr ^ J j           lx      e jiA j^
                                                                   c«Jt\o+S
       n                                                       4
?Q     JhrJ:                *d     tv    01       SpQcfriC          OLhCO^

Or                    <rv\£      p+/bic* J c r             ^           £W*/
                           c > ^

fiM 'v j       tb +       f* U «        b>       Q tsy/C       **< X   a > tc \

h> fU        l^ e r ^ r b Y                  ^      £ *5           - <^/c
P*P        Ce^cdb          £>g^c*a i S P ^ S

       * W       Scf^JL     IOa So   a       &    Q*S

A IaOcA h be looo’Z t} b~t <~Uj r<Sbr
ta j       ScUo'^     k/^ooit^Jr                                    i fo/


&■     CY       fff'ti.
S < 4 - 4 -€ P i                 -           I------------ ;— j , -------

                         t~Z

                                                        T F ^ iZ n B )

 J -A tI §<p>,
        ■4 -s.   CL   f i J L & l t j f c f ' U f a

 C f-€ L O A ^ i                        £>€     3 *1
t£b     T rX     Glc^o     c4FynnJ2tJd^n                    &-&

Cxljc c ^^& i ^           y^y           ££&       S ^jLO C m             .


      ty'lue     G if          £ 6-fru k /                        k -e
cncocj-ihe^             U I'Yl       / /U m o * - < j   -



 n w *                                            7                          d
                                                                                                                   AO OcMffiSS
      /*
     J w
                  J        S< ~i                      lm ^ ~ {    <-i                                            lt~ J- -p _ c , C ^ '          jg y

 yjix                               /& cii-6-11-1                 &{'                                      3 U       "TviZM,i                  K

                                                  f~Ju-                 -^tfj'-<*'*c^ e.-t~r                        <&**H             W'lHi

~~fa yV-l 'l        i '(                                ' *-*-'                   'f-^                -XwJi                ^     fk            Ji'l>'-)- (

                            AH
/£jLfr>ns t-Y jP- v--b-*-zi.                                •y^-v'V S                                           _ J ^ i Ci 'IttC l^.

                   tU*'                          A--] ^7 /-i*^ ^ *£>»*<*.                                          XciLb.                j /;&

 //V^ c‘C tf 0-*Zf                    1-         — '^c" "'■'*' L-f C CL               II c/ u C^ fi-T~f{                                   rrf

ji\J..-~ ^-(-i               f L~ %yri^.cOJ                                                         (9 "        fl ‘ f- -+{

 j /      I}-* ) l~-e-1' ^          / ’- frti        ~/k<-~>'                            ^ L -tscc.iit-                                        /t-- ‘ ^

     ‘v /I /^cW                                                                   fu.1. yL-i                                     dC{
 /
                       /^'--< y L                         ^ ^ -<<J<.’ T ^ W                 ^"1 //^ / /< '^ ^ tfC
     “»7 ’-i- *rl
                -i 4 - ^ * * r             a Ci.        C t . ^ i . '^ fli.-u ,     w- > v a < t ' . . ^

 /        f j *'jj{ ’i -U . ''h+i~ *?Vu> / &,'•**»£,-( * {                                      k     J . r / s t "_                     t. t~

 k x ^-c '          -7v<                        tk* t't'L t cx          /* ■* > » * r-AM*C>-y              ^      C‘f '                    ‘/ \ ^'

 i~i     s f/t        4            f * : **« tf ^                             V                                                      c- f ( - ,; f

-C->Co >                      ^ b{'             a.     Vt-*-*j* J-t /              : ■"    »/         <•       /V i* i.A       ♦ >     <■_,'       jk ■

                 $■ ~v- j,. J^'y- ifr t         Us                      »/ j*ft                                                                  J ^{
                                                          t



    }                          A.- /iu-* "T n-ey-iu^js / ^ C , ^ M                                               fju i
S             }***-% lsV~*^-<-            / i -          g          4^    .                                     <t fk ^ & c

i r / L iC£i~v<i ■/^*^c &c*^u<                                                                         '•&{*'            ky‘h+^'‘
tU                  1>1C 4      rf-C Jo ^i'h jia ^ 1J                                                       /•£-££» jfltt*M^i-
^-rffeuMt M 'k                                fj*s                                       __f?L-

Irc-luh ^                         *J p*1                                                 ' ‘ry£cs^                                  -



           { (/(' ^        a .iX ' C '^ '/’».«■* '***++<j &+■*( 0,/X f t M                                   -M * t
                    juaj' fa * t**{               A J^-eC fn. -TLc-fL-—                            ^        &      £'c>«t a t

/h^.*-( &+<. i <’
                '/-/«'^                       &*~~j           iyfcv/'                    bust* /Lsj,$£■■*•*

        fa        it/c'cC rt ‘*t                          *•^ jr t* -               l-h-l-L* /c t'^ -^ /i 1 ^                ‘*/
t-W-Wvf-     ,-,- ejc-cA J ? 4 - '      f^ /T t *■ l ^ i{ ^                   *-’•'■'/     U tL 1 -7 ‘i *                     «.»

             n .'r :A <    /'<•'<■'<-     £<jC~          jtf- ^ M d r            fn .ty .- - f l&                        ,
                                b'{<-*            'jk -^ c       a.4-c.                                           jcp^f>Ui

<.W / ^        Pj-Stf-*-?        f? V fy !U ^ £ ( U           ff<        f ,       $        .

                *^ c^-s-?            <y(M cy u. 7fa r ,
                                                      .
                                                      _________________ ■*
      j                                              JVjo           Ik jd
  S if r
                               f i /     2           '~ Y £ > C A        / i     f/e /Q           f E>

L i^ e 't2 - r '< ? o d ^                                                       c                 B           j~ r'/< ^d=
 t’ f r t i - F              '7 ~ {S (r> -           / Z r A ^ ^ /                          /= )-/? -C -
u / & i W fr                      & - ( t/c -              6 L /? C / * f C-                  P fF ^ s T Y c r ^ T

 ''/'< ? l *             £           c c ttC ?             5“/^ v               ? F1                  '7 ~ /iL<r>~yr
 U S rltv T                       'T &                                                 7 ~ /4 - c - ^
  ? £1^ ft                   7 = frt( /t-t                 fe ? /4 T C tf              M-d=-Z^ t r r
                                                  A / y J>               /* & > r i               F o /2 - c^ s t
   fhT~                 M'" trf ~ ' < S C t~'~/'                         /$.*/£>                  / ^

  B\s<£tZ'Ct>r\f      rp^r^/7~                                                   \A//9-rv 7~
   -^J~~<p f* L-/4 "y    / V £> /2                                               c // ^ /V & / X
    /•—■*? (*2- cr S /                        </? ~T~               IA S £ ~ ? ^ i IS £ c ~ s '
   Tz v P ~ T f ? / ? C ^                                   C /J - s v ^ f 'T                      /      ?     A      ^   D
   T >                                                                                 ^                /v / ^ / v r y
                               / F           1 7 ~        u ^ / f r            r / ^    v

  ^ ^                   h ^ r / i ~ c w ' - t l c ~ ~ /r t (                         U S & U u£>
      f /h - r                                F      t    s9 -~ r        <r r?                             \a    t f 'V T j

  T         H < T                 C ~ £> &                                       &     cT f       f f      $■    / a   /


                               T > /2 ( I S / M Q                         /F            y ' ^ CS
       <^    f l    a    s    m    r     T                 / £   ( i s c ~ \ .              f Z    / v    P

          JL ( IS       < T (?- F c > O              £,                o T     [ £ /- ? z _ ^              £’ ^

             H -& c *                             H / ^ is                                    r‘v
   y9 -7 "                   >L              -/T-          / ‘t2-       r 'T / j ^ L - / o AV                       S^'
                                      /z                                    r           T K cm
         r^c-~              ffc 7 fc *-< -                            £ ~ ry -?
                    £     N - C 'C * t p >              /s    cr~           7 ^ ~ //s / < = r r >

/y^M^            F -0 /2 -            J9 -£ ~ £ ~ . - T r f t S
fh£-s4 S/V                                                                  <z>^<             7-^c--
A(/4 f~ r< F                                                                                    ^ \(I>
/_ ( t S c - a      /? & e> 6             P .                         S’ / t o c A       i- O       / ? ‘s t l ' c - '

B                        B /? A r r r < F T >                     ^ ^ r z -            /9~r~
F t                                             f            r=/2.&r«                  t?               fK       C~

/ >     /I o /=h£>                    Af#T              ~T S/- <r~                 ^r7/Ac^JC.
C C ~ U 7 ? r                 A * '£ >              ^                 '7 ~ # - i=~           B r z t T t f t f

    h tfr O                       T                                         / '^~r //V ^            /l/Z f& J V J }
/ f C -/i * N                         / ls e ie -re ?         0       C.        F. c . £ M& i-tt-O
} - l A - is t~ -         $ 7 ~ * £ -< -                W /*-£=>                /9 -        & A 2 /v'
              TV/ r^<                                             ^        7~                          F
                        S e f b f & r v f                         i W ^ V               *    ¥<?U Lp>

          rV              &       ^         s~f-                       ^         <sr £>          7~^
f * l - /j-y             /h ( £                                             f T tf-           s ? l-C ~

                        s>7 7 / c'^                      c <- Ll B $                                &O
    D / €> A / '~                     C / ' l LA C cT                       - T tf/4 - T          r ^           7^ / -
^     7" - T Z /r '”              /¥cry~(Tt=~L~                         f 7 S f                                       „
£? ^          / r / /2 A /(           _    'T'/Ac--                        ^ > / V £ v^                        V c~ j ^
7~£?           f= £ ~ e -6 ~              £ < r rz           /2   ^              /= ^ ^                    ^

                           - r 't t t s 'c ?                          'r / J s ? r S y / ^ j p
                                 U l£ /£ -/2                      7 s r< Z >/Z -c r ~
 flr          C -& T              <r /-A & c a L -C ?                         fZ     er"

 A ? fe -c ~ P >             & F                ^        ' r ' C '
                         P e~ £*£               ts ^ & s s / T ~                    '7 ^ 0

fb           C -# 0 c c j^ tz>                  n ~ ^ ^ -7 ~                      u s / i s
                   T"? c fc .d r - r                    $ -m C >
 C -/b U £ < ^ p                  n ~ /+ <r~                        JZ£> r / ^ 7 ~ / 7 r
  £> /= -         'T ~ /+ < ? f< ^ -            CT                      £> R .c T ? > f

-7 H         A r                                    t                                   £ >f ^

  7" ( ^ L ~             »     /^ M S >                  /        l ^ o s r T
JJ L / ± r ') e -              H~M- c“                                    t. f c c~
\Z /& u       l-£ >                         ^                                  £>
/3 A ~ c (<l             ~ ro                                C          & £ cr~^C>
  £ ~ /~ f~ 7~ ( r           - tA / r ^      f+ -                '2 , o    &        &            L < S>

  P u r f r / I \ / C -                    WG - f l t t v C                   T         'y 'O C f

  /9-/v y 14/ f- f- cf ~{2-c ~                          yvc>        7             'J ~ £ ( £ (

  f ^ / 1 c / fijc a -                    / h r t & S 2- Y                 ^ 0 0                          c
     £   U    P    P p                                             p      7
24 APR .
 1989 J
Dear Mr Moneahan   (minister for sport)          *
                                       During the week Sth to the 15th
of april It was stated that English clubs (football,.(don*t even think
about being smart with me!)) Would be allowed to compete in Europe, but
only if the british goverment/YOU, aproved!
Therefore: (maybe) the police deliberately opened the gates @ hillsborough
to jepodise English clubs Geting aproval from the goverment to compete in
EUROPE’?
The mistakes the police made, (should they try to cover them up:-)
1) the door opened was a sliding door so it could have not been broken
    down by fans I
2) The door was aleged by the police to have been opened to stem the crush
   against the turnstiles outside, However at the back of this aleged
   crush was:- the entrance to the turnstiles, the entrance to the ground,
   the pavement outside the ground, the pavement surrounding the ground,
   & the approach roads/Streets to the ground, ALL of which Represent=
   WIDE OPEN SPACES II!!!!.
3) Opening the door resulted in the  same effect as droping a heavy weight
   into a barrel containing, Un-broken Glass milk* bottles!’ .!.
 Some years ago the police said on a TV news programme that they take
 their orders from Downing street/the goverment,
 This statement plus what happened on Saturday prove 1 . thing
    The police Don't have a mind of their OWN,
N.B. the human mind is the most powerful weapon known to MAN!.
* the shape of a milk bottle is asimilar to the HUMAN torso Which
  Houses the LUNGS, & the rib cage, As well as THE HEART!.

   A copie of this   letter has been sent to:-
   Roy hatersley,    = LABOUR
   Kenny Dalglish    = Liverpool team Manager,
   Brian clough      = U .Forest team Manager,

                       Yours AN-ony-mousI
P.S. Tell Mr.         that I have Noted that British Rails atempts to catch
the mole who leaxea xne findings Of a report resulting from a survey
carried out by Transport police which was Suggested to be more accurate
than the survey commissioned by british rail By the Harris organisation,
Proves that B.R. Put Profit Before SAFETY (the report was not published
because it was harming efforts to increase BUSINESS on late trains!).
                                  East Sussex


                          Telephone:




G Kelly Esq                                                   1 7 th AP r11 1989
Chief Executive
Football Association
16 Lancaster Gate                      ;   '   .
LONDON
W2


Dear Sir

I am an ordinary member of the public ~ but with an interest in football*

I think the Football Association should abandon this years FA Cup Competition.

The Hillsborough tragedy is not the fault of the fans, it is the fault of the
Authorities, whether it be the Football Association or the Police, or both,
does not matter.

In deference to the bereaved and injured, who will live with this tragedy for
years to come, the Football Association has an obligation to recognise this.

By not completing the competition, over the years football enthusiasts will
ask "why was there no Cup Final in 1989?"  In that way the incident will be
remembered.

On Saturday on television, you made a statement to the effect that this was a
matter of life and death, not a question of football"., how can you 48 hours
later be talking about continuing with the competition? In what way have
circumstances changed? To continue with the competition would be insensitive.
Let the public see that you really care.

In any event the continuance of the event would have no meaning to anybody, I
suspect, including the players.

For once, can we have a brave positive response from the Football Association,
to a very regrettable and sad incident.
— — --- — — --•//*- f°Lu.                                                                              gfarMA.           fix-                                                             U jJ, ^o(a ?______
----                                 /"On . j l bArU-H                                 TVMttiMk. «-tW»t- ^ w.»                                                                      ~rt^~n.^aL. W^J-
—                                                 fco *»*-»- -o^r                                                      -.■•■■_                                                            .                 ________
                                                                                                             K ».                                                *f c > M A         “J        *                  *1

 t*^^>— flUA— ir*o4z— ^Lsdtii—                           LcA. U2~~. ua-<-          ■~         JocLa!
j '"?■ ""vU^-e., U q k                                                .^4- t-^-Ja^f r U J fjjLxXr -fe
   (=5=-2 CXH^-reUg-r-*^   ' ■':= ' ■r'V':^;~■:-y' ''■                                              _ _ ___
                  fctua\<     ^Vi^.— 3h*rtn/j)HlfrOL. U^rf>, u            S=ukS— V       ^Vwppw^Lw
                                                           - ?

                                                                                                adL^ A. ^‘ot^oL w^4- •fca                                                     TU              klic

                                   _ii-Ci!= ^aiuA*v^A». t^L-o v^NX. ^ o-na-eK^- oo               ac*^»yj
                    —            sQ — *"H-*_ |>'CLo-Lv ■■■.•yd.-. ^ ivo^iA         Wo-o-v. k<ju^                                                                                                                      ___
                                                                         ?                                                                                                                                            ___
                    ______ "trCv-»W4.                                                 ^»       Cf^via                                                                   ^ *to                          a<avfe^X o^ft
                                                         UK-             <^r«->-V- tc«» N^°-y S^O1
                                                                                                 —                        ________________________ ____________
                                          -H ^ r
                                        -•'       i             -ft.             7'-7                  ^     it.          o.
        -------------------------------------------------------------------                                                  _ J ------ ^ j r w u j " » _t.% .T K C ___ ^   <•» -     o lo C L g ^ A .       \p ^     -~ K v A - __

                                 A-^CI                                                         «•"j»              ~— A.     »-^L^e> woo-Uk                                     aALooa
    ^°~*                 or       &\-Ax~ -3-<>-f^                             W«-<- y ^ ‘                                                                             L » 1 v *?____________________
_________                                *t~£—<--ve                  H q-v— U«-i-.l a~~^ >a_T^-l-a^i»»-a.                         _i=I                     fe-oL                                    o-X-L.—____
^                                                                                 »w^ »-arCx-iX^                                                           Ufl_cL fe                              Uj-itL^o^r-
    a -V v ^    — e -CH— *•* ^                             ~     -        ,f r ~                             C-Q»-v<_ jb C^<L-aJ^~ O D U V ? ______________________

-----------                                                              t^^                                   'S ^                       CL^ - C^          ° ^ U v ,|i j ^ u a A                     * t^ p ^
                  C^VN                                 J , ^~g_                             fe                        <oU-GK—/cJ                                                                                       Ca^

                         /^aui                             uvK- fW-if* O                                   Vk . 4«-o»cJ                    -^n                                      CCJK.         KdQL^
                                                                                                                      CfO*<Xg(                                ^ s>-                                                         *"
                                                                                                              n       / f i—f_?—                                                      .           ______________
                                                                                                                                                                               _




          -—         -                                                                                                «-^o ^                                                    Q^Al.                         ?
                                                                          il^fVS                            OoJ*      j\Q*S±«^                fiU^oL                        ^U)                        <JUv ^La Cl /

         *_*jhC          \liUftM S                    Qp             H lUU ^ . g s O ^ O O U £ . t i                                                                                  !       _   _    _   ___________
     ** f i in h-vM *a*~ /
                             fajLCu&»**                                                           '-. C.^ t5                                                             ,


                                                                                                                                                            2 0 ^ 4 ^ ' ^
       f)Sa&r *1* Ks$*l,
         J       t*/C & C i*      ^                 ^                                         4 rw < v i(^ d < ^ v | (**flv                        *£> *** Pu A 4 a.L

                                      ^        6 hm«m^vw                        £»*& .*•»■*' & <**■&                                           eJ? M * P te u fz B^ ’^ U/ ■& ***'-


                                                                                               (TW                               (\JJLl^C hrJ—&*£ f JS&JL. oA*ajiu~S e-*-c£

        e#+ *~Jw + t4 A ^~ S /£ - * £                                                          #VuA-*Co                                                                 «^vU-
          ^tcj£c|                 fl>»ift(»<(t > n 4 U                                                                                                nu-   6v&*j! err

                 Xv        A«^ V*-*^ . fljL                                         QtXtJ-U --^JA^nfr A-U**S «Lu* s 4t A £*r»»i^6 't*...*'6irw ^
       -^6JC&ri                4-e ( ■ f                           & U & irtrrdz*^ $4jk*~e&&,rxbf^6-€&&s*-L»ri ii»jrt>st - krttf'^jr*~eU£f **~4.
       fr^u.^y Cr^ /U**xLLc-aJ*sr4s i|" A-
                 J       //t^ u ^ t-         /irf^ jJ b   #   j   ~         t   e u ***      e^    cdU L           (^ s x ix £ -i     C ct»xjcc^ -m m ^ - t                  fe -&*•

                                                 /4C(.                                             <UU-                             (^tv                  6^*^?                    . ^Ivli

          VrktL >u}£ S&4~ 0-&{\J~*~*r2~ei-                                                     C^rf~0^-^^J<- ^ f /n!rV                                                   <^-4.
                         ., fynj&it fiL(s&£+-e-iJ-<—t- £^ /^t- 2wt>                                                , fe                   A^/ / - < W ^ ct-&£u- ^)-/

                 6e-
             J       * W     ^                                              A W       «*r - C u x A / ,       •/    U -^ U L         J s A C x.   4     tftu - tfu

       tr€-C&~l***4+s^'w                            ^ £jsr<-'l‘p j^          ^>OT*V                                          ^                        {kJjFfiAJu+JL^ CveV$ s ^             *
                 /,Vm£.                                       £c^o^^_^^e'^Lu*v^               c~~h~iL v^ C—c<^ ^v>£-<^fe'Cf A/a--6i-<,w\^. -i^o-rfc^                                        f
        £Uv-^ 4^v                                         X-A^V^ ^                                                     C'^CLsZ t" /£U-t-*_C^v/ ^                         fifc-CA-C^ &V*Uf
          thi*           i . r -A jLdkj ptc^uc^ as tb '^-rei'i*i<-£                                                 citi*t.trSpJiz4-e. e^ Na.ZLt-nsJL                                       f

                                 yJ$-tJLx.'*--t       P kjJC              £U ^ hk     fe             C<ri*^<-*U-r-e-X               ^ r tn w      £k*£                          «t^C   £L nk.

    /^ipLt& s t i t l e s                 /y b n J u l M - K/v-^X-i                                                  y               ^     ^ d /^ K < --

I        jC K^uT ^ Mu,                                                   e^ Mol                   J,t U                              jk&t /ki- /u,^-^r(rt                              iWKtuXi. ^
                     H ^ t ^ u C A ^ fa u ^ jU                            jnrw v t u t r - t ^ i ^ , 04 k ^ a l L A fr * z L u                                       M t W
     Jst^ rrL .                              !& * £                    ■A- ; ^5Cc         6(mJ-U- Art- cU islA >-ii.                     CL U i+ U .4                    ^ <L   ^ Jrg& r****,   |

    ] /U                                                                                                           A*4**c <u iU *t Lf r u -r*»v«X
             "?A*t ^                  ^o^HvKvCfrt^nl^v-C Irv-B-JL&JL As< frtr<*xX'& ( »*v#(, eHt fc ✓^-c.                                                                       t *«■*^
        pfjxtfu .w                                                                   A^*c,                ^                           fe                      s#*, ^yOAndu* cj.i*j^L

        cy 4 & re^r*JL.. GJULq tU*JC fru^, <y/7Z~*                                                             ^ '7’U f^6 ^a JL lfia~~£g.d-L
                 fty u ^ S ajUcp P ^ tjjU t                           i'el ^ fiuii *JU*A tu jt *J.~*-+J"£ jkvow                                         /&&£. eUL &&**>(UuAf <A -6^i
                     ^                fe ^        it/U^ 6 C J -J                    «^-              t* * s ttr m         &. tifc ~ - iff u - i ^ - i t J u iL e t~ K f v X w          ^

                     X^<_ />\*tobs^                               £rJ**~-c/. it.
     _______ J fa mt?                                                                                1/LaS *&**** W                    texx**^ ^ e u < f fJtL                               £,

                                    .   JCju fp cxfa terfS                                            l& * b                                                                      t 4* ?
              /^ u u U '     i|' A<. pu*upO&' <fir wCUuU, it 4*                                                                                        Aw*»A_Ai-«vZc                ■&****£

              jg /tf .S ^M it+ tfti                           gfs.^C(>                                                    >*v t>                                                            *■


                iChst++A^ U-U C^Jih+ebJ* l+u                                                         *".      £fu& A' IfiS&u, ^*>*W                                         1 Okt lUi^a,

              4t*«r «VUfc                                                                                                         Igt s&j^o^xi £ 0                                 &[**“*■£&**■
              fl/C fV'C/                     Q A ^d jU                                              "1% Ar           & rO A r ttt 1^ ^                     , & v< lj       3 <&» AalfrKluAu'

               «|’                            t                                ......                 ...       .......

                     *f»r/LJ4**^ U r*^U yf 4m^ * ^ *• ^ W ( W j/yw^                                                                &LbaLX -AjO^r-C                        C$

f                            V~tvL*k oeCwi trf. «W itA v itb                                                                     j4uu hl& *lcvni &*<- *-<                                  ',-'
                     } W & A Atb*rJ Mv                          /^>^'^6                     A w C C-44*Kl                             **v                          -/^WlU^

                                            A / ^                      <£0*^/ < ^d‘£>+CrfU’                                f^                                           t^u u rS >w


                     J*/ 46.                       Cx m J X J ^ t         3 '^-*-*L          A.                                                      t s £ j . C + — ~Jj6j3 *** tu


           _J/f-cn*,TL Cy^&lr*/ tf& jh*                                            <^*' ^i^v^-' /                        <**'v                                     f y^ c^ i . ffc
              ^l^iuvwC                                                              M^wC/

            Os+JL, &£&*>                   £ c iiu &      OA                  Cnt-trus-ti* Co +>s*- o*-^ a J *              ^FhetlsrdsC t h * ts f**+ *- ^ a ^S' . « /*<Vw'i * rv ^ -

                             Jb+*£k/ t A**-JU ^t£fc ^Aa. |L*\fl'&£uv>i/ t^irrtA t/Ci^? ^ jl+Jb i^rCUy^JL^uXj^ ^ $ ^rtL/C C*«M“*-fi-«C

                     b*^          it&vt j t U t *                                                                                                                       •; ^:',




                                                                       K-t^fc/K^             ^&V lr^bh4\^-tcC>l^ fVX^ ' ^'-***VJL'                                  t'Ut~A*'+A£'j&ut

          v^U/             ^ *     J £*»/ *W J&Wf                                                   i*b-usv^cL ^ q_su^L So                               Ct-*Lw%4r*££-C.#\?Ou't'iH.cL
          X_r% t < & ****> £.     f~& V jt4 \jJ t      b t* * s& rw t J            k f t f c h to     (L /V -fa cC   ti/'b r + - c tis v ^   t K i . j^ o ^ C ^ C c .   <6&*t£Xrv<*£              ^
              y £*v\/ A**~d*~~g 6 ^ u S C^&A4 £ & / & fciK&tvvl*                                                      /&X A 'v k Xj /X «*w £ C«mCe^U-o( r

                                                                                             ^bureZ^dc+ *il*~r*J-^
         KS

                                        ^ X 4 a^         '^ 4"/ ‘- ^ t V i i / -           ^wL>                      /y i* \/^                                                        (s/& £

                                           «Aw.                               cU b*t*£*J*> A*****
                                   Amx*                                                       <^TM’/&> *Lffu*+ ntXt                           c& t4»i * £ e*»-*J~tL fL u vtA a d .
                           f yi    lsk-* £ '                                 1j6-e.C4UtsijL. fL*tjL,/ii4*uL*vvJ->                                              t a ^ A w~bo i*rc*b &.
         d 4 * Jh ^uJ^> **/U&**G {Ztfcut* A*rJ- <^v * i/fc&tZt ^ A * 4 C u ^ ( 6s+vJL<k %
                                                                                        0hj*'+*‘ £pH A. h rirt* «*♦/                                                                  SKu ^A

     —    fe^- /O/ <~■■»-*' Mu                                                      ^cimui^ A                           iVw                                      a (ZS&l L ^
I"              '
                                        ^                                             oi_

                     y-' . . 0 2. M W 89                                  _________________

                                            .                             *6 -       © V - 8^

                                                                       jnj^tP CcClC|

iW r          /U -r/ /re i^ y ,                                                        L
                      X          ^                             tb express              ^
    CoAte^e                            JL's$u.sb             fur     youS        arcjo^i'Sa^o* 'S
     U ^ o lliJ g           oP       tk e .       PA       Cuf      C o ^ tc ti^         -A /fo to t^

    ■^|\€,         k o m 'fic        e^/vt r              at' H t ( ( $ tortfugt .
                      X>tcr press-ust'svig op-                            Li'vZrfooi fooH><*U
    CiuJL           Las bee* b>tk Q.rr0^ t                                           <//»se*tiue
^             ^        o/^a^a ,               ol^oI        < AdM 4> n'shr«± zs       CK c J e ^

    U ck          oP K a tv .r d lj                        c*bttU $*~ .c* .      % ua        o r^ .-scct™
     pr€SCAirs dbsoJp a S                               Ls^sir a_**or**~L f a-^c/
                           d ^ zro ix sly             -h>^*rds                , Cn ctT
     O itb C b txeie. »J.
                       LJ«xs~ ct            rc*.l(y          So uLi.pe>rir*^t~ -bo Secty'sfy
    ujeuS          oLvtoCiS          <5r^          ~p*r                               CoKCAr*
     -Par          procedure                  ^       ^                              t^er-e <vre
     •/tstMjlL^r            s£"l(/                 tA^| on M e j s e g S v c l e j     b o o li-e s

     S id e          'bo    hu.rC*J ’ pU<j£SS a ^ e l                      oPP'o'o.k         Shit
    io       C^/ue -fo                             *oW
                            S u p p e r o/ie, y>u.                                   ?) <£
     tiCf^ri^ce? Yoctr T W c jW e                                      s d te l^ e s s
     uousstAves cLd e>u~r prtse+t                                                          clea r
     C o n o co *            .Y o t^ d e s * " *              - «*<*                   *         o
I




           T        4m          A-                                    S chool            tc.o.cA u/' |
    A,«ve         , k«2c*v                                                                L «J      A**j               fu ju X *
    k)Ly          y o ic r       orgo-rt.CSA’H on                      tau?          i e kfi.v'^         So
    SirufielLj . X                           U ve                            ^              c te o r           p e a se * ? ,
          *s «.«irU«J                             "J-^e • »                  **J
     « . n « u ^ 3 . «e^ 3                                  sfrrt«t-«.i-e

      rtv«j,           <u--e.        A«t              *=       u # « * r-u ia e J                 e r      «*
      M.-S T ' r f »j             <«                         e lf. a - J             u*J*ush~M* - U r W y .
                       As . - J                       L           W *-**                 Ar
     ^uif-             iX to*            Aocb>^€

     w             ^             U       r   «    ,   »       ^                                            o   T         m w   ! ?
                                     I                                                                             ^       .
                                                                                                                                       ,:lf
         Lcpoiv          KC.         k*«-J            C & rriA ^frtr        K jo m T      ®/^<XA«'Sec K 6 «i ‘S’ ,
                                                                                 ^         otUry , kot-KU^r,

         re-eJLs-C *pw -^                        AoW • ^ oU                              /Vo      C            o         €x.(>*ch
         & u f'        ^ o o d u i'L tt           u jfo si                    o cca ^s t_e^
                        JT      u/t'^             Le_'h c>~kLK.4j           £t Jir-Lo ^^SUUv               -to
     yO/<xy        A^T {VnpCQJd                       Or\     Tuesday                             2 *^

                       tJve. LxW^rf>ooi Cxj^p • TLcS tj«-^   ^                                                           " ^ C"
                          MAircA -fco (u2_         Air t t e
           fiu2         K U s L o fo ^ k                          JL 'se^Z f- x                5k.oi(              U . ^<Jcu^
         CJO&Kr         ~ho o-ft                 l~t'S4sf>0(rL          £ Tc ^ o P £ ,c.<'oJr              XL              A*&szb

            My          U&fis C od& j^pt                             'fz»r yauuT                 °k'Sg roXx.'Pul
          C tttx b u .d e .      "to               '£t*0-Cr        cLuJa         .   X   ^ o jj^ s f r         you.
            yeu/             O pP tC ieJis                ^ C~out            x^jf <K$      «^ut‘cic
           ocS         ‘po.S^'uble 1 O                            "tUo-sx        uJLU                                     a J o ic .
            -b>        MA^<^V                                 M.^'VVAuivi-kj                   o f tl^ S           <lLcJo1S
         «*^sr*er-'                          y»wi                 S^ew^,,
           r '«
                                                                                            LANUAbHIKiU.

Dear SIR,
               I enclose      a s k e t c h to       show you what          I t h i n k w ill   e ase t h e     crush
 a n d h e l p to p r e v e n t   another HILLSBOROUGH disaster,                        I w r o t e to t h e    I T V

and t h e y g a v e me y o u r      adress      so    I am    sending the         i d e a to y ou h o p i n g    it

w ill   help    in some way,         the   clubs       concerned        could     have the tickets             letter

-d to    each    section      and    o n l y let      in s u p p o r t e r s w i t h   that   letter    on t h i e r

t icket s ,                                                              ~ v 'r >       -

                         t h a n k i n g you,
                    I R E MAIN YOURS         TRUELY,                      ^ 9. ra ?9
                                          FtfWNCF       .       kY
                                          FoK AW O* PeLicZ. -




                                                                     c>
                                                                     X;l'r
                                                                         ~N
                                                                     rt  1




      fSjOT     D f if iW N
                               En tran c e     for
Y o   CdRREcr     5 / z e n   KM &u u m c t : or P o L ic e
                                                       U V ^ i




   I V          f • (V   •,

       w e ll        he^es -r^«L



            N c rtT S ? o R t^ 3 -          fW e t^ ^

                                      1 ^ , 0 0 0



            U x v c e .f > o c L    A \ie 2 A fy e ,   o c ^ r ^


                          —        3 3 ,o o &
                                                       0


         your             V .t« T           A H o C ^ t W '^ ^         A-

          PftRCe• to/ 6 W

                -fe^L.        N i Q C V t a o C r '"fej't ( ^ K j r e v ^ p 1^




                         JiSftvSfcJ




OpC~
                                                          Twickenham
                                                          Middlesex



Dear Sir,
          I would like your opinion on ay solution to the Liverpool/FA
dilena. I think this year's FA cup should be abandoned but Bverton should
play lottingham Forest at Wembley for a new cup called the Football
Supporters Cup. Then Liverpool could play the holders of this cup on the
anniversary of the Hillsborough disaster next year and every ten years
thereafter.


                           Yours Faithfully,
w
I




        / - o p T S f X - L - ^ S S o Ou»JioK_
                        5-#HlO»CtWfe, CwvT'e.                        ....... .
                      Ixndffri-    -2.

                  E

    JCdZg.Grr' / JLnJ k                                                                    f £     itfcn < /£          !frrU+J
                                                                        I                                        dL ~^r‘__ _i J*

                                                       A o * ^ jyd£**4                        . ja ^S
    -£^                        t<s                p                                                                     ---
                 I r v ' t t * - - -^ s v i-   |s > ^ 0 « S   Q . t r» •—   r>©>C? _ f e   ^ it-p « < -A . ©jr
             rvoe4.                        qL^mjl* ^   -tt&. tCcx:                    _ ofpici& flfr S o
                             ( 3 o £>>* -W-Z a— -b-*U4i-                      ^ 88tur-«-> /kb tb-w                     ©»^S.
    O-^V-e                    V.vn-^   ""fcfci^Ci tvotv*^.                             JSt&V«oreT*^»— f
                                                                                  *5^              , \ U f c i ^ _ % _____
      J— VA_«a_vO>J, D-~~-^y I LOeT-*--^' U^Q_ *—                               lW J^S^*      Le*-*T^'U-jli^C —
        i)0~< A dbru&             »"Xif* ^-'~‘— ' J-tn^Z                    tSr?b&       b~<JC < c S ilC e-&o«e
    'bktoL                  <Ze~r'-a-—                                        .                Tr     .....   _ --
                                                L^utV'r ~ k o M
                                             .•47             .w .




                                                    London



                                                    2$ April 1989


G.Kelly Esq.,
Chief Executive
Football AssociationLtd
16 Lancaster Gate
                                        8. A:'/ ;5 •
London W2
                               '   ■';;V"   af-’:-!-:; "■

Dear Sir,
         Regarding the Hillsborough tragedy it is known why the
tragedy occurred (by the admittance of thousands of non ticket fans)
and how (by the crushing and asphyxiation of people against the
barriers).   The question of who was responsible rests with the
thousands of so called Liverpool fans who came to the ground without
tickets with the intention of gaining free entrance.   They are
nothing but thieves in so much they were stealing tne space allotted
to those fans who had the decency to pay for their tickets ana
thus ensuring their place and space on the terrace.

          Liverpool Football Club could not exist without its fans
and therefore to some extent the Club must take responsibility for
their behaviour.    if as it seems in this case a section of the
fans have let their club down tnen the club itself must bear part
of 1he blame and be made to pay for their fans bad behaviour.

         I suggest that in the circumstances Liverpool Football Club
should be barred from entering the F.A.Cup competition next year
and this perhaps will bring them all to their senses.   Football in
this country can get on quite well without Liverpool F.C.   They
are not the Alpha and Omega.



                                                    Yours faithfully,
                         DAVID ALTON M.P.




                       HOUSE OF COMMONS
                          LONDON SW1A0AA

                                                     24th April 1989




                   %cV\^   .
I have been contacted by Mr                 a constituent of mine who
has contacted me about your precipitousdecision to proceed with the
FA Cup Championship. Many other constituents have contacted me in a
similar vein and I hope you will reconsider this matter when you next
meet.   Surely 1989 should be remembered      as the year   when the
Championship was not completed as a tribute to those who died at
Hillsborough.




Mr F A Millichip
Chairman
Football Association
16 Lancaster Gate
London W2 3LW
                      r




u0    -


              f       O ^rv^L                                    \u u v - Q ^ h ^ ) L r

u u c k       J ^ }            .                                   / 7 a /                                          /    w




                                                          f i s X b \>’&

                                                                                                                                                   to o
                                                     A- 1 , ^                       ^                    f                              ^

          l^ tj                « ~ *L       ( tr ^ f c k iv * -                d ± c ~ *^ -                     i       ^


          fe          ^                     ‘i        Ji £                                                                        ~     “--

          U,Jc f                                     *“

                                                             >     «- ***      /        '   j       c\   C -,

                                                                                                                             U^ jI
                                                                                                                        T & iJ* & * ~     b f




          y ^ jv               -& u         (S v * -y -e M J ^ & -                  f w '~'k             7 °

          ^                ^                d ° M , .                                                                         ^

                                                      I     ^ V                *# **-                                                       r
                                                           I                  CeJj.             te *                ’* * '
                          ^ I X L       k k v              U              X                                                                        i


               C ~              ^                ^         u ^ .                   L    - -

                                                     /Vh     '~ k j2 -'
                                                                          I    J x ^ rJ .        < JrU ~ C * ^ ^ U

                  ^                                                            < £ i                     u              p -                 ^


                          fen,        C ^>                                    U -       ^       T        T
                           I                     i                   (,                              4^)/'-
                                                                                                                                                 3>rv^
                                                                                                                                  - \ M         J
                          pyj-        cv^        tk ju jr        p r z ° - f
                The U niversity of Liverpool


FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIOLOGY

INDOOR SPORTS RESEARCH PROJECT
                                                                             TEL: 051 - 709 - 6022 EXT. 2648
                                                                             TELEX NO: 627095 UNILPLG
ELEANOR RATHBONE BUILDING MYRTLE STREET P.O. BOX 147 LIVERPOOL L69 3BX       FAX: 051 - 7 0 8 - 6 5 0 2




        Dear Mr. Millichip,                                              18th April 1989


        The tragedy that befell 94 Liverpool fans at Hillsborough is
        one that has deeply moved the people of this country.
        The sheer waste of life was, it would seem, bought about by a
        chain of events that had everything to do w i t h bad planning,
        organisation and communication and nothing to do with hoo];1S®”
        behaviour. It is therefore with absolute disbelief and outrage
        that we hear the President of EUFA describe those caught up in
        the tragedy as "beasts". That such an emminent figure as Mr.
        Jaques should make such an ill-informed statement ls at
        wholly at odds with the responsibilities of his post. At worst
        his comments will cause lasting damage to the guilt and heart­
        ache felt by those directly affected by the tragedy. We also
        feel that such a statement will do little to bring together the
        footballing bodies of European nations to tackle the
        enourmous task that confronts them in re-establishing the game
        as a safe spectator sport that should now realise its primary
        responsibility lies with the supporters, without whom they
        would all have to find alternative employment.

         We ask you to use all your influence in pressing for the
         resignation of Mr. Jaques for the further hurt his comments
         have caused to the bereaved and the slur on the memory of the
         deceased. We do not ask your help in this matter by way of
         making Mr. Jaques the scapegoat for all the anguish felt by
         people of this country, simply as the only justifiable and
         honourable course that he can take as the perpetrator of a
         gross and insulting error of judgement.



         Yours faithfuly,
                                           London

                                           17th April 1989



The Editor
"The Times"
1 Pennington Street
London El 9XN

Dear Sir,
Hillsborough Tragedy
It does not appear to have been recognised that the tragedy
could have been avoided by delaying kick—off for fifteen or
thirty minutes thereby enabling the waiting fans to enter the
ground in a controlled and orderly manner and the stewards
inside to direct them to the outer sections of terracing. An
announcement to this effect would have defused the situation
outside the ground by relieving frustration and anger and
pressure on the turnstiles. I trust that the Public Inquiry
will ask why the Police did not recommend such a delay on
Saturday.
As to perimeter fencing this is not only a safety hazard, for
example, in the case of fire, but also restricts spectator
visibility. Are such fences necessary for crowd control? The
current first Division Leaders do not think so even though the
gates at Highbury this season have been well in excess of
30,000. it is just as well that the perimeter fences are not
electrified as once suggested by Mr Bates.
The FA now advocate all-seater stadiums. Surely any further
reduction in capacity would only exacerbate the cause of
Saturday's problem, namely that more people wanted to watch the
game than the stadium could accommmodate.
Yours faithfully,




 cc:   The Prime Minister
       Graham Kelly - The Football Association
       Colin Moynihan MP




                                                 i   ‘
The Ri^ht Benourabl* leuglaa Hurd, *.0# M . f ;                                                           T
lane- Secretary,                                                                          Surrey,
Sou a* of Cennona,                 *.
Li&dut| 8«Vn2f 0 «A •A *                  ^

Monday* t7th April, 1989*                T1A1-

Denr B i i v ■■'
     ^              SAJETY II POOTBALL GEOUffDS.                -0 w
             Si* n o « K k huna* t o t a g y tragedy at 8heffie3.d *i«kt have
lhHm.Atoidad bad the people pushing known what they war* doing, There
 was auoh a dim going in that no htuuua ory oould be> heard. if yau had
auoh a t h i n g mm a* Air Biad tjpa siren which oould peseibly have t r t
aort of 8.O.D. M i t a f i blaatad out on it in the e t w of Mtrgtaoica
af »ny kind and tha reaaonfor ita uaa to be put on wrery ticket and at
▼arloua plaoas laading to the g«ne and the n«saage that when the airen
blows everyone, including tha playera, ia to atand still by law,
except possibly in case of fire, this suffering could be avoided.
              A t the ezltrance gates and in the s e a t in g area there ahould
be buttons to press to give warning placed high enough to be out of
the reach of young children.

                                           V n n -p g '   g - i n r » A T f f 1 v _____________________




The Secretary,
The Football Association.
                                                        V.   S u ssex ,

Mr. Stephen Hooke,
Club Secretary,
Bri^iton & Hove Albion F.C. Ltd.,
Goldstone Ground,
Hove, E. Sussex, BNJ 7DE.                               17 April 1989

Dear I-Ir. Rooke,

I am sure that you will have been inundated with messages of sympathy, following
this weekend's tragedy, and I too would like to send my heartfelt condolences to
those who lost their lives and loved ones in such a devastating way*

I felt great sorrow that afternoon and for a great time afterwards, and this was
driven home even more strongly when I realised how easily something similar
could take place here at the Goldstone Ground if action is not taken NOV.
Having just read your comments in today's Evening Argus, I was appalled that you
could claim our fencing to be safe.

I am a Brighton season ticket holder and watch every single home match possible
from my regular position in the North Stand. 3his I did, as usual, for last
seasons final match against Bristol Hovers and I was, as was everyone, overjoyed
that this match rightfully gained us promotion to the second division. In their
jubilation the whole crowd surged forward to celebrate on the pitch, leaving
those near the front, like myself, with no choice but to follow the flow. Ihe
East sided gate to the stand became jammed for some reason and despite the
police and stewards best efforts the gate could not be opened.

The crush was intensifying and I tun sure that it was more than the two or three
minutes claimed by yourself before I, let alone the masses behind me, were on
the pitch. IXiring this time I was forced up against one of the crash bariers i n
the stand, and being only a slightly built fifteen year old, was unable to
escape the agony. I cried out in pain and if it wasn't for the fantastic action
of the man behind me, who bravely pushed people back, shouted at them and checked
to see that I was okay, I could have suffered similar consequences to those at
Hillsborough.

I hadn't considered the consequences this much until Saturday evening but the
cry of a desperate policeman,whose heroic efforts finally managed to break the
gate inwards, "For God's sakes you're going to kill someone      ", will
probably always remain.

Well, now he’s been proved right, what is going to be done about it by the club?
As you are wrong, it is not possible to get everyone on the pitch in two or
three minutes and the gates for some ridiculous reason do not open the right way.
Surely it is time for the club to realise that the ground is not safe and it
must be time for the'death fences' to be removed to prevent this happening
again. The police and club have done superbly in eradicating violence inside
the ground and the removal of perimeter fencing seems to be the only sensible
answer.
Despite the great sorrow and disgust that I feel, I love football and ay life
wouldn’t be the same without it, so despite the emotions that will probably
be with me for some time, I feel that I must not give in, and continue watching
the game and team that mean so much to me. Many people, I am sure, will not
take it this way, and I would not blame them for staying away from future
matches. It is the duty of the clubs, the Govenment and the F.A. to prevent
similar tragedies taking place in the future which could bring further grief
and total devastation to our national game. Please, please don't ever let
anything like this happen again.

I would greatly appreciate a reply to these comments.
                               Yours sincerely.__________




                                                    1. APR




Copies to: Mr. Graham Kelly, F.A. Chief Executive
           Gulls Eye
           Kr. Colin Moynihan M.P.
           Seagull Post
           Kr. John Vinicombe, Evening Argus
                                                                                                 s>
                                                                      1 V. APR i-3




CL       wv*cL*-v-eX'£*“^                                                    ^Mrr-t              a s   L sJ ^     ^      /*>

              JC ^A              ^ tA .             iZ n J t li.                                 J~,              i t        -i«

oOl       AK-rM                                 ^               e -f\ . . * 0 ^ $ r >            a~J        p J J l

 L_                              J t       J t" '                             i^v~J                              -wcr't

 0        ^                  I T s                       -W t^                           ^       -fc -A                      '

_   ciaf^ r r=t2 r o                     o ^ i                               ^^                                          .
     / 1                          »r\     f)     A                               I                         — j w -*
 a -»         I       V—  A ^ D j J ____ IL    J                             c^<AswvL-t.                   ^/T
i ^ S . v e J        -t?.                                              ^         v               'H Z m .
*U            ^                  ~             —                                         ™          ., A.
                  -          3         ^                    r          r             /
J U 1-            t - n            - - '                -~ L'                                _   X f c , . » *-
/^^-vo^v-iA           ^t«r                          ~~~ -

 ^ ^ b c o -l                -c L -t                                                             Y
                                                                             •*'1^"tl_-~ 'WLXX.^L £—

                  'J , (7                   j               ,                 !•<.           4

    „    u ir /?                                                                             ^           V               -



                              r            n            T z                 1i f 5 - ?                  ^—            >. #
 *u ~     ~   ~   7     .         ^        ' t ^    L             «     X    X

 p        ,                                    S    T                                                             uf ~
      bJb~ nJC
               ^           JU c        ? < &           -                                                                                             ~                  j    .-
                                                                                                                                                                              unx/o

                   I                       L                                       ^                    C ^ c ^ v - t : ^                         o ^ t s ^ U .

               ^           T       T               '               £               A       - t           p-       « —                    —                     '




               X                   o j             -w                    —                         -T r yJ
                                                   , 1.4 c               -j<                   •         .V       /       ' - '- t           X5          -i-



                       0
                           ^       ' r '"                  •           . \—                    *
                                                                                       JC rU -r-£_
                                                                                                                      _       „      _ 4 W ^ iJ L = ~ £ .
               / W -                                                                         ^                                                                        J            .
                               ,           J                                                 LWt ^                    ^ - -■>                                      X--V



               X               L       -       C               ^         '     -       ^                *     ?               *      3           •-> .         T        J      ^



                                                                                                                                     ^       ^           ^ J h ix - -U :
  iiiaejwawa




                                   *L z ,                                                                                                J [„              ^       «     X    ^
 .
 '
mt




                                                                                                        ^ -A‘L^ — -■- .>
.




                                                                                           j
                                                                                                                                                                              r        1'



                                                                   o j Z-C             —           u>
                   J U X                                                                                                                 ^ y v i c i
                                                                   0               v-Jk                 .vT“          a:
                                                                                                                                  i-v-JcJ

                                                                                                                                                     ^xsjX.            'Vv




                                                               '        -      r       ^   j                  'G             r       b       ^ t e                     tk^ r ~         i
     ’         'J'ivA'a-C            4 ^-ov /vvvoJCcive^?                              .                         >feX-Vvo                                    *Av<rtr{!u-«J>

                <\ £<X*-ClC_                                                       ^                                   ■& £.                                      ^ t~



    ^ K ^ C ^ -r -J U ^ i            &        'W't-^JL                                                       ..-«-               Y 3^       20^         ^       '- I & ktL j



    zte^owvw                                        -a JZ JC                  J tk d L                                                                      ot^£Lo-«-ajfcn. j
    ;j                               ^                                        ^ - d U        ^       ,       ^             fe=~^_                       ^ . r -       ~|fco

    'jR^ ' 1 O V ^ J                 u L ^ -                                                s t& S - j                 < = ^-            fJ L p S ^ L ~ ^               w

    i      4 ^ ,           oJLfi. ; f c J * u :
     ^erY ^U -          oHvs               « > c ~ ^ v ^ r s * # \r                    C? f* ^ c r                                        ° “r“e-            (^T*"'"''^
    y^"    /tcur-v-^           -c*-p ^          ^            /|tw»-xO                      Tfc^^e^j              ✓o^''*-^_Jl<i-'vv4z ^                       _^ -t-*-t‘

    \S5        &v J L a        Iv u ^ O                                  'V^cxjfcj-e_r                           -M          O-O-u*

     „J    W - v w O I J l ^                                                                                                   ^ A - a ^ J                  tl^-j

                         ^v^-u-eu             cvH r                      A * •*■’*'                              f-f* ^ -^ -< ->                         i— rfe

                                                    — v- .       -        -    -                 .           ~    ^


    0-^—    /VYUv^v^«. iXtd. . - ^ J ^ C c '. (                                                                   /-v-^_-c2_-<^                 y ^ ^ 2_

                                                             <JZ\^-J~~0\j_XxJlJ^,                                     l/ 0'"E > -v _ ^     r^_-Q— -C        O -—5L <^_*v-\_/t



    pJ^X" V                                                                                          ^tZ_TZ3                    &"<-                               /to

    utkI^Iv             -^lu^v^                  p-4Uv>j .                                                                                    '^p^&--^-e_^\w.

     /m.         C'-'-p        ~-5''-'v^x^3 uc?              ^       iaJ^vvj                                                       ^a_<2-e-|>-^. c_            >0 ^12. ^

     A xJU X o                                                                     ~A ~                                                   ^ -tJ L u -                    M
.                         o.          Xz<*—                          (                                                o -^ J r                < a ^ ^ _ ~ -^
                 o-f'fcZlj-^             su-lQvo"^2^_                         ^tlSlc)'                       ^v_o              ^                                  „     J-^Le.

. jCC^-^O             />^r-^~^~JL^               ^’-e—                   p—f~°->jo—<r~<— k^^-er-v-^jL-oV                                 Cr“'-'^C           'Co
     ^      p l< s ^ w ^                  < » -> --(                 / W u ^ '.                  u .« i                 -*                                   cJL ^A fc^
                                                                                                                                                                         -o.OCO
    « ~ j','       to, J                            ‘ «\Vw x                                                                                        ^~J                 *••
                                                              ^                                —         r   1 * --                                 j               o

                                                                                                                                   \ C^ >                             ^ J"
               ^ A jL ~ n X ^ X i^                                       ^                           -^O          wxo               X ^ - ^ jjA ^ _ .             sr^o -c L o ^
        /YVU^vvJ^-e-J^>                    A z k jL J r ^ L            «aj-<_ ."»'«»                       ^>orv-\^aJL-^_                                   .3 ~ 't-^ -x jJ c A
                                                      9             •+■    ^ \   Qj

        Occr-<^<3                 -<SoC-o-c-^^y                                        , «<a-c?<^^->-C_ ^a a -T^-J^-^                                                    c3-^/CU~-

                                                                                                                                                            — --^ p

    I <v^fcfe%~a                       ~>-v             o--L                 ,fc&xLe_                  e^j-ci-=.                      ~-j-e_ '^ -t-*^ - t f i^ ~ jlk


        ^JtJ                                                                                                                                    «-f-r*
        •                              «^AJL

#                                                                    ,           C ^ ? a l                         -                                            - & ~ V

    :                                      o ^ -                                                 , -£-—                     - '^            2^ n r ^ >           ^

         T       -   -   ,        i    r       j    j       i       r        ^    :          *     —                        ,   ■<u     ~       ~       f   V    1
                                               ^                        ~Jt-           —               ^               <*—                  f       ^



         V                                 A„ -                                                                        / ^ vto

        X L —            .            cwxJ                                                                                                                       ___ ____

                                                                             fe            A o fc te                                                ° ^ r       O ^ tL y

             ^               ^ 6 -^ tte r                   .d U ^ ,                        eU^fcik.                            .       k O ^ -J r
             J U e                    r ^ r ^                         ^ ^ J b r                                                     r    ^
          j u l      ^   ,            A k * ^                   l ^          l    (J U        u o ^ x .                                                               '*'*

             4r                   .        9                                               '=*'—               5                        J



                              r        ^                f       r        “             t           9
                                               -)       ^ ' '*2 X -                ^          ^ I                       ^                       ■ •              J



                                       W i O                                                               W           J ^ rJ L

          oi         /tic              |       ^            (                                    J tr" A < - & ^ U J r j J l ~ - ^ ff ~ ~
             »vvv        X^O.,                 (a/L,                ^ > 4 ^ J u                  3             ■& * -               c L ^ f- i^ J           ^
                                               -0-^0         "       *     n           r        w         "            3

 lA sbjL r                          (rf^                                                     <tXJ^C»       C-^iTV                         <>*-nrvjdjsu3^K~tjr£'

                                                                                                    ^            - ^ 00"                    3    -vv

                                           >t^rofci^                                   ' tl x c          -^cr-c--fcfe-osiL?_

       C ^>0 <.          </fe - C /t ^ .          ^d"            t^^W A A ^yy^jg            / 0 --tM_ya^3 < s r-f g~f-N                —
                                                                                                                                       r>Jr“^'Vo        o -^   j

/to                                                                 co-t^_J^.      .        $       c^^fct^v/vpw-^                          c^-v               [
                                                                                                                                  3     -^<X)*_je_^
                     ^TrTT^fcfc-O-fc-ft^'
                                                                                                                                      ^ p-rtr-O-c^Xu
      -B-^w                          y^r-tT*^ ^ '^-|3*-~O^Z_Jg_^ o ^                         *^-r-e—o — fc                 -\          C\   __J>   -/

                                                                                                  -^^V^VVN,.

                                                                                                                  JbU
                C\         rc-e—                        .                                               ALK >:*

              CUJ.          ^btvC<7             ©w<S> -     J>                                                                               3     | < ^

urO^/t^-cJ                      /•C-t'-v-^-'-el                                                     3         ^e»          -^Uc       /D--^-<_-£_Yrt>

                             frl      stA^is                                                                                                JL
         /J c     .        A-^tl      <<v{*-'<r'L/v_^c/                    '                               -&
                     *                                      f»
-^^-\>crxO        .'U't'

 A l-< J -^r\     (A'^r-v^J2_
                                                                                                4 -v J r           5
                                                                                   ■wvcJ^                 -e-o-^s-

                                                    Z^-O,

^                              d                  ^     or^r         .                  7       c ^

                                                                           ^           ^                                                     .    £>JU ^




                                                            cwv          <>^v^o^J-e_r                   /to        -^t^wo                p^-f-tr^^v^

4 ^Jtr       do          -v^ertr            -6-<-                              ^                              ------ -




                                                                                                                                                ^iir




                                                                                                                                  ^ 'T f l r ^

                                                                                                                                        PTo .
                                                                                                                          ....   ••           ■



                                                                                                                          mwsm


P S

                                                                                                                      cO
          p<Trnqu~*ksv^*s»rd2_,                         ^Lo~^s> \Z-

          cuJ                          -&Hr                 ^

       |x-v^tr'                        ujlvt-A.                  /vY\_r. o A/V©-v^ v v »_^v o w n _,



                               j       *J}j2s-r>                              Jb ^^L i        ev    L< xj~^C .




                                £L£^irvt^«-^~»-C-                l^a                     f L-^J ,                w*->x*t^c-'u-«-«*,v>^

                                   O      M        ^ J U                                                                                              V,       -A-uhJc


           CX
                      <
                      c J U ‘-£-
                      rC
                                                                               o^c-e-o                   cs-^-v. ^          /b L u ^ j                 - & ^ - e - "W 1


          <?v          ^c ? L J U < ! .n ^ & ~                         * w e - t- td (                 -e^-«~^             c i < ^

       4 ^ J it                                        't~^> -                                           ■'-                              H                           •
           ^               j u ^                       —                                                < ^ -        ~ f ~ 7                            —

                                   a          fJCj              —          A ,                                                   't       W       -

                                   SX ;

          tU     c             - .j J o ,                                                         -e—     c-
                                                                                         #              £_                            fc"ZYr^ P


          ±       £                     ^
          /fw M^ J b               'C c r ^ ^ J Z       .        ^       >wwvcJ                                                                                   ^

          ^                            r>^fc_U                         <*.'        -£*~*                                                      •'(U~>-~~e_
                           <^fc^oJ^-^                                  v«-~                  sLJS-r-un-ai^ ^                                  A t .            -fc-pt*^

      ^ i ^ c ,                        ^k          ^        .    ^     M       c         -jiw           ~~<-      fe                  —       -t-j


      3         i ^        J                                                                       ^                 “p                t f ^ r l r r
       oml       -v-v^tr                o c u X u p                  •A*^'                    '*^"ti           ^ $ L m J l- .                              I

                                          jl   £       sJ       ^ ^ -           J L      l.                               <»-=»                   «-
      0 U^O^.U^-MS     -w-c .*&&*_
      orvN^/j^r^n^CT so^^*<r~L*-£d * y^u r\~                                             y{^-c_    fcoLj-~r-*u--cJ                                    ^£Kc. ^

                                       wwii
       S football counts its dead,                                             mm


 A
go out.
       and wipes away the tears of
       the Hillsborough tragedy, it
       is, once again, the fans and
their families to whom our hearts
                                                                                                                                                            '* *




                                                                                                                                                                        IfMlp
  The long-suffering supporters who
 only want to watch a football match, .
 and yet so often are treated like dirt.
    A nd so, ju s t as in th e Ib rox d isaste r, a n d th e n
 a t B rad ford , h eart-bro ken hom es a re p lan nin g                                                                                                                                                        ..
 fu n erals a s d e a th ca sts its shadow ov er th e very
 fib re o f o u r n a tio n a l gam e.
                        Profits                                                                                          ^ ,
    Sixty-six victim s in Glasgow in 1971, 56 a t
 B radford in 1985. Now Sheffield's Hillsborough
 footbcLH           becomes another killing field.
   Soccer lovers pay a terrib le price for a product
 dragging its heels still in the dark ages. The
 facilities they are asked to endure w ould be
 unacceptable alm ost anyw here else in Europe.
     As Michel Platini, one of France’s soccer greats
  and now th e national team m anager, said
  yesterday: “The Hillsborough disaster stem s from
  th e decrepit nature of stadium s, the poor
  organisation of the m atch and of
  th e security personnel.” And his
  predecessor Michel Hidalgo said:
  " It’s scandalous. One would think
  th e English had already been
  w arned.”
      Y et these intolerable facilities
   are accepted, tolerated, all in th e
                                                                       By NIGEL CLARKE
   nam e of being a football fan. _
-'F o o tb a ll looks to cash profits                                                                                                          of th e scale of w hat w as unfolding          are in terested in, n o t th eir
  ra th e r th a n th e creature com forts    cater for th e w ealthy and                     while big-wigs and V IPs get                                                                    well-being.
                                              well-heeled.                                    preferential treatm ent.                         before them , began to ta u n t and
   o f th e ir dedicated supporters.                                                                                                                                                            Too often it is th e £2 m illion
                                                                                                                                               jeer Liverpool.
      T o ilets are a disgrace, little           T iieir facilities are a m illion               Because it is a w orking-class                   B u t th e n th e public address            tran sfer th a t th e public read
   b e tte r th a n holes in th e           ‘ m iles away from th e fan who is                game, fans g et w orkhouse                       system a t m ost grounds gives                 about,    and n o t w hat happens to l
   g ro u n d . . . rows of latrines, some    th e life blood of th e gam e.                  treatm   ent.                                    nothing m ore th a n a few m usical            th e fans whose cash through th e j
   ru nn in g over w ith urine by                                                                Even   Wembley, th e showpiece                 req uests and team changes, and               tu rn stiles feeds an d fuels such
   half-tim e.                                   T ravelling su pp orters on                                                                                                                  moves.
                                                                                              stadium , is a shoddy,                            fans are rarely brought in to
                                              aw ay-day excursions are herded                 old-fashioned edifice th a t only                 share th e atm osphere of the                    A nd perhaps it is another
                                              lik e c attle by a police task force            now is being extensively                          afternoon.                         ’ ■        tragedy for football and its fens
                 Cattle                       w ho look on m ost of them as                   refurbished.                                         Y et they support th e gam e w ith         th a t will a t la s t sound th e
                                                                                                                                                                                              death-knell for th e antiquated
                                              trash . And tre a t them as such.                                                                 a passion and a belief th a t has its
       A t one London ground you
                                                  C ar parking? F o rg et i t A t m ost                    Passion                              roots in th e very traditions of              stadium s of th e E nglish game.
    have to hurdle ponds of pee to '
    g e t into th e lavatory, and there     ' grounds it is non-existent, unless *                B ut even th e n th e first priority
                                                                                               is boxes for th e p unters able to
                                                                                                                                                th is country.
                                                                                                                                                   F o r m ost, football is th e ir only
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Frenzy
    are no facilities to w ash your           you    are one of th e gam e's F a t             pay th e prices, and n o t b etter,                                                                On countless occasions
                                              C ats.                                  - ■ V: basic facilities for those who                     o utlet, th e one entertainm ent ...
    hands.                                                                                                                                      they can still afford to attend.              supporters have escaped, scared
                                                 “Ehere are never enough                     • can't.                                           A nd they are crushed, burned or             ■stiff but uninjured. In the
   • T h e d u b s and their caterers         turn stiles, and m ost clubs
    th e n ex p ect you to buy products                                                     « H illsborough, for instance,                      tram pled on for th eir troubles.         ■' cascading human frenzy of a .
                                              o perate security guards who                                                                         T he tick e t allocation could
   so appallingly packaged and                ap p ear program m ed from th e             ' :*foiled   to inform N ottingham
                                                                                               F orest fans of th e m easure of th e
                                                                                                                                                                                         v,. surge on the terracing behind a '
                                                                                                                                               ‘have been a t th e h e a rt of th e *’ : . goal. , .
   prod uced they would be an Insult          sam e laboratory o f T ransylvanian                                                                                                                                             -
  •In $ p ig sty ..;           ,»•>                                                             disaster for a dangerously long            .    problem s on S aturday. Liverpool,
                                             .-experim ents.                                   period. .          ^                     '•       asked ab o u t a change of venue, i            ' C lubs have sp e n t m ore m oney
  ^ 'A n d y e tm o re aind m ore d u b s *     I F o r b ig g a m e s .itisJthe fans                                             off ’            Ri          w*ivw. nol
                  aNHiran
                      fan'gri*ve*"i alon*
   am o n g ' th # . w reck ag e w hera to
   m any o f k it friend* a n d fellow *
   iu p p o r ta r s M r i i b t d a t H ills*




                                                                      1 m ho




th e atre an d excitem ent of th e big        I t is inconceivable th a t th e FA      T here Is m oney in football,
occasion.                                   did n o t expect th a t Liverpool,       trem endous w ealth, generated by
   The dangers were ignored, as             after th eir trem endous League          the pools, television coverage and
 clubs m aintained th e traditio ns         com eback, and Forest, after             com m ercial sponsorships.
 passed on by former                        winning th e Littlewoods Cup a t
                                            Wembley, w ould draw extra                  A nd it is ab ou t tim e some of it                                                                                                      sgaovj
 adm inistrators.                                                                    w as sp en t on th e people who        c
                                            thousands to Hillsborough.
   A D ickensian contem pt for                                                      - n a tte r m o s t For how m any fans
 decent citizens who w anted to                      Warnings                        will w ant to venture in future into
                                                                                     a big-m atch occasion where th e re ;
 identify them selves w ith their            B u t th e w arnings were n o t
'team .                                   heeded, and Liverpool chairm an            could be sell-out crowds spelling
                                          John S m ith called it “a sc a n d a l”    p o ten tial trouble?
   B u t can it b e any other way
w hen th e F ootball A ssociation,           He im plored th a t the tie be           In A m erica It is th e fan who
th e adm inistrators of th e gam e in staged a t Old Trafford, where                comes first. S port is packaged
th is country, have th e ir roots in      .there is 50-50 segregation, and          for th e follow er who pays
th e la s t century?                      where th e tick et allocation could       through th e tu rn stiles.                                                                     NBWl
   A nd who have on so m any              be fairly distributed. . •                                                              (Morris 102, Cairn 58.
occasions in th e p a st been a t            Surely it is ju s t one more               F acilities are com fortable and    I
                                                                                                                                17: Mullins 5-77) C a rt llah
                                                                                                                              »:1U0.                .'                             0836 400
loggerheads w ith th e ir brothers         reason why a wind of change               d e a n , and in Europe it is a        IRKS.— (Saturday) Oifar#
                                                                                                                            lorthants: Northailta 35V4
                                                                                                                                                                                     832
from th e F ootball League.                needs to blow through L ancaster          sim ilar story, even in th e soccer     126). Today: 11.30.     ’’
                                           G ate, taking w ith it all those          strongholds of Spain and Italy.                                            S LINZI DREW NEW!
   T he FA Is an old gentlem en’s                                                                                                                               |    PARTY GAMES'
                                           doddering decision m akers n o t             W hat happened a t H illsborough          GOLF
club w here privilege exceeds
                                           able to step in to th e 1990s.            h as once again highlighted how
                                                                                                                                                                s    0836 400 829                     5 THEFftHGSOUAD   JU   i   I
prow ess, w here d e a r, concise                                                                                           S OPEN — Final scans (4tl)
thin kin g Is overshadow ed by a             How m any m ore disasters m ust         far we lag behind th e world. It       ished o u t OB As Ire unless        |    TRACY KIRBY NEW!
                                                                                     h as ta k en an oth er tragedy to       207— P B roadhurat 72                     0836 400 957
rule book th a t rivals th e                we endure before som eflU ngls                                                 ;«208— J Heggarty #7. B
               -       i ancien t ritual. done?                                      bring football finally to its senses. .us) 69, P Senior (Aus)               Full.GUIDE0S36400BOOBfrsmchLtd
                                                                                                                                >88); 209— R B afltrty 70       Cain:-rEMeiIBp;*'*p.’epea*535p pert

          i(ViV*'-
             H III
          VAVA
18th April 1989

Mr Peter Wright
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police Force
Snig Hill
Sheffield
S3 8LY


Dear Mr Wright
I feel I must pass on my sincere feelings of support to
the police inspector who opened the gates at Hillsborough
on Saturday last.  I would endorse any such action if, as
he no doubt felt, it was necessary to do so in order to
save the lives of the people who were crushed against the
visitors' turnstile system outside and he might even have
saved many more lives outside the ground.

Last year                                     invited 30
      yeai my company,I          j      , . ..
people to watch Wimbledon play Liverpool in the FA.CuP
Final at Wembley Stadium.   After a pleasant lunch in the
Wembley Conference Centre we all made our way to the
entrance marked clearly with our ticket numbers so that
we could enter and take our seats with approximately 30
minutes to spare. The horror that was to follow was
probably the most firghtening experience of our lives.
Thousands of people were trying to enter into the
inadequate openings, young children were screaming for
help the whole crowd was carried along pushing and
shoving with little or no regard for the safety of the
young children or other people. Unfortunately there was
no chance of opening any gates to relieve the horrific
pressure.   The police who were trying to control what was
going on were magnificent whilst the majority of decent
people tried to hold back the mad charge.   Three
policemen managed to pluck three young children to safety
 and I saw one policeman lift a young child over the top
 of some barbed wire to safety.




                                                                   Re g is tered O f f i c e as abo v e
         D ir e c to rs : D.U. C r a w l e y D . l ) C r a w ley
                                                                   R e gis tered N o : 2 0 9 4 1 2 8
         C o m p a n y Secretary: L. H o d g s o n
Please check into this year's Cup Final and make sure
that this does not happen again.  I will get all of my
guests with me during that terrible experience to endorse
this letter.

Yours sincerely




Chairman




CC:   Mrs Margaret Thatcher
      Prime Minister
      10 Downing Street
      London SW1

      Mr Graham Kelly
      Chief Executive
      The Football Assocation
      16 Lancaster Gate
      London W2
 copy   Of MY LisiTtJSR TO TEE
 CHL&iJ' FIRei OF-elC-aR

 Saturday i$*b April 1989*
Dear Sir,
           Z k m vttoteft with horror and dlabtlitf lb* frag*dy of
 the Liverpool Football gaae, at HUlaborough,
      The football Association and the football Clubs aanageaent
diaguet b w . Their only concern is *oney frost the gam*.
Football fans ara an unruly aob «ad rabble baaed on thair past
performance. Purely m y opinion to w h i c h I m entitled.
      Recently tightened up Fire Jftegulatione have baan vigorously
•oforead aainly against n a i l astabliahaanta.
      The Lav requires all public placaa, thaatraa, cinemas,
discos,hall, hotels, guaat houses, d u o s , and bornea eonform to
tba regulation*. Inspected by the responsible Fire Officer.
      Oovernaent offices, buildinga and establishments, railways
public aervicoa and a bost of other g o r a m e a t agenciaa do sot
nave aueh a thorough check. In fact they aeea to ba outside the
law.
a.g.      The Iondon Air Traffic Control Centre at West Drayton
bare locked recoaaended Fire Eacapa doors with a key alongside
useless against a panic crush*
      Inspecting Fire Of lie era always s trass the need for outward
opeing fire escape exit a of adequate else and number plus panic
release facility where necessary for aecurity*
1*       X want to know: The last date these regulations were
 inspected and approved by your aepart&ent at Hillsborough
Football Ground?
      I advocate the resignation oft
1,    The entire Football Association Board.
£•    The entire Hillsborough Football Ground fcana :ement.
5.    The Public S&foty Of. icer.
4.    The Chief Fire Officer, yourself-the bucic rest *iiL you.
5«    B e Inspecting Fixt> Ofiicei-.
b.    ihe Chief Constate of Sheffield Police.
      iiost of whom should be dismisses without fat pensions
in addition ba made puulicly accountable before a Criminal Coubt
for advocations enc&geuent of a public crowd with no estfcr^ncy
fire or panic facility.
      I aa tired of ao called prcfe ssionals drawing fat unwarranted
unearned salaries who give anything but professional service.
Solicitors, Accountants, Bank Managers, Architects, Police,
Government officials - the list is endless.
      There can be no death by misadventure veroict here. It waa
and still is at every barrier erected footoall ground potential
organised mass aeath - approved by officials.
      In ay profession I could kill 5 tim«»6 the number of people
involved here by one split second error of juu^e&ent. These
individuals involved have day a, weaka, years to deciue.
                             Tours truly,
 19 April 1989
Margaret Thatcher
Prime Minister
10 Downing Street
London                                                     ______
                                                             Herts


Dear Mrs Thatcher

Like the vast majority of decent British people, I am shocked by the Hillsborough
tragedy. I am prompted to write to you in the hope that Alcohol Abuse can
be put clearly at the top of the political agenda. The families and friends
of those who lost their lives will care little for matters of inflation, employment,
GCSE, NHS, Nuclear Disarmament and Green Issues etc.

As with the hundreds killed and maimed on Britain's roads, the countless thousands
effected by the Canadian tanker disaster, as well as hundreds killed in previous
football incidents, there is one root cause, namely, alcohol abuse.

It really is about time that the leaders of this nation worked TOGETHER with
one another and TOGETHER with those concerned to stamp out this menace, by
researching the root causes and making a clear policy of remedy j and by bringing
in harsh penalties for the culprits. I am sure that most decent people would
pay two or three times the price for a drink, if it helped to cut out abuse.
Why is it that any area of the country which has a high percentage of unemployment
and where we are told so many live in poverty, manages repeatedly to find
the money to travel to football matches, buy tickets and spend so much on
alcohol?

The matter of alcohol abuse touches all our lives and the enclosed cutting
refers sadly to a                Resident who has repeatedly caused disturbance
in the neighbourhood at very unsociable hours. If such people do not have
the self discipline or common eense to control their consumption, then harsh
laws are needed to protect the vast majority of citizens from the effects
of abuse. Only a few months ago, my wife and I had booked a table at a restaraunt,
only to cancel it shortly after arrival due to the loudmouthed, abusive and
rowdy behaviour of four grown men who had clearly had too much to drink.

Two hundred years ago a mob stormed a gate in Paris which started a revolution
from which man has received much benefit. If the storming of thegate last
Saturday could see the start in 1989 of a Temperate Revolution, then perhaps
those dear people might   not have tied in vain.

For many years my wife,  two children & I had four season tickets for seats
at Old Trafford where we spent many happy Saturday afternoons. We are now
far too scared to enter a football ground again.

Finally, it seems that top level co-operation on this matter should exclude
the Football Association, for their insensitivity in announcing the date for
the semi-final to be played is beyond belief, but sadly is.typical!

Yours sincerely




cc   Neil Kinnock, David Owen, Alan Beith, Nicholas Winterton & Ian Stewart
     Keeny Dalglish, Martin Edwards (Chairman - Manchester United), Graham Kfell^FA)
Meeting
tipledto
      up
 FOUR young men
 out for a reunion
 drink ended, up,
 raiding a chemist's,
 magistrates beard
.on Tuesday..
   Two- o f the drunken
t« m cmariwd the Shop
window with a garage
tign and then three,
made o ff with armfuls
o f goodies.




              pleaded guuty
 to purflary and theft
  from            Chemist in
I       --------- 1    ^ in
  January.
                   who has
  his own roofing com­
  p an y, also pleaded '
  guilty to destroying a
  shop window.
     The fourth man in­
 volved w as               |

                       who
 admitted being involved
 in smashing the win­
 dow.
   |                 pros­
 ecuting, ' told Hitchin
 magistrates that            .
 full of remorse, phoned;
 the police. '• '     "
                      Id e -
  feading
  and             described
  the infitim t as a *!tra- .
  gedy” and said . the
  young men were deeply
             and ' embar-
  nwed.\;;:_W~*“ii'V-':.
    “ The drink is an
  explanation and not an
  excuse for” what they
  did,” he told the court.
                         de­
  fending f
  said the.. incident was
  not premeditated and
  his client regretted it.
     M ag istrates' fined

             £200 each for
  the bur]■glary charge and
  o rd e re d
                to pay £600
  each in compensation
  for the w indow.'
   • They were' all order­
  ed to pay £20 costs.
                                              SHEFFIELD



                                              17th April    1989

Mr. Colin Moynihan,    Minister   of Sport,
House of Commons,
W e stminster
London                                               .        -

Copies to: MRS. MARGARET THATCHER
          y M R . GRAHAM KELLY
            MR. PETER WRIGHT, CHIEF     CONSTABLE,       SOUTH YORKSHIRE   POLICE

Dear Mr.   Moynihan,

I have been going to write to you for some time but have kept
putting it off as some of us s o metimes do.     However the tragedy
at H i ll s borough has jolted me into action and I hope that my
c o n t r ibution will be of assistance to Mrs. Thatcher and yourself.

Having to frequently make the right decisions, I cannot imagine
any c i r c u mstance that would have prom p t e d me to open the outer
gate on the day in question but the basic problem is the hooligan/
yobo element which attends football matches and for that, I put
most of the blame with the football authorities.           R e garding the
day in question, you must now have seen fanatics climb i ng over
fences from outside the ground trying to force gates and jostling
policemen.

It concerns me greatly that people such as yourself and
Mr. Graham Kelly might be too young to remember what it was like
to attend a football match prior to the yobo era.      Well we were
not segregated, even for cup matches and we had a thoroughly
good time exchan g in g good natured banter with our opponants
supporters.   We frequently made friends and I recall queueing
for some cup tickets to send to a chappie who s u pported Norwich
for a replay at Norwich after they had drawn a game at
Bramall Lane.   As the final whistle went, he thrust some money
into my hand with a note with his address on it.      He later sent
my wife a box of chocol a t e s which I think he probably would still
have done, even if Norwich had not won the replay.

What went wrong?          In my opinion, the main reason for the
deterioration, is the increase, from say the 50's of un -sporting
behaviour mn the pitch (I call it thuggery).               We always had some
hard players but they were fair players.           When this behaviour
dram a t i c a l l y increased, the football autho r i t i e s did nothing
initially; from that time, a good referee became one who allowed
the game to flow, which usually means that he o v erlooks certain
offences and if you look at old films in the years Arsenal won
some honours, you will clearly see that certain clubs 'clogged'
their way to success.          For a number of years the football
au t horities did virtually nothing and it was only when attendances
slumped d r a m a tically that they were jolted into action,           Inner
City and other yobo type behaviour might have directly developed
from football crowd behaviour but it would require someone with
more facts to confirm it.



                                                         Continued
Mr. C o l i n Moynihati                                C o n t i n u a t i o n One



The current situation is that ev ery game of professional football
in this country that I see, d e m o n s t r a t e s a good deal of un-
sporty behaviour.         This can be making sure you get your opponents
foot/feet if you miss the ball; inte n t i o n a l obstr u c t i o n including
blocking a players progress unfairly; p r e v e n t i n g an opponent
taking a free kick by standing too close; elbowing an opponent;
kicking a ball away from where it should be; arguing with the
referee; pulling an opponents shirt or shorts or his body to
prevent his progress; cheating by g aining ground at free kicks
but more frequently at throw ins.           Some of the present day
tackling is h o r r e n d o u s and some players are nicknamed 'The Butcher'
and similar self e x planatory names, and some of the fouls that are
committed warrant an immediate sending off (not just a warning
card) and a long suspen s i o n without pay for what should be classed
as a public order offence.

In the old days it was usual for a p r o f essional footballer to go
through his playing career without being sent off and when the
occasional player was sent off, both lots of suppor te r s knew it
was a fair decision.   Today I think one player has been sent
off something like 10 times and the football a u thorities still
let him play.  Some clever, niggardly players can regularly
commit fouls (not part i c ul a r l y in the same game) just short of
being shown a card but never (or hardly ever) s u ffering any
disciplinary measures.     In my opinion the game a s s essors at
each game should record every foul given and these should at
least go to a totting up record to suspend and fine regular
offenders.

You have only to see the strained ex p r e s s i o n s on the faces and
hear the shouts of the Managers and Coaches etc., on the 'Bench'
to realise the tension they hype t h e m s e l v e s up to.  It is a
game of football.  Personally I do not believe anyone should be
allowed to be at the side of the pitch except for a neutral
doctor.  When a team goes onto a pitch, it should be capable of
playing on its own from that point.

The on pitch 'thuggery' results in many skillful players being
lost from the game (hence Englands decline) and I despair when
I hear   reports like Ron Atkinson signing a player to save
Sheffield Wednesday from relegation, who at the time he is
signed   is suspended by the football a u t h o r i t i es for offences
he has   committed on the pitch and by the police for offences
he has committed off the pitch.     Does not seem to be the best
influence to youngst e r s does it?

I am certain that this on pitch 'thuggery' and the tension
which is generated (either succeed or be sacked) is reflected
in the crowd.         Revert football to the sporting game it should
be, encourage players to shake hands before and after the game,
reduce tensions (perhaps promotion and relegation could be
determined by the annual a t tendances of the clubs at league
games) to reduce the pressure of having to win matches to keep
a job and encourage integrity into the game at all levels and
condemn a n t i - s p o r t i n g / a n t i - s o c i a l beh a v i o u r severely and you
will be well on the way to improving crowd behaviour and
football and everyone connected with it would benefit in the
mediu m / l o n g term.


                                                                    Continued
Mr. C ol in M o y n i h a n                       C o n t i n u a t i o n Two



I hear of a father already th re atening to sue for comp ens at ion
for the death of his two daughters.    It is incidentally understood
that they do not come from anywhere near Liverpool, N o t t i n g h a m or
Sheffield, but people should in my opinion, always un de rst an d that
they should accept primary respons ib ili ty for their actions.
Tomorrow, I shall be travelling down the M1 to London fully
knowing that my life will be much more at risk than if I had
stayed in the office.  The Police can never guarantee 1 0 0 5 o
protection.

My prayers and good wishes go out to you and the football
authorities to put the wonderful sport of football to rights
and in Mrs. Thatcher's words, please do not fudge the issue,
put it right once and for all, starting at the centre with the
players and football management in general.
Yours sincerely,




P.S.   It surely cannot be a criminal offence to open a gate and
       if the enquiry establishes that the deaths and injuries
       were mainly caused through hooligans (possibly including
       drunken hooligans) rushing through a tunnel; surely the
       major blame should be appor t i on e d to these hooligans. If
       I drive into the back of another vehicle at 100 M.P.H., it is
       my fault.  I cannot blame the Police for not having speed
       traps at say one mile intervals.

        Finally, I sincerely hope that the majority of the massive
        funds which are being collected will be put to a memorial
        such as a Sporting facility from which people from Liverpool
        and elsewhere can benefit for years to come rather than to
        certain relatives who might not deserve to become virtual
        mil l i o n a i r e s overnight but obviously innocent d e p e n d a n ts
        of b r e a d winners who have suffered, should be looked after.
        I trust that the usual ma n datory Public Liability Insurance
        will in any event, cover the death and injury costs always
        ap p r eciating that nothing can fully compensate for someones
        death who is sincerely loved.
The Directors
Football Association
16 Lancaster Gate
London W2


April 21 1989


Dear Sirs
On numerous occasions I have planned to put pen to paper to p r o te s t
about the Football A ssociatio n 's a t t i t u d e towards league fo o tb all in
g e n e r a l.
Over t h i r t y years of activ e support I have watched standards constantly
drop;on the p itc h and o ff the p itc h .
Your Board has to be the most uncaring,bumptious,col le c tio n of in d iv id ­
uals ever assembled in p o sitio n s of authority.Y our handling of the
Hillsborough tragedy has been appalling.You should a ll resign and give
fo o tb all the break i t needs to build a proper future'.
Needless to say none of you will resign nor accept any r e s p o n s i b i l i t y .
God help you a l 1.

Yours f ^ t t h f u l l y
                                                              Haywards Heath
                                                              W. Sussex
                                                              Tel:


                                                            Rf>nl 1 ? ^        1^

 J^€ckt fV\r. felUj;
                          4. W m ’tt   ok   l>el\«.l^       Btfe0^jeMern.4i<3KS
 of hMj                              taw? loG&v<                                    tvr
j o r iw x t t k a v ^ r h j J ea rc - ^ ^ jou<fo Stf*|> H^s
Jears               TVr\<tl.

                        fe j< M jc M < D e |^ sx i'^ MuAo cures Ojko
 Uxv\s CUmj k^vtrre. " Hvew tk-ene U ho jzo^t' of
 Oa .   i t   U r o ^ U b e a k o t l o i o ^ gst-un?   ft) J t> (lo io

f* r t j ^ e n i U .      \»ve jsla^ecs Kaatp Ko k e a r 't j « c t b ^ ( 4 ^

Ca^h-^ i6 Stcke^i ttj tt“. 1 skali Kvobjo b a^
of H\e T^^oakav^ tv\nhAe.s tUs S'ecLSvYK,
           To      C<vu*vtv^^ (XwA H\^ UnorUl - it Unl(
skou) tW:^v\tmetj a^A bjj Lu^tKess ru-tes. fbr ^Joel's
«S^.ke |pl<cas<? r^vnev^ter HvA.t tfo av\Lj ajcu w e.
                                     ljoMP>    siA\Cen?^L|________________
                                                                                                    U s.

                                                                                             (4-*w'o -
tl-<,               c
                                                                                            xi,4.-15^

            _l                  v r^ j                * w     rts^                                   Ju^ujZf

    I'-*''* V'-fcy»y»<v-«'X- .                    Ylv*»      ^ H s^       fU^r-t-dT        -I—«o lA-Cf


 ''k-O &-'</Cv>v>^              «~»       Vl'W                  ^ rtv^.,                          (f r.^ T ^


*T ^-Wvrt\tf-LC^_                             -&XX~ tTkUcw              V1n_u>_        (f                       ^<1

t^ V i^ L           K * ftr^Lv^.                   ^rU. -^O                            Sjfl-rr^             Crr+f

i^ ~ t' ^ * -» \"       '4 '^                 -              ft-u _     -vxj-t^-oo^     ^    j?   .: .n         , _ ■_



'""^T               •” -                                               ;iu^       r^u^,                 ^


            , VLe,                        ^               Iz^v^o                /U_^<a__ '                £>
                                                                                              ~sj           O

                                                                   .           Pv ^               C* ^ i ,

£jr^*U               J,     e^WO.                     t 1<_*-f > L ^          -rPrtlvv^                   U ^ ^

           ^ 1 ft- f X i .                         ^ P&-J09T                          U.     Caltrw-tX

*                    C^nU                         0^ ^ 4c ^              ^                                  ^

         4 lU, u «                       „—       t H^. K _ r                         iL^x          W        i^ J j.
I   l°.<m               l^vsT              ■     +      '         ^                    *A>t“

*1"-cs-flk<-t~^-Bv>.„              fcjf               ^t-c,               M j^

 Lt^c UA.^ {^<-^ &                             WL*.         — O           «— -t-j CUow.             o^-t_

            > H-n-sj t'-ik UJ&            Vis^x^       *+- ~o''d~*v~e^<L U-c U^^Cci

       •*                                        C^A*—i                          j^. '^vl^A<i



***~u        t~ -               M JL

       ^          i^ n L     t» ^ - p ^ t        tu ^                          ^ Y ^ jJ i,

4JLl J cW v ^                     -t-^'u. rts^                        o_ -r tfo            rU p j,'„ i

*lJtr< J ^ i -                             U^o       ^wv^-ci-j                                  v

H-Wr^aLs^> -r -lAr w. U ^                 ^cL *.                      ^        I'kjT    -~i ^

t w ^ W          ‘^ -               - w^lr ^                          <jr               u ^ J i^

                  ^y-rc^JT      W-l/wC*

            '"7“'V*                              / £>                  P*T
                                                 (e» plc-^jv -+- S^>v^v KWv*~'{ 7 ^


      iw^til^rArx^                                            c   W        U                    ^VwO.
                                                          Mi                                 letups




           zx             / ,                                                           /7/^Af.



                    k » ic * »            C o w v ii       < **& £■     **- ^          1-^




f u V f f ^ e ^                   « W < 7 ^                        ^ c“ 't W          to ^          ^


^    - M        a   ' M       ^   ^   ^         6*f                                           ,- j,

     u l l W t o 4 ™ y                                ^        U   ^    7    ^    7      * .          ,   r
     v              «   i-                til                                                         ^
o u U ie ) ,. M o A i °                           ^ H                  *7                           jy-



L     ^«jtow ^                                                              °"7 ^               ^
f
U u e^x> l p b y & l O n fl                 '

      '7K/?     rrjn & ra X           jb5

b^aw m ^< 2-

       Ucuilkd. 4 k >                                                  fer       " T            ^



         a W / p ^ 0t£ - S o ^ - ^ ^ \S Aix>^
CjflWiNA                              OS"



^                      ? f r                                                          ' V - f c - s i


^j ^Ia                            vs>— -       *$0                                            ^v^vaaAJ'                            t£-v__
    p w M A o' -------                             W t J / f T<_vvsi/l^                        Kl^U                                sA^vA                11 1




                                        frvjf fy*-^                                                         C    orvJQ.              ^vj£fc>
    V?e^Vv                                           -(2- ^ T                   Ul--ferv^               I       k^cla^                  U ^ w h ^
    \£-s^_                  F a             w ^-x    _j (

           (7?              AT*J            os            »v— kj^jtii.— ^                  ^<?              ^g_g-r>          <n— .
                                     U/l^ Q-J ^-^i                  ^            c*r<H                            ^




          C    ^ ^ )        t> ^ C ^ cL xJ                  r f-o           ■                                    CJL k j L J u l             W      " \^

                                           ^      LjCkV J L W ^                             0 ^ 0               V^v^~-tAy




    X              U ^ /3           c^ |^ /V A |5 k L ^             <A rC o c y v A O > 't- Q - J , j        <>J^ j) P<J\KxJ             £ \ J V" \ 4
                                            ^-\cJLrv^J                                /W^                    dU^.

        *>^ A .             — ^JCivV^ C-N-^                                                S* J H\_ N/^               cVj'-\S^
                        s         cO_c^\ > ' ^                                                                         f p*jt(          ^ Hnrr^Cvj^)



                                                                                       b
                                                                                           K VVn


                                                      CN/w~i*-*v'iJ                                         H-^it_e          ^yL^cQ_.

    •2^ 3J»            *TKiL          r^,t_ATri                   ^ K j Tv JL j I                       ffra Z<2jk'          v^^lrr^
              \Y       % \~Kjr-hi .                “~ ^ r —-e .           C -W A f>          %'W-—0 u X A               U -fi-     :>

              W w u - ~                    ^                                    U a* A 4 .                        Y<XV       C_A*i«\ c5f-

               A«O^C4 _,          <TV^         dJjL*^K\ •
Cfh-K^K                      H«J\rv_Vr-«      l&-j>       ^     cJ U a A v ^


<3 j-^sJLil                  b^     <motk*-^^sui{                Jiv'           -Q8 =$l

^         (K v~ ^                 o^V-^A                      -Qjv»i     /\     v£-\_

           <Vs /


         V ^w^-i^r                                      vKxvxW                 rvA        *^x -


y , ^ n n _ tJ               ko     ^              j«-ojiJ>kJ)           K K j^ J y i |

                   (7y        Yw -q yv V^v         ^V'SV-^        /~\-A^\/->4

 ,'c ,        crvJ^                vAjuw            C M                    ^


 t^-e-4yC t~v rv   vn    ^              ^ ~ Ai3^    *




         /\ / ^ w i                          C^^yVV^lr
                                                                                VgjQPto>€Cfr ftlMgSl

    *




jZ c .
I G U ^ > ^                       6**<L                                      fiexto*


                                                                       /7- ^e.

  & € o r '^ t s - * t



               'ib u * ~
                               &-rU
                               c b z c fV d ^          A > * jo d &
                                                                       7jtx$ ^ ' .
                                                                            o Jl

         A ^U              4 M         «      F -A        C ^>        /I

     ^WcJy
         n &      c jt         < 4 **                                 y ° - J ~ ‘f *           * -



                                             <      ^ L% -

                           £    ilJ                             O ^C & - S O ^ &          eg    /C h ifd d i

             u ..,±      /;           W > .                                               t J u 0 ~ :/ _

                      cr*
         Ifa

         AuJ             5°
                       /?        A 2 6 *t> - U                  ^ M        , * * ft     *> d " * * -

         ^              c /r a d            £ y      J te - r                      S t 1 t°r^ * a C
         //e_          c jO     ^ 1^        (-* S ^ /           AO'"       / W -      ^ 3 M u /c a /)

             u^<>                          t* 4 *      * ° g * * * -*              b tJ        *>
             & > * u u o ^             cJ-a<a> ~ - ^5 ^                        a i x ^ d 0^ ^ *
                                  mam*


                         cu J9                                   ^ ca° 5 -
o u l                                                   /u ^ * u £ U < i>

        A ^C u tQ   A ^O .

          Sc/ ^ s    ^ s k               tjr o ^ O )   gu*   3 ^ lc * ^ $

+ *L C C *> 2*d*~                C x J * lfle * x S >     G i& c J y & ^


                       u*~   S c t^ c a r & A ^ .
         •; ^ R    '         I“J T U AP^.lL f




          ^ ✓ccrt-vCS1         p-<»t5^r         >£&•&




           . . • U /rt/7 i
*   lu




                        j"* y^ >cA£ ^TLex^cM^1^^to




^^CCA^C.       a ^ « .
         \ \ J J a^ x J j C u u z ^ s   4& SL                    erf   4 ^ S l

\                     ‘X t A y ^ v y            /uu^5   s   £ jl   ^



    A v i- s x ji



        <yVuB^ J U             ycu a                                                 ^
                ^oite - v ^ t                               *£           ^       ^       r   r




    ^ A * U ,




    f'oCTfeAUi^ AS-^O^ lA T tO ti

     \y L a m wzr&z 6*m
     l— O N S O O / O
            C              ^ c c v/v'°^.
            L^psrOLfN^^^A               OA^C                 C A        , V\-Q-
            i-OrOPC? vs'->*                                                                                                               iMvo'tf
                                                                                                                            '"Tc\



    'X W s ^ .
                                           "~ U w            \r\Il l £ iy^-zo0\\                       *6cx'j<t)j „

                        "Tlw            ioco^pe^o^.                         <^j          ik*.          p-rofU                               JcV      -S^l'o^              r'^

            -sAcuVinc, "tVa.               rn^cV>              is          v^vW\^MfXU
                           iki,       4llpw^. -/jkck'r                                                     ft>A* U>cv\> Kovr,             Lt*/N     l^AOV*X\ ix)                       I
                                      J      I V                                                                                                              v/ - i                   J
                Toliuv ^              /^  ^   ^    V<k vodf                                       WiU'         k   S   3      oclotk.       a^p,Cf.«-Vv<^ & ^V\(Os

^               V/-^ "iVvarN *0                                    Ou|'ln{| (OwU                       ^t-c ^C)C)i\ft-,
                   ^ ^ r s tS S     lr\ '^’OSiVloo v.'-'V'lok                         CoAc)            no{ Conr\»- "c)Ovo^. Ir> c<rv Q ,rr\ts^> c^p^

        7        ""TlcKeX             <ql\oCrN\|Cv-x                UrJdxX .
        2        ^clcA’                                  UVe.           2k'C- t'o \<?cTb                   ^ 0 \\S     <> Kaw,^| -to 'pewK X b n w

                   "r^cfYx "tlvx.

                                   C^YWincj              r-\                             ^                   'Vj<3CcA'£_
    ^            '^Tc^\\j-Lu          CwjYn              UKiio               q oA                 ca/Tcj   oj^e^           ^-sa~ATt>                               "to v^w ? s

    C/            Son\x                       "jp1cv^~rVj^                 l-v'Oifj£- ^JcN ^\|/"\Vl>
    n             ^ ° 6\' -e^o^U P o U                                  o*                                  "to                          L u ^ ^ cA                   UdHs
                  xoffbe.         c-vi^           OvVrr^CV                                a- \ W                   PU-oiet)              lx_                      K<* J^-V

                  •<3>.V-\CX       ^O   n I cjv         1^     IK   c\ Y         C v \ *< -   .



I                                                                                                                                              .          .                    .

                 ^ 0 ~ V \ * ”tV\>-               c.Vj-Cs.d-        S>V^>Viq ,^.                  wV\<^       l-c C ^ i         Q/V^CA-*-      W\                                  ^
                                                                            HacX              U\o          S T ^ y J ? P^nnb'-'^CcTt'y M-epA^V^Vj                         \1

                lUUS^                                         U)^           S^Wv                    S^brrx                  Vr^     W v ^           W V -          ^ 0 ^ > 0
                        ’'^ H , s         is        v-\vJ       e ^ e & O c Y , T 5^0C C                               >S T 7 u ii4 > *&       oP^            S - \ l>P

            "TuSKwoCr, ' K o f ^                               W                                                          a- ^ * u -                lvJ        VAnoo-TEJ-.

                ^L < & ± £        W               T^<t-sT.                   ^                                               K\Oc
                                             ^-'\V\                p\       ^C^-T                            ^<ee.V               IV-      ^ P O S K iokj. » WUJ-

                 G\\)<C           ^ /O v            Pv                                            i^creoC v            p^n-         'o      wx.’o J V           tw -^ W J x


                                      (^ ‘r'A'' o \                V^'cVc.                          ^ q\ o^ 7 l)            W       ujfii      cuX            W<^U_iI
                  O-K    S\cX\K)r\c^               (\        (j \Ca^ > ^Tn/.                      q\               \\ ] V w - J \ i \ _                                        "1^
rW rb D U t.             r-j       -tk iL                            Or\      " tW            jp fV     C c ijltv o R tU c iV '               ^        I^S5           C £ ,i< _ ,

"Hv<_         Cxoloc)             C ode)                 Kdcsv ■jfci.            \oou           cj -Hm                          \/\&S C>*^D                  houjo
SOrr\a>*V\-«ve. 'to                     \or \        .
                       ^ \r-a-                                -^Ka- C<f. f\                Owo Cc^GvA*^                                    “Hu T?>o(r
C o o rv ^ n tx r           Ko            VYiv«- cv. VeiJ\"                                L)-'L{-> prrs               Of                                   fHsL

%        G
 U d c .^      " tK jL       Co<pe^                            -S 'K cxA ^>       K c tv < --                    \o \D
    I        IkAkjo                ^-\c\ ',] "ttu.                      S'imfU-' 'p*0 Ccu~cO ie,                               t\Vj**\io      WO
 C ^ s C ii)          Ov»V        (k<<V          " tW                       U >o4c>              K av< -        \-e ip > o < u )7 t>       Q r^ >      L ot c^oX ^
 W-           looVLins^ ^                        Cs tv'i^ov                       P\ | po\lce-1 ^ K J'fA'b
 »X\&         U jW iV          w ?r^C             ‘o-ioo^          i~\anV                               irv c'
                                                                                                             n            VCictl                       W\^
                         \nfco*                  ^                                   m\o            Uv'^''J)          °~if S             'pco^Lc Cvt t3ecT£>.
    T'MI             S<?n\o<         Y €°p^c                   ^'\K         c<       \«-W\Jc.^T             CVi-Cr-        c-j         1ejpo0 5,lnt\\s x^ T b

             -tf*      invy»oo»4j-^                                   ^ '4^'3 n lt'' ^ rsC|'i'fV^CT' ^                                 ^VvJ^xTb
CWVfvrOo^                   c j << ( \ j                  CV(u^          ConyVcLLc-^^T^                         \-\orrvs_ i T c C ^ ' a * ^ «r-"DO;

                                   J T ^ o iY ’                                  rn o \* --       ^ -f°Q            9 -^          O bV       W c f ,w u _           " tfc u ^
 '" y V o j'^ -C -       (>«-<_      ^ > 2 i i o o c , \ |^       A - 'iip u o J ,l> L o        J o < 'tk.v .       C)<’ i'A W                       J l>      ' ^ J ' vn       V o
                     +U v          W .* " ^              op           '"’W sL         L O O iY l)          C^r^i)       C \L (_e^pt~         lK ^           'D 'U
     (       Ul-       W\rx\                                  WAl)                      ^        mt^V^                    Ii-ci        I k                      ^ ,r c' *
                       ^ c c {kjL.                                            ^ Ic M fU f          U ) jL       .sY c .'u '/       " p it\> c V ^ y                     ii,u
    \u<,I           Or)      a»o          -^U^/^i) Ao                    C cu fT                                                             JO         U,4)
    ro u iV                           ‘I t * .           o W iV v X "-* -     x ^ c ^ ji o L                           t^ ^ jr         jo           W ^ l-j           w a o jc j .
    \n-         v>jlie -       ^                               ^C< rv~>c^           ^ lu L .f         fX      r -m c,\\          Y^Un               i^V0             V.-rO

                         -*• 'fruk. '"C^r^.o^ ^ ^^n(s\c.v                                     ^o c S . V o W ^ V                   '-^‘oj'b
 VUc            Co^nV^j                          ^            "Wv;Cr^/^            Uocioc)                       T«^r,\\           ^c,rK-            C>r>            -f^
 (VVi^rv             XV^O'-00£J                                   A^ y c x .                     s^'o--i'-w-V            <<T ■/\ ,
            ~          *"     ’* .-gf~ -
                                    ' *"
^ *              • *:**-     ■[■ :;      -»

i   I ^
                              *

                                        .i
                                                %

                                             **mT;•
                                                  '
                                                  :
                                                       l0lH,                     I3?R


U:*

      I    oj\k uj/xJcG’Vr^                  t-A          fse^po\A /x^          4-o
                     nerpAJr                                                 cx/ vd

                                                                   *t3Uj2.      e A j- e /tts ,
IcsA            S    oiliJurolc)uL-j           1^     ^          ^-ppJl , <~y\

iWjUJ^C-iy                             (j^r\ocje>^Jz:              £ o l a .s

    ^ tv r€/"pool           £oc>tJpexX-A                  CAa-aJ o       cA
                                                                          -a^ jJ      .
    S-ejC| ^ A jr ^ i/K S ^                               L j O t u '1
    c>^po^PLjrtxj^\CA_                       ov\              i r V/ •       cyvv
    S oJCOurcL^                    a   Jl c |V\Jzl / I             -PeXirr      -tKcrin
                       cLLck       A o td k jl* \c |             -b l ^ z
    uo c x f f ^ e .         otrvrd            -Ca j c x c L c ^
    cj^x^ y t z x c m / i          O L / y k e di           c^                     CL^ =:
    ck       “bJi^A^L.         ootaz-o                p-exr^La^-             we/^,
|ir\         ^\ock_               oyvd          cb\/i.ou^U|
ifsrveeri           •c^'--x :£J3«^*Af^r4z> '/^oti/v^-ivc)                         ojoca.
                                                r^v,    ifr^’
      solo   v*

                    *£’
                      is1’'




Iolrxr^^xyvOi^                   '‘ ^           o W )     -     fcKoJz:
fe^uonoo          ywjQ'Str            u N - o p o"rfcex^

 H o u ; a b o ^

  T W o ^ , c w                -i-op        4 )      ° j ~k           .,            '
 ^ o t    e A ^ n                               Ko<a-»3

 . y ^            -b ^ c ^ d -^         <   Mo u            -« ^ p e c W

 Uvevf-odi                F - c -’          ^
,.\jr\       t x r r a u ^ s i'- ^                ^S -pLo-H                4)
 -btsz,     q c w ^
1 j     L k n ^ p             41 o u ^             cLua_d         \

f t      c o o d ^ L          A ^ t
fctovJUd            kx_        s o                                              .


                                     <3l^ V O
                               •
                               ’■■■•IviWmi


                            i:?.;
                                -;'■v^-•'.>-
                                               M      '

                                                -• ^ ;..s ^ v f ;t




           '^ A '    *;-■• '* ,V.--. •■-•-•....•v            ■v      -. "->-1 -““fr’; ;-;:'4r.Vqs?

           - |© o tf c > a iX                                        <coo                ^

                                                             CJ2_                          .■
                                                                                            ".V^f*' „r~!-^
                                                                                             /v          ' p~-
                                                                                                       * ■» S**
                                                                                                              *?W
1;
                                                                                                     S. APR *?
                    S»l>nQ2 ^v^ L v ^




     cc   S»port=s.                       ^dxJocb>r

          Todcu^                        AexoS.pa^>e<r
       ■C i ;
       »
                                                                                                     *4»C»C/a/         &~r 0
                                                                 -;      ,    .; r*                                      | l < .c "
                                                                 •• '—   >-    w-. !«■

 /r .              v « y .
                                                            *- V.5. APR          11
                                                   .. ........
                    J ! >         B


                                  1           u x td                                                  a jt         &Ll                ii^LfluyoY

                                              ^     COvfLfi                                                            JUtNiljtUjA

 AJLt^Auu          J L k^    m P.             ^                               S T ^            UULK+4         tr j _ CU2^_ i
                   St v           /j                 /) s
 CA^          1                             ,1 mJOutUl                                        —J*       C k j ^ j £)                              ..... .
                                                                                                                   «         *              — V
 1         U X i/)           cAMJJYMJuJL .                       M -C S-v^^M L T '

 cr^          T , V/          i/u v ^             ^ J [ aj J xJ<~-             - b x /i                                  $A>          a^sUlXJ—
                                             A                                      *                          J              /\        "         V




                                             ^ l£ d u .j                                            6000               JtLLhl
 LM SUct                                                                                 *J*S-                                               1

  Jixju^f'        JtuAjJti f                                     J i ts        jA jJ-fi             C^JJLt*-*- .

u-mjclA.                                                                                       ^                                       -C-Aj w

              j& j u      .._ C>uy                                                       .   __________ >/l£Q __L^-t^W jEltwv

         X)         UXe_                                                                                                               tL
 y^N^eufisSi-             $ aAJ            0 -0 J—

 J^JL             { L ^ M S -fU n d           v&>\

 i^ry         ....^a - A ____
                                                  iA ^ jujl L    ^           'Quxs(jJ ^ r -
        3 ) _ J J h _ k £
                                      fe



                                                                                                                            J -^b ^K .      €<-«^ecw
     4 2




                                                lAeu|^>At^-

                                A *AKM-

                      ^AJLa*yLu>-^

           fO -JV O A JL .                                    a


                                                                                        / ^ W A / ^ Cche^

& k jl                           ajS^-OcuaJ^A-Ls^.    wO




                             ^ioej2u j ^        £JL j         £A *             f “ Kj
                       ctu -
                           aj-                  jt^JLS        c k J iIL ^jo ^J x k j^

iiU                          ^ J j ^ J tk s L   ^paJjl       wlMJ^L_
                                                                                CxJL

                                                         ^sxnJL l       iooj      f tb jl    I- . \A t

                                           ^ __ M-*                                          u/-&jo
                          <-•—'
                            :
        V   " '             -M X v

        ~~*Ebev£w . .                       ..         „/       .

                7 ^ K k tv              ■                   '

        -a « » t ^ A S s a o « w * .        •;




                      I                          $ -


                     '          o W .




            O   M   r ^                                             /   "

                                                                    * ^ T   ~   ~

        C                               ^        tu    < ^           r^ ^ r




}?*,<
                 :.rV;        -                      4                  /^ - * s


 & ~ jU ^   Jr     -«<-<_         /£<   ..                4j-^

 t^ -K      O '*— <^<    0~~       S ^ —^ ^ i ' t f t J    ~ & + e *—   <a^A>


^ LJ^ ~                                                           y^.

b r» -6 -^ a ^ X         & r t- 4 i




            'K
               AprU



                                                                                    W 0 VV5



   JDfccvr      O V

                                    X       cxrn      c x p p a lo x l     ■H 'to J -      ro r    3   o C c ^ jj 2/ ,    Gao'^A -'i
  »e    +Hc_    Prci& i ( W     ’     e rf     o e - F A .               1 'K c .       fh m g s       +ho*                  has

 S p u ^I   a b o u i-    Encash              Fcoffc>ali          CXobs             j    Q -5p e-o a.M tj        U v c rp o o i

 PooH dCxI I a t? b           CXOf.4         'H>S2_     p<CJOp\j£_           o f-       )-l V'G-T'poo)      C x rtz.     ffirn fc)le„.

                                    H xl,    has         rncjcLe           cx       p o b lie      Q _ p p o /c g y          P0 r
cOKcxJ-      K t. Hp» 5    S cuct ,          bu.4-       r \o     c x p p o fo c ^         c o o id       o v ^r           com e,
++\c_    cicuneiij€       k*_        Kab           ecxob^ci         ,

                                     J_      K cu-ci        ^circ^         b fro o c *        \Zcc-tc^>        c tb o c d -

        H i llb b o ro o y k            c lt^ Q b t^ r          o_nd        c o L>(c*          c^o      o ,v         L o rjl-W
P o*" d c u ^ , .

                           1^0 0 ^ 3               Fcu4ty.p^( (c..j




                         Sei^rci^xrcj
                                                                              P o o ’Md Cv.LI      C L lj b      •
 Tv*^ 4r*.cui^I»-*                6     uwm   ,;Iu *.
                                                                                                i./£'.
 ^      U*l~b'JJ                                  ---                                            v <-■

 k'k*S tAfK.T'Os-Ji.          ^,5
                                                                                               Air :
 L~~Sr^A^i^i ■

  f,    \ fl

                                                                  (jjfcvo I w                  <»A           f^-li^ b ih J ^ jK
 ^          0~L+S du*$                      (aaV              1        UaaM               4^0
 4t) \AAJuJUfc. .                                                                                              wA»

     1 ^    1         . V^ .                 1"^W                                        ^ ^^UaI - J-X .01J                      *wf
                     cUu.(J                  Vu               ^             j
 ,                                      .         4a \        pHoic^                          ^U j   w   VvP          ^        r7^
                                                               4 \AAj.iXxjx.      *jU iu M , , *2
                                                     A ;< ic u X * * f  j* ^ ^ i.




                          ^         ^ U aaa.i^ ' I W                  ^ S~cQ »•>          .      Vdtv                l\UAAJl
                                klj^ti-^4                                                        £aU a/           fJOu.y'
 oiiA tLC^Vw-i            n^a. dj.           lAr>j            U^\J-fc'f'jb<S-0J                      -\a 4iM              CJuuM
 Cw-4       \HaJ^iJ-^               \N<-^. *             4o>-~^                      p*-/            a-o(             <M^o           *
                      * ^ \ | U     c         a   ^j ^    S       ^    s           JjJ

        ^       4&a>xL.       fcV        Vj^A J                         ^                                J        £«-<aa* -
^•V         ^     wU^A*               VKKUU           vXAjte^               ^        0J ^ <S^            A         ftt
ptvWfii^s                      6 ~ ^jJ         cxh^wsXu^ fcsJr ooouU                                 ^>KC ^                 f-o a/f .

            '^&°~r                                        ^       tWL s            tAAfiM                    >A
CAmk^JLU^                     ^Cxiaa*^Wua^UA                                    . K- k ^ s       aM ch^cU

                                                     ^                                                                »U"

            ^^ v         (^ i '*J    {jj**"- *»    ^    W-». cXvtu^ et/
                c4*a^^vcJ       M . j U ^ . C e , Vou>*     ^0* - ^ J U a-                                                   ^
    TW                                        caN    ^ X   u ^j      ICvM«-<.sA              j «u*uu '
-|t>/      >AAJUaa^           c/jiAW>-U'^                      , A\*ajo.


9w        “t W        9^W                 -
                                                        uiUeoV'          *jkjAA^   cix^ *a V^j
ftAA/iaCUs                   «?o   /OOU




fts. lW . taU»'cU^* |e*U^ ' ^ '                                                          ^
     Cj^.r. \         tV w          *A        OtM-      <) 1ft £ CtiM.    VJ

    __                I              fl         M \j_       f'-A .
     w- C i w J i u W ^ a            c-'i       1
                 iL           ^      o^jij                   f *                     *


¥        oj\     kk                         JfW         V^ ^ P e A tC w iT .
                                                                                                                                            ov^v(AV\.
                                                                                                                                    U
                                                                                                                        % \%T A ^ ' V . \ ^ V V
~\"5UL                   vAi-Y
T < \r-          f*oT3>AuW
 U>»4 <-a * o u l                    aT «




 ^ e ,J           ^          ’          \                       .v .       ^                              'V       ^                                 X


 YU«UV<. Cfc. 7.C.. .                                                              •"                                                       S’ •*■ " ~ *
                                                                                                                                                                   «_C« « a k      * •_
  AatJt-                 -A                 v \ , V \ , V ^                    , -*>                               ^            ^           ^    , ~ t



                                      ' - —'                                                     \C> / \ X e r o o .                                                   V -A -v

            \                     A         4»              _                                             ? .A \~           S&                               ~
   » ~ . < a .*.                 ■=*        ^       r           \          v                       \             U          u ^                  ^                             .
  3              ■* ■•           -              “   *       •    4 -           ^             -      V                  5:                            ,.      1     .       „ ..& .



    ^                    *       »          >           r                  v t           5          i         ■.        r   * .                                   • * -
   >—
    - v A V'R                                                              ^                                   ,                            V                      ^
                                                                                                        •~                                  A                              ’
            ii                                                      .      .            v»-w            °^-    v “° '"'^V                       *\-^                   V
      <«,                    \« \                                                  /                           Vr                       .                                      *v

        SX
      C>^         e^a
                             r
                                 S‘
                                               ^
                                                        ^
                                                            r          t
                                                                           I
                                                                                   i         i
                                                                                                          \\
                                                                                                              Sty.                          r ^ u
                                                                                                                                                W<*5

    ^              ~         s»                &*                   S> - :                                                      \    -v-
        *                                                       * .x —
      ^ £''*-~*v-                               tvu                      f
                                                                                                   -v„ —
                                                                                                       «»« <- V>wW. ^            » \ a
          A \ -i X ^-s                              —                                                   «v v                    \                        t             \\ \

          Y »T"                                                  -                                                              ^                            T             r


                                 .                      \        i l                              1            i            v                                      1               *>“**
                         ii-                   v VV.w.                 —           ,    « sr       »«-«-*»'>            ^                   *     * -rr° * 1                        ~*'


        ST               J b l !»                       •-                                                    W *-,
          A           S \ ~ W                  ,    4~i                -           ^ cs\5>iVo\            4tisO*4                                                '^>«*-^^«*V
r
-V-
                * a         *T
                                 l       jl
                                                               ^
                                                                       fc-
                 s ~4 ~.-.~ u                       ^              ^            ^       ;\ tr ='u‘“
t                                                       ?oA-.^w                             ^

       r*                                    «^LA\u~ *. A'A <.“^=>
r       ^ \                 -3           a      ^ *a ~ ^                                -       jl   vT
U      -         r3* -                              ^jg^,                   w £JMk.
VL \        _         'w * _ ~           * -* * "          ^

                  %   ~ ~    Aio         ^ - A ~ s       •>-       ‘- r \    ^              ^4   ^

-V.             Sr.\~ & v *•«•                 -^        ^                              *
i u u a jfc ^ ~ -
                                     ^       - S ^ A : -                    ^       £   oAvt .




                                                                            £& $& y
                                              Middlesex


                                               17/ 4 / 8 9

Dear Sir,
I am writing to express my outrage and disgust at the interview I
have just witnessed regarding the tragic events at Hillsborough
on Saturday 15/4/89.
The interview I refer to was that given by Jacques Georges,
President of UEFA. The opinions he expressed —       calling the
Liverpool fans "beasts" —     were at best insensitive and, at
worst, appallingly evil. How can a man in his responsible
position justify this dreadful outburst, when he is obviously
unaware of the facts behind the event? Even if he were right—
which of course all available information shows the contrary —
he should be officially rebuked for such premature judgements and
outrageous statements.
I therfore call on the Football Association to issue a formal
complaint to Mr. Georges on this matter with the demand for an
official apology to the people of Liverpool. If this is refused
the only course of action would surely be for the Football Assoc,
to withdraw from UEFA immediately, and leave European football to
the shame that Mr. Georges has brought upon it.

Yours sincerely
                                                          Lu>u|xic£




    £ W r       J3JUT

                                    VjSU*0                        WOL<^AA^

V ,          ^^^<yccu^         Y iCX^ lX*-^ ^    VtVOl         \x>cte^*A

v^sx         C^ > VJ^    viferAiUfc     o^ar     v)&a*J \ci^ \*> ^Su.

t\lJ^JJD^.

       Nic        ct^cjl,                                        vxv^ajNvixxi^

V    jdooC    fcxSW      v^\K,                     or     CXXXJ^ V'VSJ^CC*

              T A       C^UOttv O - * ^ NJN^wSijtr^              0^\X.\^j^.

                                       v ^ J ^ C V j D ^ W N s X \*>   WJLMl

                         ayL   <\*J^ \ x ^ ) f ^ \ftcu^           VJO^k X .

        \^^L {Vf                                      \ift_ \x\)M^jiv4^v^u
Vxjo\ vW                         £9*AHASL       N j^ a S t r   H f^    0l^ c
 vb Or                 \^k\.     ookA       V^ojr Oo^t>OjalSjubA. ^boJ^A
<X                                    vK.            X x u e ^ k i^ .

                                  ^®JN^. ^ J L           O ^ ^ t & t J A . CMrtXVJN^K^

OJtsk ^k(X»N^                   (Mr^N^»vUk!C&                 ^1L

     N^vsu                          <\      JUxJfcOcr^iit^ . 'I.cna . O ^ * .

     U)Ji*\\L        RVi^l                  t'VO©** \lb V\ouK^ktQ&flT

                     cxc^yuxv^ C * - ^ o ^ k      vkv   '^a,Vsjo*j^o<& £ < L \

                     ootQ- <\ovo>             © ^ ovjjr ^ e c ^ U . \ v a ^ c ^

XsixX        'WojajWl      c)^ '^ p xX'      ^'^WoiusArs&j^ CMsX

 \OV. V x ' t M \ j S L ^ ^ d S l x^ L- "       ,V>^ju^ £JU\U^s\ u^v,

         VJNUOV\^JUNW-- OorsX               jaSjiA^vj^LA^            V^r,

              OTOVXAJ^ \fcX\i>                   t«5I*j&5uc/v\ v^vx^k

\y\ ^ s VA     DsX^o^ay',         Ct>&      Xtr&,       c^\)Q_   vji\jucNNftxo<i V ^ “

              QoN^             N ^ a 5«-                   t^uxj^C \>*. W c x m a ^

        g^ > c _ oasl . w > e .     vjrfecvvaxo

                          ^* •K • '^JtSW j^XASA ^ c . ^ e > jk i               VouO

 ■ ^ O O ^ X u/\                            JL^mAc^Iss. t * w X               ^Jt>
 N^ia,                                <wv^     vfc&xC^rs.   <^Utaj^ to &

”^ J L         c ^ ^S)fc, \>\J^L- ^ O U ^ W S \j^£> U>e^t <^>*^*^0.

V>OOs., ^       CftoNMS^ Ou^C         vr^EZ* 'l^ jA                OJM^r

Vj^oocL v& V &        \cvjojo-o \ $ K        V>s\x Oo^\ K ^ roJT

Qu^ocxclxt^ OJN^^Lsl ^^Ju&i. <^C                                   C^lMjrvk
\* m£ NjOtM&jk ^x<ic Ji0a^                            OJtsX ^0v5CVs)C
VJU&Vox*.                      CO'dSw&u^ >fe>^vjf>XxjN^ \XA
 \^ \o ^ V&j^ mvjX V ki^C ©oSxxAxia^ v^syrv ^ a -V saX
         V\J^j^ \   CTO^C C ^ CTvaX           I                       I
                                                                    I
                                     '■' * t. tm      WEST SUSSEX
                                                     PHONE-

                                2   0. APR g?



                                                          18th April 1989

Sir,
          v. Georges renarks may have been ill timed but- there is no doubt
th?t he is right in calling football supporters animals.        We have to
^ t l i c a l l ^ l a n their *>utes so that they 'ont cone face toface and fltf*.
then we have to put them in wire cages to keep them apart.        Surely
is the way to treat beasts.
          As a teenager, -ver 60 years ago I used to support football -
we aot in f-ee by crawling through a hole in the fence or climbing over;
people got hurt on the cmosh barriers but in ny experience no one was ever
killed.       The fact is we never resorted to violence.    Today s young ? -
are brought up with violence, they s e e ^ ^ ^ J ^ / t ^ t h a t V b r e e d
day they read about it eveiy day.   Its not to De von.,area
^-iiaals.
            Professional football ought to be cancelled
                                                          its r,o longer a sport



            Yours
                                                                Salisbury Wilts.

                     17th April 1989

                                           -'-r, 1 /ii: "
                                                   :-' v *- ^
To the C&ief Executive
The Football Association.                  •"> Q    APR ^



Dear Sir
I am disgusted with the attitude of the football association.
The whole of the body should resign at once.
Have you or the body no thought for anyone else?.
What contribution are you making to the fund for the victims of this disaster— .-?
Why did you not cancel all matches for this week?.
TThy did you not order all fences to be removed?.
You must be among the most un-feeling of people.
"^ou bury your heads in the sand with the attitude that this does not concern us.
It does concern you you made the choice of grounds.
I look forward to hearing of the resignation of all of you including yourself
your attitude on Saturday leaves a very nasty taste in one,s mouth.
I have bean boxed up with football for many many year^I have always been against the
fence,s erected at the football grounds.
Come on money is not the be all and end all of all things cannott you all turn
your thoughts to the supporters of football who after all pa^jior the privilage
of being treated like animals.
For a small minor'ity    the rest of the supporters have been made to suffer without
any of you raising a hand in protest.
 I am sure that this letter w ill be just torn up because this is the way you are

unfeelVnfc- and no thoughts for other people.
           I OAA GwlVru^ed ^ (juvk tu-ccf"                                                            i>
 6 ^ v V i ^ A v _ p        "Kj       l   F 4 .                          b r r ^        oXiicxd


Mr    v)                                      k             xzj^
                                                          usw  uji (l*A
\9 r ^ J J ^    'iju S c L v S r iCLv-e                                  l>o^o-re4




         i^W       f U j C W t l £ K L - £ j ^ ) h qs ^q Jo Isl                     Ka^wJ^U

tuM ^^teY ^A X u                                                  b & V td .

           P^iVcL^d           t-^v                            U£aJ^J     Q X ^ \Q   jlX S l   (\      K-iL

<taj0uKv       cy^X     C^JOVt            f v \ £ ^ x l | l^t(XXC»"€       (    |>£/UL-lpri

         d o     ujd   V"   U M L -               L   v      I w j     (.v^ I ^ A ' W   clI


                                                      vAt^j          j^r'TUOv^j      't s v v ^ S l


               V^                         c^r u_-Oj            |^/      g w      |elUw
C ^^A A D u~                      ,



               I Um^jUsv^j t/^Gw —                              Co^JJ l (                          \V
 cTy - i w L      U w y e k i r u X v             ^       U / ^ r G 4 ^ x i "       pV"       t U L




                     L y^s
           y%s.



                r    V     \CeSfc-.,        ,

            \-\l*_Ovj~^^-^            -z,e..o +...       e » « -« V      Vix.eA^-^-



        y           ^     -- >t       ------1.                Vsr«*-o<s^-*-'

                                                                                          ^        <3^-—

                     _.    r^_                                 ^         WsfJc

    ________ * - y ^                                      2re-«-C^«-                  <3-— ^       V*?\.




g      a                                v^ *         V     “ ~ V              ^          ^
OJ          .                    —        -‘° - A ~ - “ ' - ^                < \      v~ “ "            V



                     o S zS l-    ^                                   >**,

                            ^c**X                              -X            H \Ji^      v -<lc*V*- v   *_


    \ U c           ' X                      —       >=      <4—                               ^
                 V_'*^>*-'-^.                   \#-n*-e^y-c^     6a.j»c.i-               .       v—^|><a, f

   '-A^y-W                                                            t

   ^             •>                       V^^fc*- ® ^ >'“                  <->w C*S)Lk            cx>«~t-

   \^o->sX            OtX.          V ^ . y «zv^>~-^-A-S-                 -^js/

                         C ^                                                   c * \j

                                                    CUs

  \^.^SL.v «_<_         .—                                     «_>^       ^o.            V'wc^a-c^ Q     jl-\j«
                                                                                                              »

  v-A^rs          v^-o              t <^_ \_C^~~ f                                           Vtx^.

  \^r^->-'^fi-AA~-           '-*—       '^C_»_                        \^-XL_m _cj£ _ .

         ^X.           o«*          -s^ » X r      \kx>-      Vve^a^C             c^UoSj eJ ^N c ^w .

\ X      ^        > \0 c r          \fco L                                        <->s       «v>.is3c   vV3^t_

 \<,aA*^a..                                  ^ ^ e-*^_SL«_^     \f^lj>_^A_          \^-6-«\^-Q_ft_

             ^                                       —     \Lo-           *s* - e ~ £ £ - c . A

                                                                              -w j j s S     x




^ =iv^ L^L       ^Ss51^ -           ^>»*-c&£&Qj^               wSL-*Az1             \V"~« . ^
  v ^£ 3 —               O^t        \fcLu                                                                 ^ e jS L t

     Q »n ■.-*•>    c^   > V jcX»——             ^ ^ O eO^Z Si_>-e«^3-                *■>—            ***^        .

  ~\\ . v                                \^X*-XX_                                                 oc— 3.

                           Qj-ej£j>-w                                  — -\^         \^e_*\^JLo_

                   V^t^AJL.         -N^Jt                                                        -^w           a—

     v,     $C«V           o —       ^      ,   o^*»              **                        ^

 ^        3 ^ w i> - X .       c^C                                     9 c ^ V        ) ^ k _ c fcx V ^ * * * - v /

 NK-»-                                                                   <=*-— X             V ?*^»go
                                O        .■>          V   t   «        e>    K Vg-          \>nc>wXl>^ft.

                               Vj^»                                                                          ^
 Xy^jyjjC-          e^jt^             VfJLA^-                                    yA'<u_              e^ A > j

cx_       \r<-<^,2Jk^-                                                 Vie                      V-^j>SLr'V

C\^p^_-            e*Ay-S^                             \ ^        a-    c^€^.vj-^t-

Vu>.                                                                             .

          -\^C           0*»     VO-           V^tSWV-S-               -\~»X €_A_           "^x


                                                                                            A

                                           ^       ^              \fcx       c   -    ^     1    a    t     €^

                                            O     ^           <^-^~          1(\M ^ v e j L & <C ^ e i ^ L t u ^

                                                                   c^-0^>-»Q-             <— ov^fc^_        w ^ __
 V-CV                             'vs-fe'. " x ^ * -                                   A.
                               *           %                                  \




                                         ^x>C v                    -C                       ^S Ls^

\       ^    ^       tj   )r< ^      W ~   J - -           V r-V * 3 k f t A . e ^ A c ^      v^ -




\
    ‘
            vl>.          --«-
                                                               W   _
                                                                                                 ^
            ' ^ (>>w>^>OS.voL~             o\^         o-          OeS-wA

            C^-*—

<2 .        9 e —     ~ -*          =—             ~       ^           -*=       *“



                                                                                                     '■\    '~ r

                                      \ < ^ < jS l A j ^                Q_>-*~        •& *■ e-*^I^ ■o-c^- ^£>

            Ol,     S»^V c*-»-

            ox-JS X                -e~-X               a       .        y a ~ ~ y


3,.          9 —           —                                   ^             U \ v ^ * * —                 Ja.



             \jb          Vwa*-V                                       «*^       \
               » oSLx.*X <vst*fe~. " \ V t                          ^ c » (\ ~               \jc t

       «*— V^ JSu-rJu                              '^«A><-             -*^-«^- CdO.     a-g      * T^- t \    \
                     c X .d -^ 'fe ,     »v . - \ \ ~         *         V—       \
                                                        ■*•-*•"-»       ve           Wne»i»o         V—*-«_


                                                              ^                         vs^ - \
  V j x ^«_          •— ~-'-                             wCJX«^«3r^                      ^
                            t




 OfiL^r-*-'.


 V -    Vv—5 ®       < ^ -€ -          Vo®      A j-^ _        ocA '



                                         ^          c^      O r.Q. veV.
           —    A-   .
^ »    ^8>-\ovaA



               «^-       ^^""""V^—'""^'        V ji»

                                 \^PA^Q.>g.C                  -Q>^_          -&>,.
    o3c          \fcoL,                 X


,\^          ^ 0              ^ K i-v »j—               Ctv^-O v

                                            V-cJLje3i c A                                2 l >-«-

            cn   ^S^A a                 V»®        Vt^C'N^,            V*   W    ■j . -*■

            ^ - s*rC-®*^“         \^'sS_>«-*-                                                V'^eoo\\m.

             €-c *-c5l ».                                     ^l*"*                   ■
                                                                                      »>»■*>. ■ JSLJL^


                                                                                         V


^       Q          _      >        «         _                         v^«_s^o^.

                       \^v_&^-'>«-'“~->».                                        V-»--T>           _JL_

        £>_        C^-^0>—          — ^-          c^-*—------------ ^V_         Sf-^**^s.cA_^- ^

              _ v         \k„           V c ^ U C«_         cP»        V^-&jc^

                                                              \k^Cr^V-fe.    CStJ«--^>Vck-X_ .


(_p .                         v >*-^o   X-»-0 >   -^ v -a         ^ Q>-r        ,3^          CK_




        y A . ^ i x v v < w                 ^                      ^                               <=-/

        v A v t A ,              VJ8_\^*CA                              ^ s ^?o^%»vQi>Va=

                       \Vl*AM                                      V-*vOs   ,

                                                             v ^ L a a a . t \t*.        V~* ^        x

    \fcvj.       V Cxxx^j-ft-                c«-_ a .       \^_              c_jQ_/          £3u«-^_
     Q > Hm - ff*              ^                                                         e^C

     £>_      \j-< A » > » w            —                                                                 Vfej-

                                   V *»         o - >-'-~     y ^ o 5 C ^ « > * fc A .   C ^ O ^ » < t.     **'

    v>^               Vfcs>        vi                             \^jt       c»^Xo t ^ X - »•*«■             ^

     \   l   Sw       Xa ,     \ V a^                                  , ^o-/              ^              , ^~>-




                                            >    \ t ^ -          , «—         ^

 w r^vSLSL             \fcoL.       A ^ <S -A A*                       Nfc****-*-                     q SLSL**J>^


 ^       jSjb^    A   jl.     Q><_~         «&>&*-                Vjo

                              O—                 WftXv-<

^              NJ^                                             ^

^ V \fc^ K_ec^*y-^-                                                       c              SltG*




\h^>              Q>aVt«^-' *


                            V>^>.               vC      <     ^    0     ^    ^          cxic        %-^^-N-r

                                                                                                          eMj




>^\                                     Vs=v*-^             ^.vvAejc          \®\s'V*.'
                                                       ■ A                         /6 -     •&

                         or
                                ;



^                               U ^ v                  *^.{          ( ^ b j                        ^


 fl° ~      (                    L-±            0^*(        jcut>t                                   CJ2\_


                       ^            C0^«.                       ^Vv      1A          W_2ux-o',
                                                                                             -i-
                                                    V
*°     T ^*~       J L c ^ ,\        -3 K o^ j              ^         K vS.                   ^


     ^•U/          <^c4             Iv^jt-Ouy £V-^                    /q U s,^«.^( Jp ck/w —         ^

     "OCs-X <*ru2^» ,           ^/XfoJ             lo^rr^JU^S            t^JLC C (          '^-t

                            £We^               ,'slSc^Z-j       js>-4                ""

     ^-*— £-*v £            n'KCsn.e^’             k         K#hK                         ~t£**JL   ^ tfc -M

     ^ ‘V e ^              C cH .’^        i       f^ -C iC ^ A ’ ?            ^      <V      ^

      Vw<^             ^               *            O^-UZ^                                               ^ (
3                        As u ^ u   h A          kc~~.

                   L u ^ J          ^        ^ ju J l                   ^VfiV/rt




     k     -Uu



                                             (*Uv»       u        ^      ^ < -




*                      , X t 4 ' te* “^'                   ^ JU~

lufi-o ^               h i^ J .         C i L c p * cx        o-. V u        XtW^


<c^k


                 ►_ex.c6o i£s.            ,oect$? •          H*       bJ^o

C **u            K-,                    b^Ja            doW<H           <7/     y ^ u ^ c j


    ^1^. ^        Mco          k f^ T *      ,

    y^V^3          t&.        1^-1 h      ~^            ^ K^~-ty^       jL<A[      CvJrv'N^/’*

N        1^3 ^    » 5)       K 6^-®               ~t ^ *               ^ ♦
                                                                                                         2)c*~ox> iL .
                                                          t.
                                                         /-'.   .




       ctx-

                             A o     Ou        j~ H A t I^O O O C O c « y o p c v = to -                 J /^ y C e s /j-

_y f.<yk g       'A*Of-*-Uf-ia r t       ^vy      *fc£fl. ^ t-O G f^ .C, j ; c ^                , / 0oc< 0 e c /-

4*U £-L q & o *-c»             -     *     -5~tx ^ x ^ j^ c /to -y

            j/       /flut.          'AjIjj-o Cw         C-^*«a f~ tt^ y              -j^o/^ Cv. ^yctu < ^ < 3
- u i u q yV»C**£CX_T, j/o <-^»<_'fcsja..RS' '^-^XS^-CLCjCms^ .'i , ,_r /' CKQ

 i^ L ^ c C C o ^ tP ^ O C t^ ^                 < ^ C C ^ o /        i-c -O           Q Q 4 .t./ s t ^ , ,

 v ^ / «-/-/<?a s            d L jztx * i ctJ-*~^      ^ o o C c ^ c i . -^ > to o             c^-»cD ^ -o * o
l/k-U,cX W>->C»^>                                      o£ilo/0/-<2e.0e_ci/ C^Oc/ . /~£*-CCo^C*<Jt^J /*_
l^JC-sO   A.-O Ort-X -€-/                                           ■f<.r / ^ r~aw»AA ^ O o                  ^Qyfc—

^o£                           £ /,& *                                     , O^JT* o/-fc**o^ ^                     W       f
CjoOL. a&~s\oLo. / - / «                  - ✓nc^o                             C-Co/ ia     >/lo
‘^ v f e y           C-Loaszs- J -o (^OGC CA^yoL                                                   / c ^ f^ U y       c^ _ y
(jo o L c^cu cte ,c/ Oo <ycoC                   Cc*_o C^a-S5

        C>sx      /no^Xuay                /7t<, /4^-L/ ^?<P?y                                                ^
o O u i^ - ly    JX<cloiA^CLOf f< ^ tO - K j                        /©        <^c^y
<^J2,                                    ^v7. ccys a c ^ o d ^LtAay                          /Ca ^L&_
                                  o Ca^.        t-^O^-e_*-i                    iAa^>4, '-£Xjt_ 4-C>'-~Cl) C ^cct
^/Co       C ^ u 6lo ' O-^t «J-7 c*^-                                     C-^JOc^yCAP .v/o ^0,0
a ua- c/a.ex.t-'S’ cw.c) yb/^uofi. /-d*^io y£y* o ^C / JLca,                                                          J

          A -
^E>'- Cv3        ^          Cfc<_>- OcJoC.                                       -4z£jt_    /L o ^ D s £)c<y.
i& U i c / ^ y         o f                                 y      *<j               o/
O C t'f-*-     ^<JZ-                  -X*o    i-C<w^«wwU            'fo r< .< L * j -A-o
                                          'J^L, v^ii                C ^ < w > c^.^a.
C^Lc^y

                     »^xy C ^D
                   ^/>AtXt^
                                                           7
             m-'rf y     aeu*^~* yx>i^<C C e.         J C ^ y <?ccc-> 4 o £
                                                                                     a
               ^       <^£*>00- V^c                            (U?QcnCily ' ^ O

                                                                 *£Xt£                   erC-C^y

             C. JTiw*3e



                                       jC * u v 4 ^ .^ .
                                                                                                                      Hertfordshire




                                     9       { \/t\A s     \ j^ X k * K A s - — ^     " f o "fcc.            ^ i y- ^         ^     C £ccM -


PC&WS             O M e L            9        H s < ^ J c           tk#'       F - A                         fto          fasud^             m



£ e ^ v s i t U ^ ( ^                    a > -                    & d & £ t i c -           Q        e           n        ^        j     .




To          U&ld. t(L&                                       Pvkj?J2 <&ta. iWu* 2o^ <r
 C ^ja^-ol'             U u^e; jj>m>€                        -h ?                                        ttCc,
 U    a v   ^       rv'X.                ^4. ^ ^ - ^ U        u m      ,                                              6 c n J x ?U ' - i '


 bV-        &..         j   j    ^       J    w    W         w a X I                                b * J $ i M ^


 S'         U x k                                             uSVc^.                n ^ j w ^ r ^ -                       u.'T.ntCxi
                                                                        O

  1\j 2 U /- C      <
                        i


                                                  4t)                                                                         ^ - c' x £ -


                                                                                                ~ - H        c   -k   l           /U^Joi-
iXUii' S .                  ^ ,u^j-- -be- -&LAi^
                                                                  ,'tA—/     § >' t ^ V K j X ^ U        p            < * > “
7W2,                    >            $



^ b ' k W j l ,             O A r ji,                  iveo-o        t & ? u * .               Au-*               k u i


 <r    5        ftuU-                                           ft         £ A ^ k         ^             S H ^

C 5 W ^ K h ^ ^                 |y)-f^,           UA ^ J                                        ,
                                    &Jr                           *Jr.                                                      ^^0
                               t d- \MXcA^ -tfca,                                      FA.             ttaa
    t'Vv        H   j l        ( ^ v ^ e j v^      h a j2     ^ J '                                t o i a ^ L           c L & c + 'z i t >


                               Ivjpu/^vU-                 A- £&<_£,.                        'Two.- ©w2i^                  j^e/X ev^
    P 1 W            .^u.                f v u ’u s UL.       £e-tvCJ^                 ttw--,      \ ^ J t j ^ - c k              <^>


                                   f<5t4^£o/\


                    (W              k          uxno ^                    liu ^
b jz -                                    ^ c m ^ u S L g ^ -^               ia   ^>     M o ^ t^ o _                                         -


f v v u u L                   c^    Fvia^X*               /   H v t ^ /           h^cfcco       k jx   L   v    qX   L      O'


 W? 'u -                      *tM>          S ^ dU                           te             tf^ L o e
         (K^                                        l^>       <^TVtA J i y        ^ O w )                                ^ A ' U L ""

^          j/       rwtn^^j                wvUj       {^2 - ^ v u - ^ L            < j ^r                            ( jJ i& 'Ifr & J r


(.]- - a                            cc       ( U ^ u ^ n c J Z               -to        ttccr^a                |K>Qr


4 ^ k o             <9^   u   2^£    ,                                                                          ^


                              3 ^uv\~ uCt&sL?j                                                                 isvJ&L ~U^l
p. A..                                     <?UrvlJ-                                             v^                       ^Ll —
} yjtfr                                  l2^ '                        $ g1 a       j ~l&->    >
MCB2360 GWY0032 PBA0009 FMCM P10 2475LANC                             16 APR 1989/1610


                                                  Liverpool



                                                   16 April 1989

TELEMESSAGE
TED CROKER SECRETARY,
FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION HQ,
LANCASTER GATE
LANCASTER


         DUE TO YOUR TICKET ALLOCATION WHICH WAS INSUFFICIENT
         TO THE LIVERPOOL SUPPORTERS WHICH YOU KNEW IN YOUR HEART
         WAS INADEQUATE, TO THE PEOPLE OF LIVERPOOL WHO WERE
         ATTENDING THAT MATCH,A LOT OF YOUNG MENS DEATH'S ARE
         ON YOUR HANDS AND THE COMMITTEES,AND I FEEL VERY SORRY
         FOR YOUR PEOPLE.




                           TO REPLY BY TELEMESSAGE SEE REVERSE SIDE
                                     British

                                     TELECOM
                                                V.     '•



                                                                                                    17& AprvA- M ° l

                            \x"

_____________\                            QXAC^^-SV^rvv-^ c>- Co-<pv^ g ^ ^ c x r\ o^V> cX-Q. U$WqA->

-Q^ > e c ^ e X ^                                                                                                                      _______

^oJ^-          Vk V   saC   ^   n    ^m o v 5T ^U\Va\jvSWa^)^—                          v~- V'^ar\>^>r\/> .                         __________________


            <fii^JL     q   A       d c   U.    sS^Ggvte^                  <^ ' r~ ik,SQ\>£L               . G>noa-             n

 r^ U Y x k X           ^ w ^ ^ <r> r b P X ^                c h ^u     \k ^   v   \5     '
                                                                                          v0Q-T<5-      V£ki

                                                            CM~l^-         OvTb         CK.   V-eS\AX^3

 W v A K ^ J b o ^ cy                     CC<AM''^s                 -


           M   g v o    Wr^c^              i^   X K         0c     oQ          ^.•e^TYro ^ V V ^             ojoJ     ^ -^t tnV.vo ^

    ?
    yr> y —                     >Cj ~\~                      ^Kq ,V^ojV                       ^r^OJVS ^ WvD                  ^ g ^^oaQv^V

          Q^ k Q S ^        V^QXV.^vAJB-X
                                                             ?

                                          .~^gkjls           .=SyrcgrviX l x-.'




                        o f          T    h e        ^ c r ts r fe ftu -       S v i^ ? o o r r B ^ : A g a f t c j p r n < » v /
        Editorial Team:           Adrian Goldberg                         P.O.Box 851,                    Any useful information:
                                  Sally Cooper                            Selly Oak,                      Steve -021-744 2310
                                  Sid Collins                             Birmingham,                     Adrian -021-459 8239
                                  Steve Beauchamp§                        B29 6PD.




  MONSTROUS ERECTIONS
    As vested interests squabble overthe desirability of English clubs           The good sense of that advice was amply proved again at this
returning to Europe, much has been made in recent weeks of the                season’s Notts County v. Preston match, where a generator
success (or otherwise) of cures for the ‘hooligan’ problem.                   overheated behind the main stand. Fearing fire, fans streamed
    Predictably, little concern has been expended on the slothful             quickly onto the fence-free pitch, and were immediately safe.
administrators whose inactivity in the past has caused the deaths of              Indeed, the only mystery is why the authorities’ advice about
more supporters than all the mobs, gangs, firms and crews put                 fences should be restricted to seats; for the dangers of entrapment
together.                                                                     are just as great for terrace fans.
   The 1971 Ibrox disaster, for instance, was the fourth serious                 In the 1984 League Cup semi between Walsall and Liverpool, for
incident in ten years on the stadium’s Stairway 13. Only the deaths           example, a safety barrier collapsed in the Liverpool end. As the
of 66 people could prod the authorities into action, leading to the           terrace was so packed, fans had only one way to fall - forward.
1975 Safety of Sports Grounds Act.                                            Fortunately, there were no fences, and they spilled harmlessly onto
   The effectiveness of that legislation can be measured by the 56            the playing area.
deaths at Valley Parade just ten years later; as at Ibrox, warnings              Without that safety valve, fans would have either been crushed -
about the state of the ground were ignored until it was too late.             or pushed into other areas of the crowd, leading to undue pressure
    Further regulations have followed, promoting the multitude of             on the remaining barriers. If, in turn, one of these had collapsed, a
metal detectors, hoolivans, video cameras, dogs, horses, escorts,             deadly domino effect could have been set in motion; just as
iron gates, pens, grilles, lock-ins and lock-outs that now characterise       happened at Ibrox.
that special matchday experience.                                                More recently, the debacle at the Q PR v West Ham Cup tie
    But the lessons of the past leave no room for complacency.                emphasised the value of unobstructed access from standing areas.
Common sense and the evidence of previous tragedies tells us that
at least one element of modem safety measures - the increasingly
prevalent fencing-off of crowds from pitches - actually puts                      Much of the problem lies in the authorities’ refusal to act on the
supporters at considerable risk.                                              evidence before them. The Popplewell Report of ’86 noted that
                                                                              when Liverpool followers charged Heysel's Block Z, "it resulted in the
                                                                              Italian supporters... who were seeking to escape towards the
                                                                              perimeter, being squashed and suffocated by the press of large
                                                                              numbers."
                                                                                  Many of these deaths may have been avoided had the perimeter
                                                                              fence not caused such a formidable obstacle - wire mesh over six
                                                                              feet high, which could only be opened from the pitch side, with abrick
                                                                              wall beyond that. Psychologically, as well as physically, fans were
                                                                              being warned off entering the playing area.
                                                                                  Small wonder that supporters panicked, and brought the wall
                                                                              down; yet Popplewell shied away from recommending the complete
                                                                              abolition of such fences.
                                                                                  Fortunately, most English and Scottish League grounds are
                                                                              sturdier than Heysel and many have been improved since 1985.
                                                                              One of the more logical recent innovations has been “penning"
                                                                              whereby relatively large areas of terracing are divided into smaller
                                                                              sections. This ensures that if a stanchion collapses or violence
                                                                              occurs, its effects are limited.
  Victoria Ground - We are not amused!
                                                                                  So far so good; but the actual practice of penning, especially at
                                                                              grounds with cages, only exacerbates the problems fans face.
                                                                                 Take the exam pie of Stoke City. Their allocationto standing away
   This dangerous practice could have been fatal once already this
                                                                              fans is an enclosure in two sections running half the length of the
season, at Grimsby’s Blundell Park. During the home side's Cup tie
against Halifax, afire warning was announced in the Osmond Stand              pitch. Each of these caged-in pens holds about 1,200 fans, but
                                                                              normally only one is open. Thus, when West Brom. took about 1,500
(part seats, part terrace). Supporters evacuated in an orderly way,
                                                                              terrace followers to the Victoria Ground this season, there was a
but squeezing them all through the gates in the 'safety’ fence took
                                                                              period of potentially dangerous overcrowding. Under fence-free
about eight minutes.
                                                                              conditions, Albion fans could have escaped onto the pitch; at Stoke
   Survivors of the Bradford fire commented that if there had been
fences in front of their burning stand, fatalities would have been even       they just got crushed until the second section was opened.
higher; so it’s hardly scaremongering to suggest that another
disaster could have occurred at Grimsby.
   Fortunately, on this occasion, the fire was not serious; but if a             Many clubs ape these tactics, utterly defeating the ’safety’ aspect
tragedy had taken place, ignorance would have been no defence. In             of penning which is meant to prevent a dangerous concentration of
the 'Green Guide’, which accompanied the 1975 Safety of Sports                fans in any one area. In these circumstances, fences make a bad
Grounds Act, it clearly states that the best place to evacuate                situation worse.
everyone is the pitch, so there should be no security fences in front            The nature of their construction also contributes to the danger.
of seats.                                                                     Stoke, like many other grounds, has fencing which obstructs the

                                                                          2
s fQame to such an extent that fans, straining to catch a glimpse of the                 level - Arsenal, West Ham, and virtually all of Scotland’s Premier
   action, can’t help but push the person in front of them.                              Division - are fence-free, yet the clubs concerned don’t find that
       Oxford United, realising the dangers inherent in allowing fans half               assaults on players or pitched battles are a weekly occurrence.
   a glimpse of the game have taken 'safety' fencing to its logical limit,
   obscuring all parts of the field for many customers for the full 90                                                          V
   minutes.
                                                                                           Indeed, many of the worst incidents of recent times at English
       A Portsmouth fan who'd bought four £10 tickets had the cheek to
                                                                                        grounds have taken place in spite of perimeter fencing; Millwall at
   think he and his family were entitled to a decent sight of the match
                                                                                        Luton, Birmingham v Leeds, Chelsea v Sunderland. Fences which
   - so he took Oxford to court. He was completely outwitted by the
   brilliant defence put forward by Oxford’s Managing Director, Bernard
   Dalton who explained, "If I did not sell seats which have a difficult
   view, 8,000 would have to be withdrawn.”
        In other words a rip-off is alright, so long as it’s a big rip-off. The
   argument found favour with the judge, who accepted that the
   Pompey fans' view had been substantially impaired, but awarded
   the case to Oxford on the grounds that fences were a necessary
   safety precaution. (An opinion obviously shared by the local author­
   ity, since they had insisted on these monstrous erections in the first
   place).

     OXFORD UWTEB FOOTBALL CLUB
                                                    But whose safety? When
     IMPORTANT NOTICE                            some idiot let off a CS gas
                                                canister at Easter Road this
   The safety fencing erected at this
   ground any pottofly obstruct the             season, were fleeing Celtic
   view of the spectators in certain            fans endangered by being
   areas. Oxford United Football Club           able to run on the pitch?
   pic accepts no BaMHty (or any                Would they have been safer
                                                panicking in a space confined
                                                                                          Chelsea    - Not in front of the children!
   obstruction to view, whether
   caused by safety fencing.Interve­            by fences?
   ning spectators, weather conditions              O f course not. Y etthe FA’s        are formidable barriers at tim es of panic and confusion, prove to be
   or otherwise, and warns specta­              choice of Villa Park (rather            little deterrent to the determ ined hooligan.
   tors that the side of tickets implies        th a n H ig h b u ry ) fo r la st            To be sure, pulling down the fences might lead to more pitch
   no warranty or condition that their          season’s Spurs v W atford               invasions, and even fighting - which is bad publicity for football. But
   view will be unobstructed.                   Cup semi-final was jusified             at least the aggro usually involves only those who want to be
                        B. DA LTO N             thus by Ted Croaker: “Villa             involved. The mania for fencing, on the other hand, is most
                             MMiffing Ouectoi   Park has exceptionally good             dangerous of all to those whom it is presum ably meant to protect; the
                                                facilities... Highbury has no           innocent, peaceful football fan.
  fencing.”                                                                                  Tear them down now, before another club has to echo the words
     But that should be no surprise; the FA's own family section for                    of Bradford's Stafford Heginbotham : “There are a number of things
  Wembley internationals is obscured by mesh.                                           we all wish had been done prior to this terrible tragedy."
     Taking their lead from the top, clubs such as Chelsea and Millwall
  are busily educating the next generation of arm chair supporters by                                                                              Adrian Goldberg.
  placing similar blights in front of their junior m em bers' areas.
     And for what? Certainly not supporters’ safety as we have seen.                    Much of the inform ation for this article has been gleaned from Simon
  Nor can it really be for crowd control. Many grounds at the highest                   Inglis' excellent book, 'The Football G rounds of Great Britain.'

    POSTERS • UP POMPEY AND SOUNESS • BAD (OTB 10 & 11 covers) are still available as 44cm by 30cm posters. Price - 75p for one or £ 1 .25 for both. (Including p ip
    sent in a tube).
    ‘FOUL - BEST OF FOOTBALL’S ALTERNATIVE PAPER’, available from OTB. £5.95 plus 50p p&p. We regret that copies of the 1988 CLOGGERS CALENDAR are now
    completely sold out.
    SU BSCRIPTIONS* £3.50 guarantees the next six issues of OFF THE BALL. Overseas IM O £4.25. Please state which issue you want your sub to start from. Issues 1-12
    are still on sale as follows:                                     -
    Issues 1 -3:30p each PLUS postage. Issues 4-12; 40p each PLUS postage. POSTAGE RATES: For a single magazine add 20p; 2 mags - 24p; 3 mags - 30p: 4 mags - 37p;
    5 mags - 43p; 6 mags - 55p; 7 mags - 62p; 8 mags - 85p; 9 mags - 85p; 10 mags - £ 1 ; 11 m ags-£ 1.05 ; 12 mags - £1.10 and 13 mags - £1.17 OR A SET OF ISSUES 1-12;
    PRICE £ 5 5 0 INCLUDING POSTAGE. Cheques and PO's made payable to OFF THE BALL.
    CONTRIBUTORS - THANKS TO: John Adams; Steve Beckett; Roger Berry; Ian Blacklidge; Craig Brewin: P Brockwell; Steve Cann; Tim Chase; Nigel Clark: Ian Colley;
    Andy Collins; J m Cooke; Steve Dixon; Phil Duggleby; Gerry Dunbar. John Ellis; Dave Hancock; David Helliwefl; Mark Hoath; Paul Lewis; G Markey; Amanda Miles; Brian
    McClair; Neville Moss: Archie Partridge; Larry Peace MBE; Andy Reston; Ken Scott; David Shand; George Shanks; Rogan Taylor; Dave Thomas; Rob Trent; Graeme White:
    Jane Whitde; Roger Wilson and Alan Winter.
    DISTRIBUTORS • As always thanks to all our distributors. OTB is on sale in ABERDEEN - One Up Records, Diamond St: BARNSTAPLE - Second Spin Records, Joy St;
    BIRMINGHAM • Nostalgia and Comics, Smallbrook Queensway; Rockers, Hurst St; Windridges, Selly Oak; Key Books, Digbeth; BRISTOL - Revolver Records; Full Marks
    Bookshop, Stokes Croft; CARDIFF - Spillers Records, The Hays; CHELTENHAM • Bad Lands Records, Regent Arcade; CHESTER - Penny Lane Records. Foregate St;
    DUNDEE - Groucho’s Records, Market Gate; EDINBURGH - Football Crazy, Spinal St; First Of May Bookshop, Candlemaker Row; Avalanche Records, West Nicholson St;
    Ripping Records, Southbridge; EXETER - Henderson’s Records, Centre Fore St; GLASGOW - Rat Records; Strathclyde Programme Shop, Renlield St; GREENOCK -
    Rhythmic Records, Hamilton Gate; HULL - Scarborough Sidney, Under City Hall: LIVERPOOL - Pink Moon, Acorn Gallery; Probe Records, Rainford Gardens; LONDON -
    Sportspages, Charing Cross Road; Rough Trade, Notting Hill; Freedom Bookshop, Whitechapel; Housemans Bookshop, Caledonian Road; MANCHESTER - Eastern Bloc,
    Ethel St; PicadiDy Records; NORWICH - Backs, Swan Lane; NOTTINGHAM - Seiectadisc, Market St; Nostalgia and Comics, Broadmarsh Centre; PERTH - Goldrush Records,
    KinnouO St; PLYMOUTH • Rivals Records, Royal Parade; READING - Listen Records, The Butts Centre; SHEFFIELD - Nostalgia and Comics. Furnival Gate: HMV; The
    Independent Bookshop, Surrey St; STOKE - Cactus Bookshop, Howard Place; WIGAN - Alans Records, Market St; YORK - Red Rhino, Eldon St. And also in the following
    dub shops -Bishops Stanford FC; Bournemouth FC; Croydon FC; Darlington FC; Maidstone FC; Wealdstone FC; West Bromwich Albion FC; Wrexham FC; Wycombe
    Wanderers FC.
    RECORD SHOP DISTRIBUTION BY THE CARTEL. TYPESET BY ROGER BERRY DESIGN, DIGBETH, BIRMINGHAM. 021-772-5954. PRINTED BY ABLE EXPRESS,
    PUBLISHING HOUSE, SALTWELLS ROAD, DUDLEY DY2 9PE.




                                                                                    3
fc        Mr£        <^.eAHfcVl

kl^jLX^            B c-^jC aJV -laO ,                                                                             t £2S\C&,


C to        ^-b

                                                                                             ^                Lb ^




                            VdG-XX^            |

                                         T ^ \          U > d b c ^ V o cvs> f- e g L O t- z VVQ-

Tw^gscJL^                                                                 t       'So^2^                  ^        ^A£L

 ^       W j- \S         \ V XO v^U -                    LW VAO A             k * 2 , U rv ^ L ^ o T      o J & a j) r       W SL

     \x u j u ?a 3 z >                   \su^e^A                c^>       £^<soA L l*o                        t o o a c ^ 1^

     Nx*-          <?*o M c x j ^        UojJQ.                                        IA*_>-     r\o.               U J O X 1.

 KO^LoOA              U A     o ^ f f j 2**<2a M — )                      iAa

           ' \V o q                      cxLXScu^d <2 ^L /VyyzJvOlS.                             C-^ o ^ > r c ^ J ^ k Q.-st- l/\£L

 V'A^^Y'O-Jt             t^iaaJr              laXoJt-          r^2a-lJU_^ V>a-£^LO-*OiS>>l

                       L rx_oA          b o     W ^ C X aO oX l      I A c j* -    V aj-€L


Q r^C\      Ov^r         S<^<-ei^V9 , U O ul /A ^r5lTY\30XX_ Ur9 S M y f ^ v ^ j -t-D V2 £

 CX         £ S ^ b -/W ^     ^O o T V vQ -        \^ O J r-    $xl£2AQ _^? L X -/U Q .          l/’W ?       LJlM ^ L a^    ^£L Q aX

                                 •                                   I    r^iUr              v\a^~        Sxt^*           W a

     ^        Y ^        N ^ o O S                                       *ACL ^cvvm:l^2— ^                                  V'VD-zv'l

                                 Sd~>^\ kKl^29--^2(2.                    V\cu_^ a ^C L SUsx^J& o J r                        ^ 2^

           ^ju^r^£s"tA               ^ a -s^ l j i/xK&s^ , f\o-— ^ OvXf'-^oA                     iso, WnxvK^k^V

                               ,. W       r                                       r^    2C‘ '“LA^ °

         [_pv2^r     . ^x^a Jr          < \j0 3 w              CK- fe-o^          t~U-«u=Afto c > p Pts\5TV2aJj_

          uvs         3 ^aA-              Oa-Q-                  ^       2* o ^ ^ n n             < w           <VJ^-vwi_a


           C e ^ W ^ o                                 r u °                      heM2^          !c,J ‘3«sal O U U                 6:0
     TKajx         to                           >Aao^V2J2.                                      uuU JL .           feoLX.
     W 2£-£-L^- cv^v C J \^ C           ^E yQ o^C \~ p ^ n A               ipsO   o /sj^   \ /*>i q i n .^ —

       csvOA.      K A o A c O.        gk   ^ nT       S ^ W H y                ^oCYKa              C^cx           fe^ax^LcCC

       & y \Q -     'c ^ Q J r                                 Wl-An        'pfe^r L a J s l ^ >               h o - ^ iC a - ^ a A .
                               ec*\Jt        W 2o J U U _4 '~G -±cpt~a<2Z)                    ItvDjO           V £€j2_X           tou-'

 X        ^    in Vmo-O UA <*-                                                                      ^        1^ lo a o ^
      S cy x J U z J L o C U       ^                           ^-O.        of-      Cte ^ \ 5            (jxjr! ■
              ~T|- ^ n             o        o O i - O ^ W S <2-^- ^ G U U S Z iS .                       O i- U J * - * -          .

                   v^o.          c-o*.
                                                                            L ^ L              ^

 - T ^ w W             < S c ^ > u ^               ^           <y^r

         v, v o ^ -                                                                           W * i 4              ^




                   ^                                               c        .      . ^                  A Jt        V\£_ IsAJVv^L


      c^e,          csoaaa^-                                           ^           UJo^             ^                      ^
     o 0 __v__v_e _Q_fc,                                   VZ-CUjO^          Ic2 ^          S o - m s ^ txlaj-i

      \       rj    Uulo^                                                                          L n ^ ° ' l2^ 2r^
                                  JUJ       V^o-               IfVL^ ^            S ^ u / W ^            U ^ u x        W 2J 2-
( V m ^ M          ^                                                               v S m ^                         t* = * n
                   .         ( M o J U ^ 2. <3^\T                                                                         •,
^U-OJLC^           to      '                    _                  l V . f\C-C X a ^ j^ tfO X                      U J W U ^

 f   M    ^    J       -          V M ^                    ^

U3        U A J L ^                t^^L. too. te>v^2A Mcu. *-V toJ-H

Vo        kojuf                    ^            no.                    .-^
                       k   * *     ^        i          w       w

                                 S u U ,           S o a ^                                              ■
«ox           < W ^               u^>


                                                           ( V w           v_pic A                      'V i\^i q a s          feinfix^c
M.<2_          £v C x c h c ^ r
                                                                                                            lo/vO-S
FcoTgAL^                    AsSoCioJUsTN

\ b>     G^rvO^Ol-OX' C-jpUrsCL
 ,L ^> ry a X jx S \    .
                                                                                           Afvu. lb
                            \                                                                    ’’fe-L
 0 0 2 .      3 >L-t— 3



  Qxacu_^r                      0 <\ (La/ c X c o -T
                                 V      (           '
                                        TX. cx_yy\                                    Mc^x_                v-^ x ^ L o V\£
 ~\irt?v^eo^-\              oot-        \VtXAju^S\aavuD^v^                      .


                       AAouu^Vzti- M cjlx_ <xoJt M ca-V .O x J --^ 2 ^ -^ o JM.ga_{ IaCusQ-

   (V q AvvojuL>ey-                    Vo         ro ^ >     -^ v ^ X                             O ^ jhelt ^ C u r-^ tu k r-

                       t A V y O o u 2 - A - > _ f c                " bo     \c?.Q-                         ^ ic w n

   pva-jO          S j u o -Y-^s X q q .A (

                                         IV- Lxx XJ ^                                                     AT\Q-MUi>vn

  ^        rM2J3p-DA^                U X ^ (       KJ<r V \ 0 ^ 2 ^ 2 ^ q A           o-^A       U U ^          L^r Vn0^2_Xu2_1

          <§xu2-V'>         cx- .^EL-oX              L*xua_^       L x X a r\                      f-e A a -^p o l y \ Io a ^

 r ^ rx                                           W r u ^          L X A nJt U o d o                        fco b a ^ L n

  tfc>       Y W \                           ex     ^cjtJY W U L ]h U U i€ U ^

              JL- Cjzl^ J c                  vW 2>-           Ur^i^2\a^X               U     u    f   W    ^     U   L    Q    -


                                                         UcuxiX     li2A2^- Aq_£L U u u ^ o cx A - cu.

       <^j%rV\QjaXA--                M xi~L£A a             Va A&-T\. L^2P                                Q l v '' «6AJ^yV£^fcr

                                        CXjQ-X                       . k2A jr~                   1V_Q^2A- o M             'fho^Q.
         U3       <X        Wai^A        £>y \ ^        .

                                                   P^>                                 W\cuO              \ m     ck   C ^ v^ oJ t

  X o ^C \     C ^          '^oiTXlcajju                c^a\       iViQ.                          -^aAiia>U£l/\ t o

             Sx2£. C5W* C\GA^Ka CVN Y\a Usz^GA C^Ga-lYA b-ur VMMr
                                     u > ^                     -
-L -   Y \ j ur<Xc„    Y \lJ r                 S o io L v M L o ^ o   LXXJjL         A   Qjo-sir           *“ i O   Cajud^ ^
W "     %Sarr\CL 1f « A / )                                   Mxl         O s £ U u < ^ Laj^2., C o a u ^

c^r\     1<2a_J\ hju o       -S-UA^GAjau-n            K\£L4- U tr      c Kj &lO<2aJ c            V m i^ L £ L ^ \ C U £O a^ s \

       ~T    5 sn n       CX^ry -BJc^A           to       CrL/Y" ^                               "^CnJ\\^JLL
                            bo       -e^sA        ^vJUL K V a                                e -Q A

X ^C                             , uc Uk> CovCt <^o aU -                                         to
       ^<X>TYviL- |

                                 ^ n A             CoUH           V W ?

             u u L o     Lo c l A-    A a -H    L u ^ £ >

                                  ( u ^ y ^                       CO             /           W     ^                C rv > r~


 O     VJ^Q-^Ua/A

                       -yuo_a         ©^12 , GUULoeWo <=^- A-tycaaXS

  CXyr^aA                 ^TVO.       MarK\a-rfc (
                                               i          i i,o    P^qA        1^ 0- o c i u J n a n
                    ^ W ^ X 2_       rv^c- u O a r ^

            oJU -      CJUUv*                                                            '
                                                   Daventry



 17 April    1989                                  Tel e:



Grahame Kelly
Chief Executive
Football Association
London



Mr Ke11y ,


A+ter the dreadful events at Hillsborough your only option is to resign
your position with the Football Association.

Watching the interviews you gave to the press and television only
highlighted the negative attitude you have shown to football over the
past years.   You cannot pass the buck this time!

Whilst you have sat in your ivory tower ignoring all advice and failing
to put your house in order the supporters of English football have been
betrayed by the likes of you and your committee.

Now you have the blood of the victims of Hillsborough on your hands
perhaps you will do us the courtesy of resigning.


                    ed supporter,
                      i
                                                                             freccju ^      b    /^ s 0)


                                        /^ 6               //y s ^ u L




+                   z   ?         £        X                 ?           ?          *
f               y                              /                     A / .          Y /iy /> y

    g 0 K                             v J y v ^ U

    0   .       ^




                                      A e ^ C          ^ -f      G -* '           < X ^f

                            J '                    ^   J    w    t   w

z           ^           —         5    -           >        =        ^        a         ^




    s^K                                        CLDa^                                        ~ '
                                               a
                                                                   •0 -—& C <2.


    COa ^ V                c^   o       /' y ^ e ^ - v ^ >

^ /k y 4 s ^ jl                                 ^ c * -C e * ~ 9


/ \      -    Z        A >          JU^tZs              S ^ s


Q       c ^       /* - &            ^



    ^              M            T         7            (T
                           M* q*ee~^=-‘?
    /* * *                      \ r        z       ^        %                     ^      y

                                    \a             i
                           ^             /.        T   i X ^                                 ,




        ^LfjA
                                         ( ^ j^ y u J ^ S X Z r ^       o$        <k J J L
                                            3
'p
/fc    * $ \J           y ^ ^ C Z k x b _ A A ^ -^




y(-z       s\e              <fj

/&■                 ^       p h          i^ -o ^ 3 Z     JtUo   ■**   /^y
j2 * & r   A    ^       ^    ,        /C oK    jl* S ~ ts \,




                          > r         <5a^ /l
                              19 / 4 / 9 4

                                                                 J


   ~               0 ' >                                                A

            ( ^ U H ^f>                                     ^
  (yisf& d A ,       ft     f? b-t^4s<& £-*^£< >                                        //e x ^ - d ^ '

 < ^~ escu< X ~           cu l> -& u K c u l -it                             o C u i^ ,



 U          ct 4 u S U ^            ^        c n ^ r                                           cu ^v-

Sk^b^>                                                ^z^22/ ^ ^   y    A7^ u^ i
td r -                                       k s L - y cL ^ 3 T /U   a u ^ r

(ZcA                 yrlr^CJL                ^                                                 ^
c y u A f^                                                 C c h t^              bx4>



S-uttvt. psdlV^« & '/?&'■&n~~<***
71^         $JL,   b ls&      (Y ~ 0 ^~ t& -C '                 'tc f                              t



c4* U E f f t                  &J-           a-^<i                           Ttuzk tterz,
iO .                  °^ -* y <*f~ tp -e & d l         *

       /,                               j'                              t_   A    s .    _ .

             J d/CXpt*-^^ u^So’T^QX^ CHI
                               <2-




a ^ U   - .                          'Z**-    f l f       ****

          ut L '   & * * * d     a~-d         <T      ¥
                                                      ’   °   ^
% ^ t d X          c£dsi>, 9

    L~J ? did l
              * t k^tL                  a ,               ^
                                                     R E A V E S
        T el :\

                                                       ‘                                               St. A lb an s,
                                                                                                           H erts.




                                                                             <?>i^



^       /^        <3h^ & * z Z ^ ,          ^ 4*0      0 6 *4 ^         /     <& m>/

                                                    < T)   ci/^>^                <^2                   ^        s*7& csyZ'
(7& > z£                   s,                       ^
                                                                <
                                                                3 ^+ 143/




                                   ^         /£ /£ t z ^ W           J a?                                    Z%

                                                                  < a ^a /

^ JZ j^                's & d H                     * * & £ sz& £ y                     J& b Q & e/         '&         A & U ^ tf >


    ^                  .                    >0                          v                       _                 .      _
                                                                                                                 # * /= &

    -6 s s - € ^                  Z*g>                              <p                           ^ -----

^& $ i2 ± 4 % c< r>t&                    . c>/                              z% v 2 i£      /6 ^ < y ^                 s& 7< w e

'^ J ^ C J ^ p /                /& 3 csU&    S& 2A S& Z&            A j^ & t£ 4 6 4 G ^ 4 > tA

                                       & 7 > u $ ek sy ie0 e? > j ^ 6                  z f£ z > te      ^ p ^ o              ^l

                                                 s^? ? ? e ^\       $          Jfr5>z*&ZiSv          ^& V < Z     2% & & 9 ic /
                                                       ^ .
                                      A e                                                                                 J




                                  .                                                                    2 *     /
                                  ^       z                                        '               '

                                        /6 & £ c* J                           ^4 & Z k£ 7 V p & i* J€ 0 ? » $ & ? ’ ■■■



                   C/y*>v                              /& e*ustsve^/ <z
 'z ^                                                  <Q    O /F S ^s? -                        stZ JiS M jZ       s? zJ 2 r

^             ^ z£ k ?        ^ z 2 ^ e                ^ ^ S ^ d t^ e a /              z$        -^ * 3 ^ 0 ?

                                                            /*       s jld -       ^                         < 3t /> 4 h M > x tf

                                                                       £ t* t&         / ^ ^ 7          sS ze ^ r 4

                       < a> t£         r^ zd Z te c A * / £           f       ^i& K Z cd k te          /o z c &      ic




                                                   ^nv           ~ Z ^e            ^ Z      J ^ ^ d t'             <P

                                                 tj?     ^ J 2 K + j& Z                                        /& £ p '

                         /2 ^ Z h £         ^& 2 ? -             “
                                                                 &&           /Q & U lA & te?

                  / A & & & ee/              ^           r< £ v e sy O & ^
/& & ?> l4.
              ^J ^* ^c /                      Z & *j        ^ Z & z jZ f Z & k &                   .

■&      k     -z S e    ■&       ^ e        /& 2 a p -& a/           ^                        a ^ i * f a c l ‘3 6 g &

J * '       ■&&          v ^ V                                                                                      ^     ^

/° ^ y c a '           ^ i,       & u p ’4 x z £             ^            / e ^ /ta A             O      ^Jjj,

                                                                 a        ^                                     j    s    ^

- jZ z tt?                                              < 2 ^0 ,                             ^           ^           &
                                                t l f i r J c t f E .j& 'n s-g

                                                    t<H i 9 7 Z i L.         /<?8 ^

          S-**" •
                      JJh W                      cLj       -?k> —
hi
S C&r             a^^-&^u< Y~^y          yl^>       tj &-u^-r-
(- Cryn^n^xytl-e^C.          Jov                                  eJ* —^ <-^ ^ f

b-e^t^art-c* <-       st^A     _^>              A z^ c .



'c l <_   t£

J U J             \^j firtcy                                              y^y~P>»\
<>n-e~


                                     Isj B lXO'S    ^
 ^iiiimiitiiinHniiiiiiinMi«tnmiiiiin<iiiiHmm#.niiiiriiiiiniiiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiMiiiriiiiiiiiiiiii'. IiIi111111111111111I                                                                                                                                      .........            num.
 S ■         Ob'.      '■art



 i SFARE a thought for Lord Longford, whose
 = home 'w as bungled th e o th er day. I rather
                                                                                                                                                                                                        BALANCING TRBC |
                                                                                                                                                                                                        TO saddle any kid with a name like Fill i*
 I syqp?<* j*> fa W ishing he had spent m ore tim e                                                                                                                                                     Tradbelle is something fo r which, on© day, I
 |   v isitin g th e K r»y tw in s in ja il a n d le ss w ith h is                                                                                                                                      Bob Geldof Will no doubt be given a free =
                                                             >H ospital.                      S T R A I G H T T A L K IN G F R O M T H E S T A R                                                                                                                               iter. 1      1
 _ For llonnie and
 S still have Iota of:                                                                                                                                                                                                                             If she is luelQr enough to =
 E th e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ive th at long.             =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   With ear muflb d am ped I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 over her head against th e =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 cold, G eldof has appar- =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ently taken to sittin g Flfi =
§ ™j*M not U v c been                                                                                                                                                                                                                            T rm belle on th e crossbar =
= NOgledfaitkeflnt^ae*.
= . After * ■, wmM not a                        TH6 stench of decay is wafting from under
= bandar have to be a ta a t                    the doors of the Football Association.
5 as cracked as I n B n Sr                          E xactly 24 h o urs after 94 football fans w ere
= even to thinkofr«bbinga                       cru elly cru sh ed to d eath , th e FA w ere busily
       1 o f the Kray twins?


I <4                                                I h e official version o f the h alf hour m eeting at the
                                                                                                                                over their Cup tragedy plan
                                                    k                             FA in London’s swank                       seyside, I have no doubt of      to be one o f th e best in
                                                                                                                             that. But not sorry enough       Britain. Yet still they pack                                        dab in
                                                                                  L ancaster G ate was that                                                                                                                  r as this
                                                                                  they w ere all going to                    to make them cancel the         the concrete terraces with
                                                                                                                             FA Cup.                                                                   y e w 'sp im Final is concer­
                                                                                 m eet again to decide                                                       Standing fans, herding                    ned, all bets are off. And
                                                                                 w hether to go ahead with                     It is a badge o f sham e      them into enclosures like                                                                 GELDOF. . . risky
                                                                                                                                                                                                       th a t if th e clubs don’t p u t
                                                                                 th e Final or not.                          that they will surely wear      caged anim als. T hat th e                their houses in order by
                                                                                    B ut th e truth was that                 for ever. They should have      fans put up w ith being                                                             o fh is drop-handlebar bike          =
                                                                                                                                                                                                       nex t season they will be                 and taking her for a spin            =
                                                                                                                             said: “ The hell with it. We    treated worse than cattle is

           HAVE TO DIE
                                                                                 th ey had already decided                                                                                             kicked o ut o f th e league.              on the streets o f London.           =;
                                                                                 th at th e sem i-final which                are not risking any more        a m ystery,in itself.                     No ifs o r buts.
                                                                                 saw all those innocent                      lives.”                            Many o f th e Liverpool                                                            Anyone fam iliar w ith             i
                                                                                 young lives w asted at                        For, make no mistake,         fans would have given                       There is no need for a                  the streets o f London and           §
                                                                                 Sheffield would be played                   th e re w ill b e o th e r      their lives for their Mam.                G overnm ent inquiry into                 the m urderous traffic will          = '■
                                                                                 again in two weeks tim e at                 tragedies while football is     And on Saturday after­                    w hat w ent w rong a t Shef­              know that a t th e very least        = ,
                                                                                 Old Trafford.                               played on what foreigners       noon som e o f them did.                  field on Saturday. A child                the child need* a crash              =
                                                                                                                             would regard as slum                                                      could give you th e answer.               helm et or, better still,
                                                                                                     Gallons                 grounds.                           Instead o f listening to
                                                                                                                                                             greedy football club chair­
                                                                                           A nd on Sunday after­               Ironically, S h effield's
                                                                                         n o o n , a s th e c h e rry                                        m en and self-opinionated                 children are no longer d a n g e r o i
                                                                                         blossom blew like pink               Hillsborough is reckoned       local big wheels, th e FA                 with us.               •TttxttttUe!
       ------------ ■amo             m f methods tre                                     snow in th e wind and rain                          sa
       bring applied to yemns hoodlums on Ha wanted                                      outside th eir windows, the
                                                                                         FA had done everything
                                                                      *farter*           except book th e ground!
                                                                                         How could they be so                STRUGGLING w ith a h eavy
                                                                                         callous? Sim ple.                                                                the check-in stewardess that she                                              to
       a g g r a a g g g B g g S S                                                        I t ’s ca lle d th e sm e ll o f   suitcase on th e p la tfo rm a t             wasn’t flying First Class. “ You are
                                   M n t picked off by the                               m oney.                             Gatwick A irport railw ay statio n,          now, madam,’’ she said. "That w m                        —              I w  th   a tis iti
                             In the* d& centres. For the                                   T hat all those young kids        an old lady w as d a d to accept th e        Richard Branson.”                                         pulling teeth.
                       im told to repw tto isolated areas for                            h a d b e e n w ip ed o u t         help of the tall, b earded m an in a           At th e D aily Star A «tah i|
                                                                                         because o f inadequacies            pullover.                                    luncheon he sat next to A School
           Haven’t « •                                                                   which should have been                 He nicked up the bag and carried it       caretaker who had given his Bfc
                                                                                         rem edied by th e Football          into the airport while the old lady          savings m that the children could
                                                                                         A ssociation years and              excitedly told him th a t she w as           have a new mini-bus.                                     the air lanes when he w asj
                                                                                         years ago obviously didn't          flying on Virgin A tlantic Airways to        „ He watched as the man received a                       April Fool Joke over the I
      the men o f violence are. And we have seen just                                    count spit as far as big            Amenca to visit her daughter.               Gold Star for kindness. Branson                              “ I nm an airline, I mai________
                      the Irish Rat Army isw h en Cued                                   business was concerned.               The man took h er b ag to th e F irst     passed him a business card. On it he                      were nowhere near the ah- buses. I
      with real            w « i are ready,
                           who       naan w illing more                                    O f course they were              Class Virgin check-in, told h er he          had written: “ The bearer o f thia                       would not dream o f putting
      than a bit able to blow them away.                                                 sorry for the youngsters            hoped she had a wonderful holiday,          card to be iriven a free holiday to any anybody’s life in danger” he said.
                                                                                         w ho died an a for their            smiled and walked away.                     of our destinations.”                                        And I don’t reckon he would—
                                                                                         shattered fam ilies on Mer-           Flustered, the lady explained to             The Virgin boss may be the best unless it happened to be his ow n!
................                                                                                                                                                       Him............................................ in......... .............. nimiii,..................... nimiiiiiii
 SOUTHEND UNITED                                                           DIVISION IV RUNNERS UP 1971/72
                                                                           DIVISION IV RUNNERS UP 1977/78
                                                                           DIVISION IV CHAMPIONS 1980/81
 FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED                                                      DIVISION IV PROMOTED 1986/87
                                                                                    Registered Office:
       ROOTS HALL FOOTBALL GROUND, VICTORIA AVENUE                         Roots Hall Avenue. Victoria Avenue.
                  SOUTHEND-ON-SEA SS2 6NQ                                           Southend-on-Sea
              Telephone: (0702) 340707 (Main Office)                         Registration No. 89767 England
                (0702) 332113 (Commercial Dept)                                   Fa* No. 0702 330164
                    0898 700 279 (Soccerline)




                                                                                                                 n         H




                                                                   cl a                                                    Ws ol        <A
                                                                                                                                             a3 * - L
                                                                                                 ^C5YV<t V                                               cJ^
                                          Uaa \                                 '                         "TT                  (\       ~ ft IA


                                                                                                                               .\S_AA        VACHA
'^-^xVualluy.
^      vocv^
                                                         cr^N/         ^VVAC_             cxV



 I    in          \       ^                                                         M                                                          1 0
                                  ^         ^              ^                                                                                   u h   W
 ^           ^                    ^             ^                                    ^                ;^nV.uH                                     va.^
                              CXvA                                                  A ^ L             41          1/                Q                I-




 V •                      M     \                                  ^                             ^               ^Vovv\
                                                                                                                 ^Vovvx          V              Vo
 » \Ai\*£L            C o Xa *L<^a     VA^>JCrV\
             cA   o u ^ cj <_         ^     '       —     —               o         v      '•’ ^ lC
                                                                                                  ryA
                                                                                                    ^                                    V
                                                                                                                                         o-
                                                                                                                                          c Iao


     J j          ^ tV        A       U)        U              J                    ^             ^v^tUoW                      u ^ o           u w l
                                                                                        Ss|WvE,oi6 j^Vi'e                      VtS^«v^L£L
     ' ftA   .                                      jl    \(              ^ O r V W \ UA^Jn                      _S    < * * \\ Wsl




                                                                                        V-V vAAVsL S>VA^vfi ^                  1\--      V/'
                                                                                                                       ^       W \c u a V \ ^ t n A V
                      THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                             L IM IT E D
                                              Founded 1863

                              Patron: Her Majesty The Queen
                            President: H.R.H. The Duke of Kent
                                  Chairman: F. A. Millichip

   Chief Executive:                                                              Phone: 01-4027151/2624542
R. H. G. Kelly fcis                                                                     Telex: 261110
                                                                                   Facsimile: 01-4020486


                       16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
 Our Ref:   RHGK/PFS/bc/495               Your Ref:

                                                                         24th April,      1989




  Southend United F.C. Ltd.,
  Roots Hall Football Ground,
  Victoria Avenue,
  Southend-on-Sea, SS2 6NQ.



  Dear

        Thank you for your message of condolence following the
  tragedy at Sheffield W e d n e s ^ y Football Club on Saturday, 15^
  April.

             Your support a n ^ c o m f o r t at this time are very nytf£h
  a p p r e ciated.

            Kind rega

                                        Yours sincerely,




                                          Chief Executive




                           Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W2 3LW
                           Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
       RHGK/PFS/bc/495

                                             24th April, 1989




Southend United F.C. Ltd.,
Roots Hall Football Ground,
Victoria Avenue,
Southend-on-Sea, SS2 6NQ.



Dear

      Thank you for your message of condolence following the
tragedy at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club on Saturday, 15th
April.

          Your support and comfort at this time are very much
ap p r e c i a t e d .

       Kind regards,

                          Yours sincerely,




                          Chief Executive
                                            A L L C O M M U N IC A T IO N S TO BE A D D R E S S E D TO TH E SE C R ETA R Y




                      111EST H flm UniTED FOOTBALL CO. LTD.
                                                                                                                             HONORARY               C O N ?L 'i_ T /^
            CH-V"VAN
                                                                                                                               '     B R I A N A. R C F E R
         L. C- C E A R N S
                                                                                                                                     M.A..B. M ..F .R .C .S .
           DtRECTORS
         W. F. C E A R N «
                                                                     REG ISTERED     OFFICES
           J.    F i ' i C n EY                                                                                                     M E D tC A L O F F iC n :
    KV \ V. C C A R N ?      A.C.I.E.                            BOLEYN G R O U N D                                                D R . G C R T - O N BR!1
                                                                                                                                      L . R . C . F . ,U. R. C . S .
C   J.                 I.’: . A, . NOT AR
                                                                 GREEN STREET
           SECRETARY                                             UPTON        PARK
            T.         FINN
                                                                 L O N D O N EI3 9AZ                                             ADV!N!£TR.'-7 , Z \ f
                                                                                                                             C O M M E R C I A L N' A’ . i G E F
            MANAGER                                   TELEPHONE                              F A C S IM IL E NO
                                                                                             Ol -4 7 1 2 9 9 7                        BRIAN         E L O ’v VvR
          JOHN        L YA LL                        01 -4 7 2 2740




Our Ref: TMF/LD



Mr. R.G.H. Kelly F.C.I.S.,
Chief Executive,
The Football Association Limited,
16, Lancaster Gate,
London,
w2 3LW.                                                                                       1.8th April, 1 9 8 9 .


Dear Graham,

I felt I must write on behalf of all at West Ham United to express our admiration
and thanks for the manner in which you represented Football during the tragic
events of last weekend.

No-one could have envied your situation particularly as you had been present
during the events that occured. A more emotional and distressing experience is
difficult to imagine.

If we can in any way be of assistance I trust you will contact us.

Yours sincerely,___________________
                                                             Dorset.

                                                       17th April, 1989




Graham Kelly, Esq.
The Chief Executive
Football Association
Lancaster Gate,




Dear Mr. Kelly,
                   In the aftermath of a tragedy there must always be those
who have to cope with the media in all its forms, and attempt to answer the
unanswerable questions;and I write to thank you and compliment you on the
incredible job you have done over the last 48 hours,and I sincerely hope
that there will be some let up for you in the incredible pressures which
you must have suffered over the last two days.

                   The Football Association could not have been represented
more caringly and with such feeling and consideration at this tragic time.

                           Yours sincerely,
                                                              Wirral,


                                                              18th April 1989.


Dear Mr Kelly,
                 I listened with interest to your reply to questions put to you on
Radio Merseysides phone 'in' today. Althou^i I did not agree with all your answers,
you answered the questions with feeling, compassion and honesty unlike interviews
I have heard by other members of the P.A. I know you gave the P.A's point of view
and not necessarily your own but I thank you for having the courage for requesting
to come on the radio and answer questions that were not going to be easy.




                                   Yours in Sport,
4

                                                                                   HULL


                                                                      19th April, 1989



Dear Sirs,


     A copy of this letter has been sent to the following

     Bert Millichip       F.A.     (Chairman)
     Graham Kelly         F.A.     (Chief Executive)
     Stuart Randall       M.P.     (Hull West)
     Douglas Hurd         M.P.     (Home Secretary)

     Also to the Sports Editors of the following, The B.B.C., B.B.C. Radio 2,
Radio Humberside, Viking Radio, The Times, The Telegraph, The Mirror, The Mail,
The Express, Today, The Star, The Sun, The Guardian.


     I have sent copies of the letter to the above in the hope that someone
will see com-non sense and I particularly refer to the Football Association.
The message of the letter is simple.     Please god let the Football Association
see sense over the Scotland V England match, Hampden park, May 27th.


     The facts are this    The English F.A. have refused all allocation of tickets
for this game, England have a large travelling support, these supporters want
the tickets.


     The annual fixture between the two countries have been affected by crowd
trouble at both venues, this has escalated over the past few years.    The main
cause has been a lack of segregation between opposing supporters.     A lack
of tickets will not stop people attending the match.     England supporters will
get tickets from somewhere.      The consequences of some of the scenario's do
not bear thinking about.


     I believe there are only three courses of action that could be taken.


1.   That F.A. take an allocationof a sensible number of tickets in order that
     any English Supporters that want tickets can obtain than from a Bona Fide
     sourse.
2.   A private enterprise takes the responsibility if the F.A. will not, taking
this responsibility would have to be done by a responsible body whose credentials
were known and respected.


3.   Cancel the match.


     As things stand at the moment Hanpden Park, May 27th is trouble waiting
to happen, nobody can predict on what scale.   Football   could not stand another
major incident, the game I love stands on the brink of ruins, please do not
let it be pushed over the edge by the short sighted people who administer the
game, just for once listen to the supporters, the people who attend the games,
no matter from where or how they obtain their tickets.


Yours faithfully




P.S. I would prefer my name not to be published in any publication of this letter,
however if you wish to check my credentials please telephone


Many Thanks.
                              a r t




 )^'JU ~r-> s-   C f^ r     e t '/£ s t b ed * - 'jfy


                                              <u<

                            JZ ^W '                     C M Jr

j/J ^                                                        Jc        ^               ^       ^



                                                                              C-
                                                                               -"S     U^r   if <•- L ~>c
n,                           , ' , - j - -

^                J ,                                                       U ~    r-


4           ^          ‘   p ~ t-i u /                  ^                  •*x ~ * A / ~ ~ ;


                                                        I-        t ' .{ 'J      « /---»■< / ^"*
                 y
                                                                   £ ^Tn/m jfc-*-^«'-r / r
^                                 -'*"'            v ‘

^                                                                 J/
                           C U l-         ^ cU t                                 A         ^ “7
/* ',A i       .




           t
           (y+<s*+
      . Q,            ;q                                             ,

                 ,                             1*' ^
D-C«<- Ky». f?*.f iLjaJL+Jp^
                                          ^ S « - U   * u   - ^ .n

>T»«‘ty r»-o-Q^ <a_>t ^ Ct.i.ij^ ra -^c JdtZ r
                   /A— ca_ [■ . '—ipi ^«7 —
  Ovc*V -t^-CL^Xfc- ^ fu X - U S l^         <-VJL^.

  I—             «___               g ° -t~ I .^_
akje-B-o&cj                      slsxsJ     e n j ^ fc^Ln.




 Si    ‘^~c*$[               t-J-*£— '^-*-al ^-OCu£^*_
 e^kiL su a jt^o y^          mJtzr <>--.--g~ L ^* ^~



A}» ph-S^-^ o eQ e— J             -tMsi. ^ J*.a.X ■                  '**'■*—*-
      fcf-5r t)o / ■& *£**- Lr*-du-hz.jtC^=,
c l j t ^ U X L ^ ) . o-J
  Co H-j.              ^         3 -Ott- •
   < *^ >    -fc v £ ^ v » ^ ~   y e?m^ ,     ^ ^ ± d y ^ J ~ L p
?                                                                     :     -   -

1           \                                            (x L ts u y * -J       ?A7f^f




                       ee_ (td lfm & L ? » /

                                                                          .ieveno'ks, Kent.



                                                              9th. May. 198S.



                De*r
                               £fA    Ooacl^ t'*’■J ^jfy
                              Thank you for your letter of 28th. April, 128%,
                regcrding the policy of allowing ticketless fans into notches.

                               I have looked at my records and have found the
                follJWing matches where Police did not allow ticketless supporters
                into the relevant ground.

                5-3-88.         Queens Park Rangers v. Liverpool.               - Metropolitan lolice.
                1-10-88.        Brighten v. Leeds.                              - Sussex Constabulary.
                10-12-88.       Tottenham v. Killwall.                          - Metropolitan Folice.
                4-2-89.         liueens Park Rangers v. Millwall.               — Ketropolitan Folice.

                1—4— 89.        Tottenham v. WestHam                            — Ketropoitan Folice.

                In addition to these matches I have attended many ^ m e s at KillvEll
                especially where they have been ’all ticket’ and on no occasion have
                visitors or home supporters been allowed in without a ticket.

                Although I cannot recall the date^but it would have been 1£86 or 15B7y
                I was at Erimsby v. Leeds and 200 were refused entry.

                             It has to be remembered that not many matches ? re
                designated ’all ticket’ and therefore we are considering very few in
                comparison.
                              Of all the Clubs tk t I attend I regard Millv-T.ll as the
                most proficient in staging 'all ticket’.     The Police corden off
                 the ground at either end of Coldblow lane and only ticket holders -re
                 allowed forward to the turnstiles.   This can be expensive in manpower
                 but once an established practiced the numbers can be reduced as the fans
                 have got the message.     I am a great believer in early cordens wherever
        >       the geography permits.
        i

                              You will see that the Iletropolitan r olice have been
        ?       the most consistant at the matches I have attended, but they do have
        I       strong reserves in Central loncon and the Senior Officer at the Ground
                is not as vunerable as his colleagues in parts of the provincies.

                              Generally speaking the Senior Officer prefers to have
                the ticketless fans where he can supjervise and segregate then. Ee
                wishes -to avoid splitting his manpower to police the town centre when
                frustrated visitors lay seige. Ie will have to police the area when
                they have left and face the angry outbursts of local traders and others
    l i         who have been injured or their property damaged. Hir vievr then is often
    I ^         parochial .
    i I
    i   f                    Finally, it could be argued that greater hooliganism and
                more arrests night have occurred if fans were kept out, certainly
for perhaps v. season or two until they «lso c°t "^e mess'.£-e. With the
Footb'll Supporters Bill in the of fine much could hr.ve been na.de of
the eztra offences and arrests.

       This is r. real dilemma for Iolice,the ctfjoxity of t*or. would, I
an Bure, be only too please^to deny ticketless fans entry, if they felt
they had the hacking of extra resources and local people if serious
incidents occurred.



                                     Yours sincerely.
                                                                                    rgxccsf£fi




                                       n ^ y i s T                      i




                   0-€^X>.^ ^ / T K S L e U l S r t ■
X         3 ucJL/vvJb bWnJb- <VU^                  c^-cHS’®- cn-Ur \-o ‘&X\ b W .
^ j 4 v o JUcr^^T trs^v^>^~ VjLaj^ S 3-t" VL>J^/S^o y -5>-«-*j^j-X-~ "X           \.-^-»orvX^
^                                 ■ o^" ^A-A   2 . \ e? o -Mo&J>X          L t->
2L   l^jJr^KaJrS           SXXjt^scjL. J o             'V ^ c^ a jt^ jlc ^ V "      ^ ~ e-       cX<^SUsi *

            U-^vOdtr 3L c o u ^ v^aJL- fc*>~cA C ^ o                            r\^a£- U-rveU/T'sArOvy/xi                                        ^(_
jb^jus                ^CLe.     d^eyfN«_ V t-rT'           WJXcAxr^c^^U                       e ^ v         o ^ t       Jtr V = > ^ c\ ^ r < L .
             Vcrr 'r^-vvc^r\Xrtj--e^c^. o4- -V^e P-VeXX\e.                                                                \r^£xJh i ^ p ^ o o )
      Jl_0| G15 t^7 (t^nC- [v/t£)uOvc-^c^iJL-c.^' \^rT\JvAr€-eJ \f-ero-t^*=a^AA                                                 o—       ixsStr
              L aS ^ ^ S                 r \s a J ?          f l, ^ H v t v a U -   >5   5^    j 2- r ^ c - « -   ^ c rT ' (r ^ a v ^   % 'S .

{^y      2 ^ / ^ 2. c X c ^ o 5                        V^r^v-vUjH^r          t^e^r- cX^i^rA                                  ■

        c L ll^ o t A ^ i o £ \ s ^ - rs^ t -^r^e_ i^rx^-v^. Va_^. cLcrr^ ^ ^ = ^ 0
J     ^          tr^'-<2_ ^0 ^ ^ -C^-^-Cl v « > V o VxS^-W- \ c ^ r > a (_>L^J~<S Cj ~> L~^0- '8>w-'D^c'JKj^~c^
.p'i. S A / = ^                                       r^>-Yv^-eJcS S-^Xa-^rvc^i-                                              CJ-o 3c=-S (f°
 P   ,|                                                   t*—‘> 4 X 1 ^ “- t °   lrW_                                             U j(K, oU*<J '

 ^-x'Vg)                      ■
                              ,i_A/Xr-UvJj-                             -*                         t t—' y~^<VN#-Y'r\X^^" ^cLJ-A*
  t^vc_ ^a.-er'^'-Q- t—^L-^> tJLA^-ti^ v*"'* ^^_~<3- 'v^-fl-J^/^>€Jl                  & M CA^-
              ^JUSo         v-Jr o-su^ lc^2_ o W r ^
 <^?ur^*rv-o>b \~^nO-               'T'e-S-p^db v 4 V«^v\ey>\X>^r'<t/r\ c a _ T rCbv— fc^-
 ^J~o c'-v^-fcr tro ”3a-A-\      c^s-e_           ^_X-v^°S •

            ^=\.            c_^-t-~c\Ir'^               C^crcrcX W ^ r crr«_ ^S                    ^ C tztA          \-c5Y~ Q-AA

 <U>d CO<«- 3 1                             e ^ u -U L r         X    c> o     V -J iA                             W     r       <--W \p ^ r O ^
  iA-^° V^r^Jb- ^I^ sJ sj- .Ka Aj-q -s -a-^ ^AlXAsJL^cr^^^^yt- V-*-^          3- ^-rtX^vir-
     /-Crv»x__» Os o-^~*-\ C-e>^\ ^ tr?~^ S-«^v~^- ' r ^ ^ f z e - c J ? W«-     Vc/TT
                    cj^*a>=»s '\/~ xs ^ u^-£-o i_A;>^. k A ^ o r N lro*^£^-cJU^
       ^ -r\ k A/<«g       ~r     -3   w vsJb- c3o<sv\' 1^ b-^—                Vr^vtX/r tr^o_ Q-A.-^~-<V 1~y~n€X^_0 x^r^<i^ $
            —V^\, c ^ vj-rx/H nc^J CnT b^- ^ r rr^ jy ^ -^
  ^s^^->^OcvS c^o-e»^X V®*" cnT'a. U5                                           \-*rS~                '& *r\& -
     ^ A.               ^Y\j2^ y^yq-<>V2.S-/{rV ^ /7 /*\Q^A t
                                                               f          *




                                     .                     w
                                                                                                  ^>(>uJ-^vcx^wp h^v-v

                                         c A. M& ^                                                                                         <R^q
                                                   i       *
             SuHj
                                             H U l s (o orru ^.

                              ^ vi-vcx^x.          vei>x5               *\R^vSo vt^soffe ( u^ctixAe^                                       f&JB. T


                                                  k&v>A.            OLTPvU a o I                 N\t            •fe K

                                                               Oj»u^c^                      C^                  tuxsci^.          \^_COCO^A            /
                              ^          fCvU                                     o U ockoX xB             •

             evo^              Ccm^cjU^cc^                          , +£v.o>                f^vJi.     JL c^C sl-       CXJH^Oai                 o fr COQcAei

CLO-+-M^w>^                    VlS.lK^v^               oQ^Aj|3-pCJi-tl£><)                        iCtft.        S>&»C(:VJ2-G^           c^/trvc^vcj
v W b ^                        ^          cx           ^                c?P          o^oucrwo                                Qv^eo^ ,
u i£ > « _        p v iL ^ e ^ b * ^          - |r e ^         ^    ±    s >     w      ^         V & jl        S                      }      c x > -^        co£L c


C3~c^ic»-dU^vr^x^                    c^i-ej-O      c x v m ^+-v_«>               cx^>       VBjs_ t"i                                            •

 X u t^dLtA^ccvvxJ                        tCv^Li"          t£\j2_*-e             u>a^             ca^v^pJ2^            <7r©-w\                         t^stcfe.

 V€ml                                    uuJ    & ^ ^ j & lxU                        <3^      ^                      |db^
  ouwecu •                                                                                                          tocx^         op*~*^                 <£*«-
  U )00                   c^-o^.                                   to                                  ^                            <*       ^         iJ>-
 p(rxc-C.S                /
    A pt£>                    +&J2. C3k-a)^vJ2.                                         t                       ^    o££eyvO-c^ ,            T~- 1/
                                   , vC*-*^      C m w p H t U ^ S c^el^ ,                                     oJLC-    fCvfi. p o > 4 - t ^

 fo^K^>                                                             +^- t — s                                                         ^                    3
 W o4^ ^                           CLCXfc*      ouv^               C i? c ^ £ ^ ,                                    & . £ . S U .C W L J                  LOCXo

  p o i^>-tje^(l                  OrAi"( ol^-c^                    Hie.                            ctJLo©           t^-voe^c*. t&£_              Pt-c^o&cc.
 ”f v o - ^ ^ - S p d r f-           ^ v c L v g j liL ^ ^              I t                  \a e J r cO -€J2^ *^      f€ > « x   S ( r c t f io ^ v     9-


  VC\ji_          S h s^ d U v L -iw - •

     ’ U -K   &   V   J   f                  l"fcrvo'  vivooh                GL*v %£- ©j^ ^O^U-C^k. HA£*^cS-
                                                             -^s    °- %
                  cfrVtsuwc-fl-            v^C*.ovJL<^         CjCXja otioJ^ft- <9^ HAc>,v»-4~o*-c*^g ec£&-
  CUM-WOtC.                        C^cJIlauv-^ , |)c M'K ca-<JLjCX*£-^                                 Cc>OLci^o              cxwd          'f'T€x-wxS
   C O C U c^-                       JLC-                                c i\.       J ix x ^ L            y u j^ J io a ^         OUM-tO w v ^
              ^           jtux*X.                                      rjoiy O h             tOvJ-€’
                                                                                                   \_                                 IVVCtt%R>                  O ^-             iA^U. c J ^ CK

              *= > C L o d U .             Iq a a J ~         C crvJILo)            ^        ^ J I s lc x ^ l                                             '('& -*.           -^ & £ J U fto

              p^pcw ^

                  A-U            COCXjcKc.S               O p p<^ aixfro                                                        tp             U*jC--Hdci                                          f
                  «&U©u«jLd!                   lo-«.      »^vc».c5-e-              "fe                                      c-w~           guc£ 1/ aw-vefl-                   f 0_iu '_

                  ^€*j w _A- ^ Iolaa .u>«_cI                            ^ctAAjt           c?t      CX^M-'t-OCxC                           ouacI            (■&£_
                  ^XA avU o p V                           C_OCXck&£-                    C3CtxJe-UVxLtv^0 -

      f t )           B    - £   .     Tvcuvw v^.              o j u    «-     c x J L i-e -ix c ^              j^ o v v - J r t s - e ^                 o » -v u = J        c J - e f ia t ^ /O

                  O t^ -R -          C X > l/^ v \jc r v « - ^ C A <5         OU*                    (C V C * X L c 3               c 9 j^ ,     C x ? V c p fc lS 2 X U j       (p      C tX P

                  •h-oLv«JlCe>a                  •




         3>               Es h a k k ^                        a_        k o o- u* *- ^                                      (au^Ku-ex^

                          Poljt-fe-        V S^^Xo Ia H^ hv                       Cy_           -GZ. . Q, ’4'6\Jt                                                       *

u \       ^ U w J lJ                                                   cUJUm^s.                 Occu> #                                                 uv^>v^ck^±^3 »

              p o s f (U^X                                                               ^                                   1 ° ^                                                                             (S

      wclKO-                           u   >JUL           o l W              (a^

                                                      vuJU              la*.         -o                                 ^                                                                                  ^
                                 ^                                                c*o                              •.

                  ^              w L           I W             c*£           «U                          oW«jk«-                                                         c—
                                                                                         VaO               toJL UCO "fe-                                          IVL-t-Wujc£_£ 'ti
                  OLC_c.©^v\<NA^oetoi_t^-                              otAA^                                                                                                                           0

                   Kjt-CiL^SO lA-M
                      IP «^fS©H»<»£t                                                                                        <^<5                                                        <*-
                      dl^JUXJUJ                       pfcx~~                 , '-                                           ,         S c ^ a >                          ■
                      pW                   3         IZ            .                                                            ^                    —                       —        - 3              ^



                                                     •}~&JL        (X WAA^sf •G^'C'* '* '- 4--5                                                            f A. Krt

                                                                                                                                                                    uW            f£vt
                                                        U)vJtvU^                    (JCM.           J U > ^                     vA^ULCASS

                                                      “^ v u h ^
                                                                                  {-^yyUkp                                      wc£^j
