 ..-Con tinuation statement of:- Steven Peter Sapsf ord .P .C .2 652/.

   /<■

there was still a considerable crowd inside the area. On pushing past
these towards the playing area,I saw the first of many persons laying
on the floor. These persons appeared to be dead. I was assisted by other
P.C.'s and supporters to carry the first of the bodies out,back through
the tunnel,leaving the bodies to be attended to in the courtyard area.
I then immediately returned to the terracing where I then saw dozens
of bodies piled on top of each other,near the fencing. Myself,colleagues
and supporters assisted in removing the bodies. This was with great
difficulty as the bodies were tightly compacted and hard to dislodge.
All persons in the pile appeared to me to be dead.
   As the bodies were being removed,the supporters were screaming and
shouting hysterically. Their anger was directed at the Police Officers.
They appeared to be out to cause harm to a Police officer. I was struck
twice,as I remember,by unknown assailants as I was carrying bodies out
    the terracing and returning to collect more. I was not bruised or


«   jured as a result,however,they were definitely deliberate blows.As
    attempts were made to remove the bodies on the terracing,other officers
on the pitch side of the fencing,ripped the fencing off the securing
posts. The majority of the bodies were then past through the holes made
to officers on the pitch. I am unable to say how many bodies I handled,
or the identity of the Police Officers I handed them to. It is also
unclear how long it took to clear the bodies away from the terracing.
     As the bodies were cleared,the supporters in the west stand started
ripping advertising headings from the stand. My immediate reaction was
that these were going to be thrown at the Police. However,they were
passed down to Police and supporters,to be handed to officers on the
pitch. These were then used as make shift stretchers. All the bodies
  assisted in removing were situated in pen number three of the centre
south (C.S.) stand. The crowd during this period were very aggres sive
and hostile towards Police. I can recall that some of the bodies removed
had been sick and the smell of intoxicants on them was strong.
         Once the bodies had been removed from the terracing area,an a11empt
was made to form a Police cordon in pen number three,however,the supporters
in the west stand were very hostile and coins started to be thrown from
that stand to Police Officers in the cordon. It was then decided to
vacate the terracing and go onto the pitch. It was at this time I saw
a Police cordon at the other end of the ground. No cordon was formed
by officers nearest the Leppings Lane end. There were several hundred
supporters on the pitch walking around,Police officers were intermingled
 with them.
I   A supervisory officer requested that the supporters be moved back


                                                                 2652 .
      Continuation statement of:- Steven Peter Sapsford. P.C.2652.
 9




into the terracing. This,however,was protested by other officers as
being a very dangerous and unsuitable action at the time. This idea
^was then forgot. On facing the crowd in the Leppings Lane end,they were
very hostile and shouting obscenities at the Police. The crowd had taken
on the manner and action of a lynch mob. At this time I found myself
in company with P.C.270 Innes. This was the first Police Officer I became
aware of and I requested him to stay with me in order to provide cover
for each other. The crowd were extremely agitated and there were several
incidents on the pitch. One,when a Police Officer was set on by a supporter
and the other was when a camera crew were attacked by supporters,as
they were near the Leppings Lane end. Each incident further incited
the crowd and several supporters began climbing over the balcony of
the west stand,jumping down into the terracing area.(Pen three and four)
They appeared to be preparing to storm the pitch.   It was at this time
^|was at my most frightened and fully expected to be attacked.   I can
remember stating to my colleague,P.C. Innes,that I did not expect to
be going home that night in one piece.   It was during this time that
the Liverpool manager,Kenny Dalglish,made an announcement over the P.A.
system,calling for calm and for supporters to co-operate with Police.
The supporters seemed to respond and the tension relaxed,aniy slightly
however. Following another announcement that the match was cancelled,
and for supporters to retain their tickets and remain where they were,
the crowd started to dissipate and leave the stand. This was to my
enormous relief,as I honestly believed that there was going to be a
riot. Once the ground was clear of most of the supporters,myself and
P.C. Innes mingled with the remainder of the crowd on the pitch. These
were directed to leave the ground via the stands. This was met with
^fell co-operation.
     We then assembled in make shift serial order and I was instructed
to collect some property bags from the gymnasium in order to gather
together the belongings of the dead and injured. On entering the gymnasium
it was only then that I became aware of the full horror of the incident.
Once the property had been collected and returned to the gymnasium,I
was then instructed to gather in the North stand,to await further instructions.
     The serial was then requested to attend at Barnsley Hospital re process
of the bodies transported there. However,on our arrival we were cancelled
and returned to Clay Wheels Lane,from where we returned to Rawmarsh
Police Station to go off duty.
     My overwhelming reaction to the incident is one of utter confusion.I
personally did not hear any radio communication regarding any orders.


                                                    P.C.2652.
                                                                      T


‘Continuation Statement of:- Steven Peter Sapsford.
»



I can also recall that I did not see any of the Sheffield Wednesday
stewards during the incident.




                                                        P.C.2652.
