                                                                                       MIR.15


OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and time raised                             Number


Title   ksXfai                TV)                                                     A / 0 2 . |O
(Include source and any document number if relevant)

                                          ,
Receiver's instructions - urgent action -4Yes/N o
                                                    P o a         s
                                                                       kv

    i m t s /—
  "11
                 cp    T "i•^ r            —.       —I
                                                                                                               Receiver
.




                                                                                                          S'733
                                                                                                               Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                  A   ^    o                                                                   ’2- T >
                                                                                                          Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions
                                        ^r\0>

                                                                                                               Indexar
indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                    4 $ (f
Examined - further action to be taken                                                                      m




Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
®eL

20 June 1989


N Mervyn Jones Msc
Assistant Chief Constable

                                        >
Furnival Gate
Sheffield      Si 4QN                                  :^ c i , S '.tfak&A


                                                            If , 4
Dear Mr Jones

HI5LSB0R0UGH ENQUIRY

Thank you for your letter dated 12 June 1989 and do wish to
stress the little things that keep coming back to me, of which
one is the dreadful, horrible, feeling I had in my mind when I
saw the crowd that had been late coming from the bus or train
from Liverpool.. A person s.a id "They have emptied all the
drinks in my pub0 . They truly did look menacing as though'
you had a stampede of animals coming towards you.      I _saw the
woman by her house gesturing and they were walking right through
gardens up the hill, as though the stadium      was higher than from
the buses,     I saw one man dressed in a leather jacket put his
hands very expertly on the wall at the back of the mounted policoman
and another one went on his shoulders and there were people
pulling t h e m .on to the stands.

In heavens’ name, d o n ’t attack our Police for the actions of
sub-normal people.   Don *t always make it up that Liverpool
never does any wrong.     If there is to be a post mortem, then
I would say to all the Christian ministers ai
they should make the people from the buses      and trains own up to
what they had done.

I will always back the Police when they are working h a r d . It
is always wrong for a policeman to touch anyone, ^ do know,
but God help them.  I cannot forget the look, on that Police
Officer*s face who was pushed on to the ground, and putting his
hand where his truncheon was.  I will net forget the expression
of the mounted Police Officer when he watched the swarm of
humans coming over them,

        that when this is finished you will stop the breweries
from financing footballers. Let us hope that the football
clubs can find their own m o n e y , and not depend on the breweries.

I wish you the best of luc k ,

Yours sincerely




                       (j)         €j
    1
    —r



5 July 1989
                                         A   -CK CArV^D, O ^ ^
J Mervyn Jones MSc                                     W\A\^
Assistant Chief Constable
Furnival House
Sheffield      Si 4GN                        f1 I               I V c c fn \)
Dear Mr Jones                           ^ m &Ch &u ,

Thank you for your letter dated 21 June 1989.  I write what I
saw more clearly now.  On the day of the Hillsborough disaster
I was watching my favourite snooker player, Steve Davies.  At
that time they flashed on to the football ground where the people
were all sitting down looking very happy.  There seemed to be
law and order there, and a very comfortable match was anticipated.

The next thing that we saw on the TV was a cut away from that to
a mounted policeman sitting peacefully in a pretty empty space
and his Officer with a Police hat seemed to be having^a bit of
trouble with one of the fans and that was all.  Then it cut away
from the Crucible to a longish shot of a vast number of animal­
like men coming up the hill.  There was a remark at that particular
time by someone who said "They are late.  They have been boozing.
There is a train load as well as this bus load, and I doubt whether
any of them will have a ticket."  Then we saw a quick f l a s h o f them,
walking right up to the doors of houses on the right-hand^side
away from the football field, going over the walls and urinating.
One woman was trying to talk them away.  I wonder whether she ever
succeeded, but then we have all seen clips of that particular scene.

Then we saw a gang of men try to de— seat the mounted policeman,
and a policeman getting up off the floor with his helmet knocked
off, and I noticed he was putting his hand to his truncheon, but
the mounted policeman seemed to give him some instruction and
pointed down the hill.

The next shot I saw was of a man with broad shoulders with what
seemed to be a dark jacket with a leather top.  He turned to the
wall and gave it a Rugby hug and as aoon as he was in position
the other people climbed up his back, getting to the top of the
wall - quite a business it was - that way of climbing on to one
or two men at the bottom, and the people sitting in the top seats
were dragging them up, not realising what they were doing, I am
sure.  These in turn went pushing against the bars and those people
sitting forward were being squashed.  We saw then all sorts of
conveyances to be used as stretchers to cart away people.  One
of the men that had crawled over the wall was picking up tickets,
as I told you before, no doubt for no good purpose.

 I trust I am a good citizen of this country and I usually tell
 the truth, and I have had to be in Court many, many times witnessing,
 therefore my eyes are sharp enough.  I, as a citizen, will never
 rest if the Police are going to be charged for the sins of the
 Liverpudlians.  It is time that Liverpool is cleaned up.  I have
 known it as a place from where I have sailed, and there are streets
 where two people had to go together, never singly.
                             -2 -



I will now refer to you the item on Page 1 of "The Catholic
Herald" dated 30 June 1989 No 5380.  It is entitiled "Enquiry
plea after disaster priest returns for funeral". You can read
that without my writing to you.



I pray that our dear Lord will make some of these guilty people
retract the lies they have told about the Police.  It is my
firm opinion that a Police Officer’s uniform should be honoured
and that anyone touching a Police Officer should have the birch
at least.  I am sure that my heart aches when I see the policemen
who were trying to do their duty being torn to pieces.

When one of your officers telephoned me and we had a conversation,
I was told two officers were coming to interview me.   I might have
been asleep, for I always lie down from 12 o ’clock to half past 1.




Be assured by me that I shall pray that you have justice done
and that some of the people that cannot hold their drink should
never drink.  I am surprised Catholic Bishops dcrwiat they did
before and say total abstinence for fans.

I trust that this is a little m n T P infnrmat.ivp. m u seeing of
the actual happenings, when                                  Do please
read deeply in that Catholic paper of 3U June, and you will see
other people have suffered for these uncouth creatures

Yours most sincerely
