Other Document Form                     Date and time raised   2fiU    'ZC - 0Q- K?7               .


Tain Ut-rteJL             IrtU n*                    bC        SoopAnas     S m o - r o /B .__________
(Include source end eny document number if relevent)


Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/(kT_
                                                                                                               iceiver




Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                   Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Statement readers instructions                                                                            Statement
                                                                                                          Reader



Indexed as indicated                                                                                       Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                    D/M             SID




                                                                                                               Indexer
Further action no(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form

MIR 15
Inc ident       105   250489 0P5012             TYPING SERVICE DOCUMENT

                                                               Other Document Number      D2



        Date               250489

        Description        LETTER FROM HAMMONDS SUDDARDS SOLICITORS




            Letter & -      Dated 240489 headed         'Re: Hillsborough Stadium Disaster*




            Resume of points covered in telephone conversation between Mi<

            Nor cl if f e (of Hammond S u d d a r d s ) and D C C .



            1   .          Albeit, SYP have asked for copies of statements taken

                           from SYP officers by West M i d s . team, we should get self-

                           taken statements from RELEVANT officers.              Relevant »

                           officers    in Leppings Lane area and all senior officers

                           on duty.

                           May be 50 ~ 100 officers.

            2.             No statements required from l a y individuals about the

                           events of 150489.       But, stats are required from officers

                           who can provide history of Hillsborough and the policing

                           of matches there.

                           Suggest C.S. Duckenfield,         Supts. Marshall and Murray and

                           C/1 leal may be best placed.               The latter 3 are in best

  t* m ¥         ^ rfSPr   position to review history.

                           PLUS Mr. Mole can provide useful information on history

                           and ticket allocation etc.

                           Self-taken statements can and should be obtained from these

                           officers.     Should relate to F.A. semi last year and

                           another    previous F .A. semi and one or two league games,
                                                                                  PAGE
                                                                            ; .   -02   .   .

                      thereby providing a general and specific guide to policing

                     and senior officer involvement in football matches at

                     Hi 1lsborough.

                     All relevant documentation ~ i.e. operational orders etc

                     etc should be collated and   ’flagged*   re. most Important

                     regulations and selections to be considered by counsel.
ft    Crt
                     Also require to know, at this stage, whether tb©r» are

                     any regulations not actually complied with on the day.

                     Counsel   cannot, technically,   see the individual senior

                     officers until they make formal     request.   Solicitor will

                     see them in first instance on Wednesday 260489.

              5.     Outline suggested by Mr. Hayes in earlier tel.      conversation

                     with Miss Norcliffe will suffice for the actual events

                     of the t ragedy.

              &a     Counsel will attend Police HQ for meeting on Wednesday

                     260489 at 2.00pm.

                     Counsel   require list of all names and ranks of senior

                     officers on duty at match <prior to Wednesday).       Also

                     require ranks and full names of 4 officers to be seen

                     -4^ Mr. Metcalf on Wednesday.



     END OF REPORT
                                                                             i)z




Letter 6 - Dated 24. 4. 89 headed 'Re: Hillsborough Stadium Disaster'.

           Resume of points covered in telephone conversation between Miss
           Norcliffe (of Hammond Suddards) and DCC.

           1.   Albeit, SYP have asked for copies of statements taken
                 from SYP officers by West Mids. team, we should get self-taken
                 statements from relevant officers.  Relevant = officers in
                 Leppings Lane area and all senior officers on duty.
                 May be 50 - 100 officers.
           2.   No statements required from lay individuals about the
                 events of 15. 4. 89. But, stats are required from officers
                 who can provide history of Hillsborough and the policing
                 of matches there.
                 Suggest C.S. Duckenfield, Supts. Marshall and Murray and
                 C/I Beal may be best placed. The latter 3 are in best position
                 to review history.
                 Plus Mr. Mole can provide useful information on history
                 and ticket allocation etc.
                 Self-taken statements can and should be obtained from these
                 officers.  Should relate to F.A. semi last year and another
                 previous F.A. semi and one or two league games.   Statements
                 should also set out their function at these games, thereby
                 providing a general and specific guide to policing and
                 senior officer involvement in football matches at
                 Hillsborough.
All relevant documentation - i.e. operational orders etc
etc should be collated and 'flagged' re. most important
regulations and sections to be considered by counsel. Also
require to know, at this stage, whether there are any
regulations not actually complied with on the day.
Counsel cannot, technically, see the individual senior
officers until they make formal request.  Solicitor will
see them in first instance on Wednesday 26. 4. 89.
Outline suggested by Mr. Hayes in earlier tel. conversation
with Miss Norcliffe will suffice for the actual events
of the tragedy.
Counsel will attend Police HQ for meeting on Wednesday
26. 4. 89 at 2.00 p.m.
Counsel require list of all names and ranks of senior
officers on duty at match (prior to Wednesday). Also
require ranks and full names of 4 officers to be seen by
Mr. Metcalf on Wednesday.
