OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                   Date and tim e raised                         mber



Title   LeM&yk
(Inclu d e source an d a n y d ocum en t num ber i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Y es/N o        _L
                                                                                                               Receiver




                                                                                                                  Indexer
D ocum ent registered/ii lUeAUChds indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                           Statement Reader
Statem ent reader s instructions                           ol /CcaXA           /Q
                                                                                                                  Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                           O /M         S IO
Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




                                                                                                           {£*& Indexer-
Further action No(s)
                                                                                                           a      ix-<*
When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
                                                     GJD/AMS
                -h

West Midlands
                                                     28 April 1989




Dear Sir


Rgt HILLSBOROUGH - IS APRIL 1989


I ao grateful to you for writing and the inforaation that you Included
in your letter will be of great interest to ay investigative team.

It nay be that we shall be in touch with you again to take up the points
that you have made.

Thank yew very much for writing#


Tours faithfully




Chief Constable
                                                        ftlest Midlands.




G. Dear Esq.,
Chief Constable,
West Midlands Police Headquarters,
Lloyd House,
P.O. Box 52,
Colmore Circus,
Queenway,
Birmingham.                                             25th April, 1989.




Dear Mr. Dear,

THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

I had the unfortunate experience of witnessing the distressing spectacle from   a
position in the fifth row of the stand immediately above the terracing.

A colleague, who is a former member of your force, suggested that it might be
helpful to your enquiry into the policing aspects of the tragedy to set out the
events as I saw them.     Perhaps I might explain that I have been attending
football matches since 1946, mostly standing on similar terraces, and therefore
have considerable experience of such crowds both pre and post what I might call
the hooligan era.    I have attended matches on all the major grounds in this
country and on many occasions in far greater numbers than were present at
Hillsborough.

My son and I entered the ground by Gate C at the Lepping Lane turnstiles at
around 2.20 p.m.     At that time there was a considerable Police presence but
conditions were calm and we strolled into the ground having been checked by
offices at the turnstiles for cans of alcohol.  It was however blatantly obvious
that within 50-60 yards of the entrance gates to the turnstile block there were
large numbers of supporters congregated and a high proportion were consuming
cans of alcohol.    It was also very clear that public houses around the ground
were overrun with customers.

It is apparent to me that because of the geography of the area (the river behind
the stand, the road layout and houses etc) the actual entrance to the turnstile
area was relatively small.    There were I think four mounted Police and at the
time I entered they were relatively unused.   There is always a last minute rush
to enter football grounds before kick off and it seemed to me that basic Police
preparations were inadequate.    I have seen on many occasions,  particularly at
Villa Park, officers on horseback restricting entrance to the turnstile area to
avoid the problems that arose at Hillsborough.        I have also seen Police
intercepting and controlling spectators, checking tickets etc 50-60 yards away.
These seem eminently sensible but there was no sign of any such precautions.
                                       -   2   -




Being in the stand.*at the time of the major crushing I was not aware of what was
happening at the rear of the terracing.     It was however very clear to people  in
our position that the middle of the terracing was extremely full but there was a
lot of room at the sides.    The crushing of spectators at the front was obvious to
us by 2.45 p.m. yet at that time the police on the track around the pitch did
seem disinterested.

My own view of this is that a lot of the younger members of Police forces I have
encountered at football matches all over the country tend to categorise all
football supporters as prospective hooligans to be caged in and treated like
scum.   More experienced officers have a far greater sense of rapport with
spectators and lack the aggressive instincts of younger officers.

I realise that you may feel this is a sweeping statement but I think a lot of
football supporters of my generation will recognise the feelings expressed. This
I think is one of the factors that led to the seriousness of the situation not
being recognised and when the true position was known it was too late. At that
time it seemed    to me that the opening of the gate onto the pitch      made the
situation even worse as all the crowd panicked and tried to reach it.     Most of
the deaths that I observed seemed to be around the gate and at the extreme left
hand side of the pen close to the fence dividing the terracing.    Perhaps there
was no alternative to opening the gate but I would question why the situation
was not recognised and why officers were not stationed on the terracing itself.
This seems to be the case at most matches I attend in the Midlands where perhaps
more initiative is also allowed to officers close to any problems.

It is interesting to observe from the match programme a picture on Pages 2 and 3
of the same terracing last year.     You will see exactly the same situation but
also note only 2 officers on the track facing the crowd.

I must however comment upon the heroic work of the ordinary Policemen and women
once the position become clear.  They were magnificent in their efforts and their
despair at their initial inability to get people out will remain to me a terrible
reminder of the tragedy.

I have tried to restrict my comments to the events I actually witnessed although
I have of course seen the scenes shown on television and in particular the
effects of the pressure caused by the late arrival of supporters.

I realise you have an enormous task in compiling your report and if there are    any
points on which you require clarification please let me know.

YoL^s^incerely,_________________




       1
