                                                                                            M I R . 15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and tim e raised ( ^ a ^ n.   ^ *7 |                Number


T itle   .LtMav
(Includee source and any do'chment
                         document ni.
                                   number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No                                                           /U-2-C
                                                                                                                        Receiver


                                                                                                                    73^7
Document registered/index ed as indicated ^ b l Q < 4 .

No(s) o f actions raised    f \ S S 2 q .
                                                                                                                     RSLf
                                                                                                                    Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                        Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                         SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                    Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                             c x c jd o ^ '




Lancs


28 April 1989

Telephone


My name is                  on Saterday 15 April 1989 I was at
hillsborough Sheffield for the semi final cuptie between Liverpool
and Nottingham Forest,
I was in the north stand Row 1 Seat 102 The first thing I observed
was fans climbing over the fence at the Lepping Lane end of the
ground, A few minuets after the start of the match I saw a police
officer run on to the pitch to draw the referees attention to some
sort of problem at the Lepping Lane end of the ground,
the referee immediately took the players off the pitch.

The Nottingham Forest fans started to barrack the Liverpool fans
and some of the Liverpool fans ran towards the forest end of the
ground, and the police sent them back and promptly put a line of
police personell accross the centre of the pitch.

3y now it was obvious to us in the stand that there was some injuries
at the Lepping Lane end of the ground as stretchers, were being
brought on to the pitch from the forest end of the ground through
the line of police officers and none of these men made a move to
find out what the problem was.
The fans were now returning down the pitch with injured people
on them,through the line of piblice to the other end of the pitch.

Some time elasped and more police personell arrived at the forest
end of the .-round They came down the pitch and stationed themselves
in a line in front of the north standalthough nobody from the north
stand was attemping to to go on to the pitch.

The people in the north stand were shouting to the police to go
and assist the fans and others at the Lepping Lane end of the ground.

But thier shouts were just ignored, they did not move at all even
when a fan came down the touchline in front of the line of police ome
carrying another fan over his shoulder. I turned towards the
forest end and to gay discust and amazement there were about
eight or ten dogs with theor handlers.on the pitch
  I am willing to be called before the enquiry.
