                                                                       MIR.1




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and tim e raised           NufcM r


Title
(Include source and a ny document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions - urgent action-^¥6s/N o



                                    (
D ocum ent registereiMffidexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                   yy"'
Statement reader's instructions




Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No(s)
■ —   -




                                                                   .
      .....
taken on behalf of my client,________________           This was
taken by me at my offices on 17th April 1989,

                 was one of those injured in the disaster and is
making a c T a irn for damages for personal injury.

Yours faithfully,




DAVID     IA N XHtKLAM




The Horne Office,
Whitehall,
LONDON.
                                        i    ^tA/v
                                 J




*
                                               Accrington, Lancashire


will say as follows


I was a spectator at the Football Association Challenge Cup Semi-Final

game between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Stadium

Sheffield on Saturday 15th April 1989.      Through my friend,________

       I obtained a ticket for the Leppings Lane stand, which was the

Liverpool supporters defined section of the ground,

obtained the ticket because she is a member at Liverpool F.C.       She

also obtained two seating tickets in the stand where she and her friend

       went.

I travelled down to Ashton-under-Lyne that day with my wife and went

to U bp-parents house.    I left my wife there and travelled to Sheffield

with            and her friend        in           car.   We got to the

ground about 1.45 p.m.     I separated from the girls going into our

separate queues to enter the ground.       The girls saw me go in and I

saw them going through the turnstiles.       The turnstiles were near to

each other.

When I got into the ground there were quite a few fans in but there

was plenty of room.      I stood at the front just to the right hand side

 of the goal.    I was what might be termed as the second row back.




IThe section of the ground started to fill up.      It was about 2.45 to

 2.50 p.m. when I started to feel a surge of people pushing forward.

 I got pushed a bit.     When the pushing started as I say there was one

 person effectively in front of me.     As it carried on I was pushed

 against the railings.     I put my left arm up against the railing to

 try and hold myself off it.     The railings I refer to are the crowd

 control railings which actually prevent any pitch invasion.        I must

 have been there for about half an hour and I could n o t j nove.   My arnr

 went dead during this time from the elbow downwards.       I can remember a

 child whose head was in my ribs.     I put my feet up against the wall to

 and push to crowd back and also give that child a little bit of room.
                             -   1   -




People then started to climb over the top of the railings and get onto

the pitch.     Those people used me to climb on top of and to get over.

I was actually helping them get over as best I could.             I thought this

would ease the pressure on me.            Eventually the crowd did start to

thin out behind me so I pushed back into the gap and managed to eventually

find my way to the back of the stand.            My head was spinning and all

I could think of was getting out.

The game had been abandoned meanwhile whilst I was still stuck against

the fencing.

I did not know where to go.          I decided to make my way back to the

car and came out of the Lepping Lane stand through the gates, which

apparently were the gates that had been opened to let the crow© in.

They were big     double gates.          As I came out I saw bodies covered over

with blankets.     They were obviously dead people there.

When I got out of the ground I looked around for____________________

but I could not see them.        There was no help from anyone,         including

Police and Officials.

I decided to make my way back to the car as I thought the girls would

come there.      I did not know if they were going to restart the game

or not, I just wanted to get away.

 I got back to the car.                  eventually came.   We found               about

 half an hour later walking towards the car.            It was at that point

 that I was just getting some feeling back into my arm.                I decided

 not to seek treatment at the ground but it was obvious that the

 medical facilities were in full use and I was not that badly injured,

 or so I thought.     We decided to return to Ashton.          I was also concerned

 about my wife and my parents.            I knew that they would be worried and

 I just wanted to see them.


                                                                           c o n t 'd .......
        drove back to Ashton.   I was in a complete state of shock.

We went to my parents to let them know that I was O.K.     My brother

ran me to hospital   where I received treatment.   My wife cam&with

me.   I was xrayed but it was discovered that nothing    had been broken.

Apparently my injuries are ripped shoulder muscles and sore ribs.

I have to keep my arm strapped up for a week at least.     I have got

swollen fingers now which I did not have on Saturday.

I was in a complete state of shock, shaking violently when I got out

of the stadium and again when I got back to Ashton.      It did subside

a little bit when I was in the car travelling away from Sheffield.

I am currently employed as a Quality Control Inspector in shift work

at                          My wage is usually about £157.00 per week

plus.   I will be off work for at least a week.    My wife works for

                                                   and we have no children
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                        FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                 Furnival Gate
 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM                                Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                          Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9

WEST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ                                  SM ITHDOW N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                    Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                                  Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 9 0 /7 2 3 1
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5           Your Ref:                DIA/LP/SL/0167/01
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street                                             Our Ref:                 JMJ/VSC
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                           Date:                  19 June             1989




             David Ian Acklam
             Solicitor
             28 Warner Street
             Accrington
             Lancashire
             BB5 1HN




             Dear Sir

             With reference to your recent communication, I enclose a copy of the
             required document as requested.

             I trust this is of assistance to you.  If I can help you in any further
             way please do not hesitate to make contact.

             Yours faithfully




             Assistant Chief Constable
             (Hillsborough Inquiry)




    PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T . .Birmingham
