                                   C f d

                                   Cf f t .
                        (r       t4iC~C
                                    ,    ,,

^                      i'r        rv ^
 *cn*ltz '•sH t-rc *




                             L p &



                             W      &

/
  Kevin George 2ML0B
 „ Over 21
  Police Constable 110^.
  Dinnington Police Station*


  At 8am on Saturday    15th April 1989 I paraded for duty at Maltby Police Station
  after which I was transported to the Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield,
  together with other officers*


  Upon arrival I was directed to the Kofcth Stand where together with other officers 1
  was briefed as to the various duties to be carried out*
  I was part of a serial required to patrol Herries Eoad South near to the ground
  the expected route of Nottingham Forest supporters by coach and cars. I preformed
  foot patrol on this road together with PC 20^3 Gliniekxcki.

^^As the time got closer to the start of the football match there were a considerable
  number of supporters very much under the influence of alcohol and v/ere earring large
  quantities of beer, lager,cider etc as they made their way to the ground.
  AT 1 supporters that X found in possession of alcohol 1 either confiscated the drink
  or turned them back* The contents of « n bottles and cans were poured down a drain*
  During this time I isias approached by a person claiming to be a Nottingham Forest
  supporter who did not have a ticket. He enquired of me where he might find a
  ticket tout. I was was unable to assist him be he merely stated that he would do as he
  had the previous year and takscsc bribe a turnstile attendant to allow him to climb
  over the turnstile.
  At 3pm our seriel was to stand down from our position and go to take refreshment.
  By this time there was a considerable quantity of empty beer cans at our feet which
^^were disposed of. I then joined the rest of my serial outside the ground.
  It was roughly 3»5pm and we were directed into the ground in the belief that a
  public order situation was taking place. As I entered the ground I saw that the
   football match was not taking place and the seem to be no more than a bit a f
  activity at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

  Upon arrival at that end of the gcound an Inspector told us to form a cordon
  appro:cimatly five yards from the perimeter fence. There were a small number of supporters
   on the pitch and some officers were assisting supporters over the fence. Also there
   were supporters being lifted by people on the balcony into that area.
   Without being told to do so Officers broke up from the cordon and went to the fence
   as did myself.
                                                                        S l o K , •fj-f
    Continuation, of      Kevin George TAYLOR       page 2.


As I looked through the fence I saw that people were being crushed under
foot by obviously scared and panic ridden people but also I saw at least
two youths lashing out with their feet in a needless violent display.
I climbed on to a small wall which supported the perimeter fence and I
tried to assist people to climb over but I could hardly reach myself and
was hampered by the sharp spikes of metal left on the tops of the fence
which proved pain full as my arsis were pushed against them* The width of the
wall was slight and I was repeatedly pulled off by supporters already outside
the encloshre. Some were obviously trying to help but others in an attempt
to obstruct the Police.

I could see on the floor within the enclosure a male I would estimate to be
35 yrs he was motionless and his face was pale. I have seenpeople this colour
on a number of occasions and each time they have been dead. I also saw inside
the enclosure a small number of officers who were trying to give mouth to
mouth resusitation. I saw two officers trying to pull the mesh away from one
of the fences sc by pulling it too and fro X too joined them as did    a number of
supporters and together we worked the section of mesh of the fence and lifted
it back so access could be gained it was held back by what appeared to be
a length of orange rope from the goal netting* I entered the enclosure 3c
and pulled a body to the wall where other officers puiled it from me and
dragged it across the field, I returned and did this a further two times the
third being the body of a child I was sure in my own mind that all these
were already dead. I left the enclosure and saw at least eight bodily
which I believed were dead. I tried to assist other officers but as I moved
amonst the the now quite large nmmbers of supporteBS on the pitch I was
pushed swore at and spat upon. At one point a number of supporters began
to rip down the net on the goal posts and this caused ex. cjigry isac^o,*
fans fought between themselves. About this time there was a lot of jeering
between the rival supporters and the scene began to look ugly as Liverpool
supporters began to move towards the Nottingham Forest end.
I ignored this and assisted other officers in moving dead and injured to
gym using advertisment boards as makeshift strGathers.
As the Nottingham Forest Supporters were allowed to leave I was direct M E 3 3 K
ed outside to assist with the control of the crowd coining from the Nottingham

Forest end.
After the end o f      emptying the ground I went to Claywheels Lane where
I was transported back to Maltby Police Station and went off duty.



                                                       Polies-^onstable 110^
