                                  bT33
                            /M
                             s o u t h Y G m im m t p o l i c e
                                                                  REF;
                                                                                      K.\o^|2,
                                                                                     / TDC /D V
                                                                                   Fl/JRF/RK        V

  FROM:   Superintendent Freeman
                                                                  STATION fO B m   Hanmerton      Road
  TO:                                                             DATE:            15 October 1986
          The Chief Superintendent - 'F' Division


          SUBJECT:      SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS - REVISED EDITION
                        OF THE GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


          I have gone through the whole of this extremely comprehensive document
          and whilst a considerable amount of the contents is applicable to management
          of the club, engineering problems and fire officers, certain paragraphs
          are worthy of mention in relation to Sheffield Wednesdays Football Ground
          at Hillsborough.

          Paragraph 16 relating to crowd pressures. As you are aware the kop has
          had a tendancy at recent matches to produce this wave effect and it is
          necessary that when a large match is anticipated in the future, we should
          ensure that the numbers allowed onto the kop strictly adhere to the capacity
          allowed. It is imperative therefore that the automatic counting system
          is always in working order for 'A' and 'B' category matches, such as the
          visits of Manchester United, where almost capacity crowds can be expected.

          Paragraph 23 onwards lays down the management responsibility very clearly
          and is to bewelcomed, since there have in the past, been grey areas as to
          who is responsible fur crowd control etc.

          Paragraph 28 recommends the appointment of a safety officer and identifies
          his duties.  I can only presume that the safety officer is in fact Mr Lock,
          although I have never heard him designated as such, and this should be
          clarified with the club.   Furthermore, in the discussion of a central
          control point being designated (other than then police control), one would
          assume that the central control point designated in respect of the Sheffield
          Wednesday ground would be the video viewing room in the south stand.

          Paragraph 43 relates to records of tests kept and examination of the ground.
          I am not aware that these are kept by the club.

          Paragraph 199 relates to exercises of stewards regarding emergency procedures
          and I am not aware that the club have ever carried out exercises in this
          respect.

          In conclusion, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club have complied with the
          guide to a very large extent, more so I would suspect, than the majority
          of clubs in the country, and it is only on minor points as identified above
          where improvements could be made, so far as police procedures are concerned.




           Superintendent




                                                                  ( 3/ /



GEN/2
