                                                                                          MiR.15



           DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and time raised                            Number

                                                                                   f)
                                             f / i i , j f # /■>   (, <i
t;                                                                                                            T~~~
! in v a d e s o u w g jrtd any document number i f relevantJ                                                        /
            in stru ct tons   urgent action - Y0* m o                                                                Receiver




                                                                                                                     index#?
Docum ent registei'ed/mdexed as indicated

Nofs) o f actfc'hs raised
                                                                                                              Statement Reader
     >ment reader's instructions
                                                         U M it
                                                                            fit*

                                         €>                         4?
                                                                                                                      nd exer
                                     /
Indexed as injKcated
                      —


Nofsl o f actions raiseo

Examined ■ further action to be taken




                                                                                                                      Indexer
 fu r th e r action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Number f o r m
                                                               0742 325644                      Page     1
26; 20      0 3 Jan   1991   Vincent   H a l e & Co.

                                        Wm*nf Hale fr Gi
                                               Solicitors

 Telephone: (OPC)                              Nash House                Vincent Hale S oid tw
 Ott« 325H2                                  140 Upperthorpe             C >'.sttltant:
                                                 SfteffieM               <..t'rjrd Vincent Hate b.a. (Hon*.)
 Fax      325644                                 S6 3NF

         Our Ref: VH/SEW
         Year Ref: JMJ/AES/PB223S                              2nd January 1931


         Dear Sir,

         Hillsborough Disaster Inguests


         In furtharanc* of our submission at the adjournment of the inquast, 1
         have considered what further evidence I should ask you t o bring before
         the Jury and an pleased to be able to say that I can confine myself
         to two n a t t e r s :-

               The evidence ©£;                                              rho speaks «>£
               substantial number,          ; least i « f or burns caused to a police
               horse by cigarette ends being pressed against the horse,
               including some on the tenderest part of the horse which required
               its tail to be lifted before the cigarettes were applied.             He
               believes that the cigarettes were applied separately and were not
               the work of one man because the pressure necessary to cause such
               severe b a r n a w o u ld have put e a c h cigarette out. He uaw the h«i»«
               { c a n e d ______________ ridden by P.C. |       } on the day of the
               match, after 3,00 pm, by prior appointment to shoe it.             In our
               view, this evidence is extremely important because the main
               thrust of the argument of counsel for the families appears to be
               that U<« Movement or the crowd and the srfnmirt they created was
               entireiy involuntary and that no positive or deliberate steps
               were taken by supporters to break down the barriers and cordons
               intended to hold thins back.

               It appears t h a t _________ |was told his evidence was not required by
               Lord Justice Taylor, who nevertheless dismissed his evidence as
               relating to an isolated incident without hearing him, I an firmly
               of the opinion that Justice cannot be done in relation to this
               natter unless the Jury has an opportunity of hearing                and
               P . C , | I       believe P . C , '    'appears on a video lashing out
               at one the perpetrator*?,

       2.      A matter 1 have mentioned previously is the factual evidence
               concerned with the alcohol content of the deceased which was
               ascertained by post-aortem examination,          Again, because counsel
               for the families has continued to dismiss the part played by
               alcohol in the behaviour of the crowd and has persisted in
               presenting the crowd as happy day- trippers unaffected by alcohol,
               it is essential that the Jury should Know that 51 out, of 88
               deceased would have been affected to some extent by alcohol (and
               I are sure there will be expert evidence that in many
               circumstances, particularly the driving of vehicles, even one
               pint begins to affect Judgment) and that 21 out of 88 ( 251 being
               a very significant proportion) were ©v$r the l i m i t n f fitnteo for
               Jtivir.g v e h i c l e s . It is further essential to demonstrate that
               the proportion of alcohol in those who came late was
               sign Ificantly higher than average.
             0 3 Jan 1991   Vincent   H ale   & Co.            15644            Page 2
12, 27; 12




                there has alieady been evidence of 3 or 4 young person* who cane
                late and «f*re killed and who had no alcohol whatever but there
                still remains the possibility that 15 or 1€ out of 21 (a
                frightening proportion- 71%?} of those who came late and were
                prima facie responsible for the ulticate crushing were *o
                affected by alcohol m to be unfit to drive a motor vehicle, the
                question of whether there is any reason why those Milled from
                the latecomers Eight have been unrepresentative of the
                latecomers as a whole is of course out for the jury bit they
                need the evidence on which to for* a view,

         2 Mould like to have the evidence presented objectively and
         accurately rather than Mr. Marshall having to present it fro» his own
         knowltd?* of the evidence, which is to some extent speculative and
         could lead to unseemly argument in cross examination.

         It follows that, if possible, I would like all the evidence
         mentioned in this letter to be brought before the jury before Hr,
         Marshall gives his evidence.

         I have spoken briefly to                     and have two addresses and three
         telephone na »h«r« for him

         tours faithfu
         VXNCEMT HALE •




         the Coroner's Officer
         The Hillsborough Inquiry Team
         N e n h e 1 Is Green Polioo Station,
         Fowler S t r e t ,
         Birmingham

         2nd Floor Furnival House,
         Eyre Street,
         Furnival Sate,
         Sheffield, 1
                                   Vincent Hale & Co.
                                         Solicitors
Telephone: (0742)                        Nash House                Vincent Hale Solicitor
Office 325842                          140 Upperthorpe             Consultant:
Home 345214                                Sheffield               Gerard Vincent Hale B.A.   (Hons.)
Fax    325644                              S6 3NF


      Our Ref: VH/SEW
      Your Ref: J M J /AES/P B2238                       2nd January 1991


      Dear Sir,

      Hillsborough Disaster Inquests


      In furtherance of our submission at the adjournment of the inquest, I
      have considered what further evidence I should ask you to bring before
      the jury and am pleased to be able to say that I can confine myself
      to two m a t t e r s :-

      1.      The evidence of                                             who speaks of a
              substantial n u m b e r , a t least 1 4 , of burns caused to a police
              horse by cigarette ends being pressed against the horse,
              including some on the tenderest part of the horse which required
              its tail to be lifted before the cigarettes were applied.            He
              believes that the cigarettes were applied separately and were not
              the work of one man because the pressure necessary to cause such
              severe burns would have put each cigarette out. He saw the horse
              (called                   ridden by P.C.           on the day of the
              match, after 3.00 pm, by prior appointment to shoe it.           In our
              view, this evidence is extremely important because the main
              thrust of the argument of counsel for the families appears to be
              that the movement of the crowd and the pressure they created was
              entirely involuntary and that no positive or deliberate steps
              were taken by supporters to break down the barriers and cordons
              intended to hold them back.

              It appears that                    was told his evidence was not required by
              Lord Justice Taylor, who nevertheless dismissed his evidence as
              relating to an isolated incident without hearing him. I am firmly
              of the opinion that justice cannot be done in relation to this
              matter unless the jury has an opportunity of hearing                     and
              P.C.           I believe P.C.                appears on a video lashing out
              at one tn ep er pe t r a t o r s .

      2.      A matter I have mentioned previously is the factual evidence
              concerned with the alcohol content of the deceased which was
              ascertained by post-mortem examination.  Again, because counsel
              for the families has continued to dismiss the part played by
              alcohol in the behaviour of the crowd and has persisted in
              presenting the crowd as happy day-trippers unaffected by alcohol,
              it is essential that the jury should know that 51 out of 88
              deceased would have been affected to some extent by alcohol (and
              I are sure there will be expert evidence that in many
              circumstances, particularly the driving of vehicles, even one
              pint begins to affect judgment) and that 21 out of 88 (25% being
              a very significant proportion) were over the limit of fitness for
              driving vehicles.  It is further essential to demonstrate that
              the proportion of alcohol in those who came late was
              significantly higher than average.


                                              ©
     There has already been evidence of 3 or 4 young persons who came
     late and were killed and who had no alcohol whatever but there
     still remains the possibility that 15 or 16 out of 21 (a
     frightening proportion- 71%?) of those who came late and were
     prima facie responsible for the ultimate crushing were so
     affected by alcohol as to be unfit to drive a motor vehicle. The
     question of whether there is any reason why those killed from
     the latecomers might have been unrepresentative of the
     latecomers as a whole is of course one for the jury but they
     need the evidence on which to form a view.

I would like to have the evidence presented objectively and
accurately rather than Mr. Marshall having to present it from his own
knowledge of the evidence, which is to some extent speculative and
could lead to unseemly argument in cross examination.

It follows that, if possible, I would like all the evidence
mentioned in this letter to be brought before the jury before Mr.
Marshall gives his evidence.

I have spoken briefly to             and have two addresses and three
telephone numbers for him.

Yours faithfu
VINCENT HALE




The C o r o n e r ’s Officer
The Hillsborough Inquiry Team
Nechells Green Police Station,
Fowler Stret,
Birmingham

2nd Floor Furnival House,
Eyre Street,
Furnival Gate,
Sheffield, 1




                                 ©
