* Other Document Form                    Date and time raised                               k
                                                                “        1   ............          —             Number         D 130
 hi.          (P C ’s                                           Tt> $ru<zz fo-CtkoCtr*i
 (Include source and any document number if relevant

 Receivers instructions urgent action Yea/No       T \              Oh                                                         ________
                                                                                                                           ^      Receiver



 Document registereifrindexed as indicated

 MnU) nt artmrg~raised                                                                          ..........

                                                                                                                                  Statement
                                                                                                                                  Reader


                                                                                                                                      Indexer
 No(s) of actions raised

 Examined - further action to be taken                                                                       n            <»
                                                                                                                                0/M             S K }/

                                                                                                                                         X
                                                                                                                          1
Further action no(s)                                                                                                              Ind9xer

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Oocumant Master Number Form

MIR 15
                            HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                      J______
             CHIEF CONSTABLE'S STATEMENT TO THE POLICE AUTHORITY

Members will be aware of the major tragedy which occurred at Hillsborough
Football Ground on Saturday 15 April I989, as a result of which 95 people
died, 140 were treated at local hospitals and five are still in intensive
care.

Because this Force has a responsibility for law and order in the area and
assisted the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club with the control of the event,
it would have been wrong for the South Yorkshire Police to have gathered the
evidence and come to conclusions about the cause. Therefore I asked
Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable of West Midlands, to carry out this task and
he agreed.

The Home Secretary has announced that there will be an Inquiry led by Lord
Justice Taylor. The terms of reference are:-


          'to inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday
          Football Ground on 15 April I989 and to make
          recommendations about the needs of crowd control and
          safety at sports events'.


Mr Geoffrey Dear will be submitting the evidence he gathers to the hearings to
be held by Lord Justice Taylor. The South Yorkshire Police will give all
information in their possession to those conducting the Inquiry.

I can inform members that the planning preparatory to the event was on the
basis of that applied to previous similar matches. The number of police
officers on duty in connection with the event both inside and outside the
ground was 1,111 of whom 257 were at the ground.

It is understandable that this event has attracted immensemedia attention    and
I must inform members that much of what has been said by the media is
incorrect.

Attention has been focused on the actions and decisions of individual
■officers. Those involved at the match found themselves facing the possibility
of a disaster outside the ground and took action which they considered
appropriate to resolve that situation.

I must say that those officers were appointed by me to make those
decisions and it follows that I accept full responsibility for the police
action connected with the event.

I welcome the Inquiry which is about to take place and which will undoubtedly
reveal the true nature and cause of this terrible tragedy. I believe that
when it is completed the actions of the South Yorkshire Police will be seen in
a very different light.

I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the tremendous support
and assistance provided during and after this terrible tragedy by churchmen,
the statutory and voluntary agencies and members of the public to the victims,
the families of the victims and to the police.'
