                                                                                           M IR .15


                                                                                                                    1 )3 2 8 2 .
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised   (2.^2.   tlo ( c) f ciO             Nnm hor



Title   (~er<re(2-     <firZoH    ,0/2             7n   Cc.   liA -D fn g lb    tsirlf ’
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urqent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                          Receiver




                                                                                                                      ^ ^ n d e jje r
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

                                                                                                                    S tatem ent Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                          Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                                4^0
                                                                                                i
Examined      further action to be taken                                                              |

                                                                                                    11L
                                                                                                                i
                                                                                                                     ft
                                                                                                                    cy
                                                                                                                                    S IO




                                                                                                                    «o3!

Further action No(s)                                                                                                      Inc exer



When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                         OFFICE O F H.M. CORONER FOR               MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                   W ATERY STREET
                                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                                   SHEFFIELD
                                                      (West District)
                                                                                   S3 7ET
            STEFAN L. POPPER, LL,B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                          CORONER


                                     Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721            —2 7 t h - - t f t i- ly



        SLP/JT.


        Mr. R. Hadfield, Q.P.M.
        Chief Constable,
        West Midlands Police,
        Headquarters,
        Lloyd House,
        Colmore Circus,
        Q u e ensway,
        Birmingham. B4 6NQ.

         Dear Mr. Hadfield,

         I refer to our telephone conversation on the 26th of July and as agreed,                                I
         enclose copy letters to Mr. Sharp as well as to Mr. Graham.

         As I made it clear to you on the phone, I am anxious that Mr. Jones should
         continue his role in connection with the Inquests and no doubt (but subject
         of course to your ultimate decision) this would have been thecase had he not
         been promoted to Deputy in Cheshire.  As Mr. Jones has indicated to me that
         his new Chief Constable has no objection to him retaining this interest until
         the Inquests are concluded, the position as far as I am concerned therefore
         essentially remains unchanged.

         The odd thing is that Mr. Sharp and Mr. Jones both have had connections with
         the West Midlands Police, and neither are at present members of that force.
         Looked at from the West Midlands Police point of view, then it makes no
         practical difference which person heads up the Coronal Team, but it does make
         quite a big difference to me and to the way I think we should proceed.

         I must confess that I had assumed that the arrangements which I had come to
         with Mr. Dear regarding the West Midlands Police f o r c e ’s involvement in the
         coronal aspects would continue until the coronal aspects of this Disaster
         have been concluded, but nevertheless I am conscious that this is now your
         force and I would not wish you to feel that I was taking liberties with it or
         indeed with your authority in respect of it.

         Basically what I am saying is                           that I want the status quo tocontinue    with
         Mervyn Jones leading the West                           Midlands Police Coronal Inquiry Team,n o t ­
         withstanding that he has been                           promoted to another force.

         As far as the Inquests are concerned, these are at present adjourned pending
         the outcome of the D . P . P ’s decision. Mr. Sharp is of course the investigating
                           i-u- r> n n     „ ncj j believe the Police Complaints Authority




R8606

ASAAAX
                                         OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                          W ATERY STREET
                                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                          SHEFFIELD
                                                      (West District)
                                                                          S3 7ET
            STEFAN L POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                         CORONER


                                     Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721    •24feh-J-ul-y.......19...9.Q.



        SLP/JT.


        Mr. L. Sharp, Q P A . L L B .F .B .I.M.
        Chief Constable,
        Cumbria Constabulary,
        Police Headquarters,
        Carleton Hall,
        Penrith,
        Cumbria. CA10 2AU.

        Dear Mr.       Sharp,

         Thank you for your letter of the 17th of July.

         I note that the criminal investigation is progressing well.    Please let me
         know when your final report was submitted to the D.P.P. and also let me have
         your estimate wh en you think the D.P.P. is likely to reach a decision
         regarding the matter submitted to him by you.   I would of course also be
         pleased to meet with you to discuss the D.P.P.aspects   of the I n q uiry,
         particularly as it impinges or relates to my Inquest.


         You are quite right that I am aware of M e r v y n ’s promotion.                 I am indeed very
         pleased that he succeeded in obtaining the appointment.

         With regard to the remainder of your letter there seems to be some
         misunderstanding, as it seems to imply that you see yourself as C o r o n e r ’s^
         Officer for me in the remainder of the Inquests.

         This is not, nor ever has been my understanding of the position.        I do not
         think it necessary to reiterate the whole of the history.        Suffice it so say
         that when Mr. Geoffrey Dear left his appointment as Chief Constable in the
         West Midlands, you took over the Director of Public Prosecution and Police
         Complaint Authority aspects of the Inquiry, whilst Mervyn Jones continued to
         be C o r o n er ’s Officer and to handle the Coronal Inquiry Team, which he had
         done from the middle of April 1989.        Indeed you expressly confirmed this
         arrangement in your letter of the 18th of May 1990.        As this aspect has not
         been further discussed either orally or in writing between us, the position
         as far as I am concerned with regard to Mr. Jones has not changed in any way.

         There are of course very many reasons and advantages which I am sure you must
         be aware of for Mr. Jones continuing in this capacity.  These would include
         continuity, not only as far as I am concerned, but also and more importantly,
         as far as the parties and in particular the bereaved families are concerned.
         Furthermore, in the event of the Inquests resuming, assuming Section 16 (1)
         Coroners Act 1988 does not apply, I think that there would be a very major
         disadvantage if it appeared that the new investigating officer had been
         substituted for Mr. Jones.  One also has to remember that Mr. Jones was
         present for all practical purposes throughout the interim hearings, and that
         I think is a very important factor which must not be overlooked.



R8606

ASAAAV
                                                            I




In addition, it is not possible to predict the detail of the evidence which
may be given at the Inquests.   Similarly the verdict of the Jury can not be
anticipated, and it may be that further reference of the D.P.P. might be
called for.  I think if that eventuality were to arise, then they are very
real benefits if such further reference or involvement were then to be
handled by presumably yourself.   This split if it can be achieved, has I
believe much c       commend it.

There are n.o doubt additional points, but I do not think that it
is necessary that I should list them.

I am of course aware, as mentioned above, that Mr. Jones has been promoted,
but as far as I am concerned, this makes no difference to the situation and I
understand that Mervyn Jones is both willing and able to continue in his role
as C o r o n e r ’s Officer.

In order to avoid any possible misunderstanding therefore

     1.    It is my wish that Mervyn Jones should remain and continue as the
           Coroner's Officer, heading up an appropriate team from the West
           Midlands Police until the conclusion of the coronal involvement with
           the Hillsborough Disaster.

     2.    His and my support should remain and continue to be the
           West Midlands Police.

     3.    The retention, extension or reconstitution of the West
           Midlands Police C o r o ne r ’s Team will of course depend on
           the decision of the D.P.P. the stage at which a particular
           activity has been reached and the timing for the resumed
           Inquests.  I would expect, as far as possible, those officers
           who have already been involved in the Inquiry would continue to
           be engaged in the Hillsborough Inquest, for as you know, a
           great many of them have made a great professional as well as a
           personal investment in the Inquiry.        I would expect to discuss
           and agree the constitution of the Team from time to time with
           Mr. Jones.

      4.   The Hillsborough Inquiry has been a complex investigation
           from i t ’s inception with multiple parties involved right from the
           word go e.g., myself and Lord Justice T a y l o r ’s Inquiry
           Team.       There has of necessity been an absolute
           requirement for co-operation and sharing of information and
           I believe that this has up to now taken place most successfully.
           I fully expect that this will continue up to the end, and I
           am sure that I and/or Mr. Jones will wish to keep in close
           touch with you particularly in respect of the impingement of the
           D . P . P ’s involvement with my Inquests.  The extent of this
           will depend to a large extent upon the D . P . P ’s decision.

 I am sending a copy of this letter to Mr. Hadfield in order that he may be
 fully informed of my views on this matter, particularly as it involves the
 West Midlands Police force.

 I am also enclosing a copy of a letter which I have written to the Chief
                          -   3




Constable in Cheshire with circulation as stated thereon. _ It is obviously
important that we should all be speaking with the same voice and pulling in
the same direction on this matter.

Yours sincerely,




S.L.Popper,
H . M.Coroner.
