,-.   v r , s.;
                                                                     10!
              . Report re Hillsborough Enquiry

Police Constable 1442 Charters

1 am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police currently stationed
at Doncaster Police Station attached to C.I.D. in A1 Sub-Division.
At 3.30am on Saturday 15th April 1989, I paraded for duty in full Police
uniform at Doncaster Police Station for transportation with other Officers
to Hillsborough Sheffield, the venue of the Football Association Cup,
Send Final, football match between Liverpool and lottineas Forest.      With
other Officers we were transported to Sheffield for briefing by senoir
Officers at the ground at 10.00am.    Following briefing and refreshments
as part of Serial 26 at 11.15am commenced general foot patrol in Catchbar
Lane and Parkside load, which runs adjacent to the South Stand of the Ground,
linking Leppings Lane and Penistone Road, which have access to the West,
'East and South Stands*   No access can be gained to the stadium from either
Catchbai? Lane or Parkside Hoad, owing to a natural river sourse*
The serial members were instructed to patrol the area in ’pairs* and I
commenced patrol in company with P.C.1882 Simmer*    P.C. Sinner nor s^yself
were in possession of UHF radio.     At this tine there were a number of
supporters from both Liverpool and Nottingham already at the ground, but I
observed that they were in Jovial moods passing in light conversation with
ms*
As the day progressed and more supporters arrived in the area, it was
apparrant that supporters fyoa the Liverpool area were attending without
admission tickets.   It was noticeable that Liverspool supporters were even
visiting the Penistone load end of the stadium, in an attempt to purchase
tickets from the Nottingham Supporters, some being successful in their attempts
around the fast food sellers*

At approximately 12.30pm t»Mlst walking past, Willis Supermarket in Catchbar
Lane, numerous Liverpool supporters had congregated nearby and were sat on
a ansii wall adjacent to the car park and a garage forecourt*     All these
supporters were drinking either canned beer or lager and one ±n particular
white wine from the bottle.     I was informed by PC 17&9 Flatman, who was stood
at the Supermarket door, that the Manager of the store had closed the drinks
counter following a disturbance inside.     P.C. Simmer and myself at the request
of the Manager remained present in the area as a preventative measure for
further likely disturbances.. Customers requesting to purchase alcoholic
drinks whether Football supporters or Local customers were turned away.        As
a result, numerous supporters attending the fixture requested the whereabouts
of other licenced premises from which they could buy drink,     fhey were told
that no licence premises around the stadium would be open for business.        A
large amount of these supporters had been drinking, but weren*t drunk, they
wore informed that anyone being drunk attempting to gain admission to the
stadium would be turned away.
At approximately 1pm PC liiaaer and inyself restated patrol along Catchbar
tone • It the junction of Catchbar Lane and Leppings lane it was evident
that there was a build up of supporters. There was a large Police presence
and there were no disturbances.    We were repeatedly asked by Liverpool
supporters where they could obtain tickets from and in particular a group of
7 youths who were climbing onto the roof of the Police Box situated in
Catchbar Lane and the adjacent trees, from the North Wales area were without
tickets.    These youths were removed without incident. This location appeared
to be a popular place for ticket less supporters to congregate in an effort
to see into the ground, constant attention was being paid to this area during
the day.

After visiting the Penistone load end of Parkside Head making our way towards
Leppings Lane end of the stadium around 2.55pm again there were a number of
supporters climbing onto the roof of the Police Box in Catchbar Lane, three
youths were also climbing the wall of a school accross the road.    These
supporters were removed.    Abound 3pia the Force Coach stopped in Catchbar Lane
and the civillian driver informed us that additional Officers were required
in Leppings Lane at the West Stand.    PC Simmer and rayself immediately went
to the West Stand in response.    On our arrival there were around 200
supporters scattered about the street in Leppings Lane and Police Officers
were in the process of cordoning off the stadium enterence to the West Stand*
We were unable to locate other officers of our serial and following liason
with Officers at the gates we were informed that an incident had occurred
whereby supporters had been injured.    It was not known by the Officers as to
the extent or seriousness of the situation.    I could hear the ground tanoy
anouncer requesting supporters to leave the pitch.

We were instructed by an Officer present of the rank of Chief Inspector to
cordon off an area from the sterile area, to the south of the west stand, to
the admission gates, to allow access for ambulance and Fire Service emergency
vehicles.    This was complied with and the Supporters began evacuating the
ground.    We were then instructed to assist the evacuation of the West Stand
keeping supporters *way from the sterile area, where there were a number of
injured persons being attended to by Ambulance crews, Firemen, Police Officers
and supporters, following an announcement over the tanoy system that the
fixture had been abandoned.    During the evacuation supporters were making
various comments regarding the organisation of the game and put the whole
responsabilities onto the shoulders of the Police and Football Assosrtatian
for what had happened.    Supporters were reluctant to comply with anything the
Police Officers asked of them and several supporters confronted individual
Officers, but were dragged away by fellow supporters.    An elderly Liverpool
supporter and a youth in a track suit assisted the Police greatly and the
supporters accepted his instructions without question#   Numerous
supporters requested the whereabouts of the injured and they were informed
that they would be taken to the Hallamshire and General Hospitals.

Following the evacuation of the West Stand I rejoined other members of
Serial 26 where we escorted supporters w a y from the ground towards
Halifax load area.   We were then instructed to return to the Berth Stand
for re-deployment*   On arrival in the North Stand we were de-briefed by
the senior officers and on conclusion made our way to Claywheels Lane
Police Garage for transportation back to Doncaster*

At ?*%5p» the same day on arrival at Doncaster Police Station I concluded
n^y duty©




                        ,**.P.C*1hh2m
