                   Sheffield Archives Ref. f ix - f a | 11                                       MIR.15


OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                   Date and tim e raised                                  Number   ^1045
T itle

(In clu d e source an d a n yla
                            fl docum
                                vct  ent num ber i f relevant)   r\           ^ -j-u a jc f^


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o                    ^                        ( j AaX C q
                                                                                                                          Receiver



                                                                                                                      7VK Indi
                                                                                                                          Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised                                                                                               1044 ■
                                                                                                                      Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions            <^__szS2-
                                                                                                                         q -tfil
                                                                                                                          Indexer
Indexed as indicated       f\D \ a

No(s) o f actions raised                                                                                                Sftoo
Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                          SIO




                                                                                                                          Indexer
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
      « *v                                               #•1 6

vcb


 To:The Secretary to the Inquiry,
   Hillsborough Disaster .Room 662.
   50 Queen Anne's Gate.London.SW1H 9AT.
 26th.April,1989.
 Dear Sir,
              As one who was present at the Hillstiorough Disaster,
 I gqve a report to our
 and it was suggested there that I should give evidence to the
 Inquiry.I am now doing this by enclosing the following copy
 of a letter which I recently sent to various tiodies.Subse­
 quently, an article which was a condensed form of this letter
 appeared on the fromt page of the                         newspaper
 last Friday.
       '-'•'he letter contains much of what i saiS felt,but if you
 wish to follow it up by phone or letter,or by asking me to
 appear at the Inquiry,I shall be only too willing to talk
 further about it.
                 Yours sincerely,
. To   The vr,ime Minister.
                                   From

                     Newspapers,


 Nottingham Forest,Liverpool,                                            v---- -/
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Ulubs.

 Dear Sir/Madam,

            Re: HILLSBOROUGH TR a GEDY. 15th April 1989.


 Unlike many of those who have been pontificating on the above disaster,! write
 as one who- was there - in a position very close to the action.I am a Nottingham
 Forest supporter,but I am writing as objectively as possible.Seated on the ,front
 ro'- on the side of the ground adjacent to the trouble area,i witnessed scenes
 suou as I've never seen before,nor ever hope to see again.This included seeing
 people dying just a few yards away,and one would like to express the utmost
 sympathy with the families of the dead and injured.
 My immediate impressions were that I was scared,sickened and saddened.
 SCARED because at first I thought that this was just another case of
 hooliganism.Kany supporters were on the pitch,and one thought of it becoming
 another "Heysel".
 SICKENED as I watched Liverpool supporters running across the pitch - surrounded
 by the dead,dying and injured     - still trying to stir up trouble.I   can never
understand that.I came to the      comclusion that they must be either   mad or drunk!
reople have said there was no hooliganism,      xhere was! I have never seen such
hatred on people's faces.only a strong police cordon across the pitch,plus a
lack of response from the Nottingham supporters,prevented this trouble
spreading.All of those officers in the cordon could otherwise have been helping
the sick and dying.
Here I must point out that the behaviour of the. .Nottingham supporters was
impeccable,and should be comm ended. So too was that of the great majority of
the Liverpool fans - but - the Liverpool Club must aacept that they do have
a real hooligan problem which must be curbed.
SALiDjLNiiiD as I saw a young teenager - probably about li+ years old - die about
4 yards away.x watched as the police gave him mouth to mouth resuscitation.
He was sick and seemed to be reviving - only to flop back deadilUthers were
dyirij; just a little further away.oeing accompanied by my daughter and a
12 years old boy i was constantly worried both for their safety ana the effects
on them of what they v;«r© seeing.
CONTUSION:     i<ast year,i attended the corresponding match,when there was no
trouble, (.i have in fact been a football supporter for over   ko   years   j
Over the past few days i have been trying to think of the differences between
the two matches.it seems to me they are:-                                          *
1) .   POLICING:   Last year the police operation was brilliant - 1 wrote to them I
afterwards to commend them.This' year, for some unknown reason,it was just the      V
opposite.
2;. ALCOHOL. As I walked to the ground,I did so by the same route as most of the
Liverpool supporters.! saw hundreds of them drinking inside and outside public
houses.There were prominent notices near the ground advertising, "Food and drink,
within 5 minutes of the ground" 1 did not arrive at the ground until 2.30pm -
those i have_mentioned were still in the pubsi This accounts for the great
pressure at the last moment - caused by people who could have been drinking
until 2.45pm and after,and thus more likely to be violent.it was not them but
the _nnocent ones who got there early who were crushed by the late-comers.This
seems to me a significant change from last year,when pubs had to close earlier -        j
now they can be open all hours.This trouble is one of the spin^offs we never
envisaged when that legislation went through.one feels that many publicans made
a quick,large profit that day - but at what cost?     Incalculable!!!

SUGGESTIONS FOR t H& jvU t UK js:-
1;.    That to help prevent incidents like the Hillsborough Tragedy,all sales of
alcohol be__banned jvithin a radius of 5 miles of football grounds st^dTJaiis^-h.ours
before the start of_any 'all-ticket1 match and that it be fully understood that
it is~iTTegal to carry alcohol on coaches and trains to such matches.
2;.    That we reconsider the removal of fences.This could increase the amount
of hooliganism.Kather,these should be replaced by the urench-style gates,or
grounds restricted to seated spectators.
3;. I have never been convinced about the value of I.D. Cards,but if these will
really help remove the hooligan element,then by all means let's try them.


                                Yours sincerely,
