                                                                                       / 5 . ^ m//%f<!
       h * ^< Je- ^ j     k /s tj   & f~ fla< -, .‘t o V ^ £ / ( c ( >     T e t^ fa - .',


                                                                  8 °j -               Ciu.* / b •$.     ^ i& '3o

k 'j                    /Q e^)cu\sf-                           f C
                                                                 fjO                                   ^ {<5 ^<3 ,




Q ^^4Ui/kHLy&S' ^ I‘U*J-UIJ'




       \
                                         NOTES FOR COUNSEL


      1.    Extracts Liverpool Echo - 21/4/89

      2.    Statement Ex Superintendent Freeman

      3-    Bodies on terracing at Leppings Lane

      4.    Unedited statements supplied to West Midlands

      5.    Points of interest regarding Safety Certificate

      6.    Hillsborough   Inquiry - update III

      7.    Hillsborough   Inquiry - update II

      8.    Hillsborough   Inquiry - update I

      9.    Video Tape 1988
I
c
      10.   Emergency Evacuation Procedure and stewarding

      11.   Semi Final 1988 Central Tunnel, Leppings Lane

      12.   Points of evidence, individual officers

      13-   Points regarding evidence of Bruce Grobelaar

      14.   Points regarding police command structure

      15-   Video film action Bruce Grobelaar

      16.   Police Review article by Douglas Lock

      17.   Evidence of Merseyside Mounted Officers

      18.   Copy statement Detective Sergeant

(     19-   Copy letters Chief Constable, South Yorkshire    and
            Chief Constable, Hertfordshire

'KQ   20.   Precise of video, Semi Final 1988

      21.   Copy book notes, Inspector Hand-Davis

      22.   Extract Major Incident Manual

      23.   Copy additional statement, Police Constable 1035 Ryan

      24.   Queries from Counsel
       25.    Letter from Liverpool City Council

       26.    Queries from Counsel

       27-    Copy computer print, actions of officers    at track gates

       28.    Copy F A Cup Semi Final Footage 9/4/88
              Summary Serial 16 - Mounted Officers

       29.    Statement Malcolm Edmundson providing extracts, Force Operations
              radio log

       30.    Extracts from Force Operations radio log    of 15/4/89

- f f r 31.   References to officers 1988 Leppings Lane

       32.    Points to be taken up with Club witnesses

      *33-    Points of reference to Julie Shelley, barmaid at Mathilda public house

       34.    Proposed points to raise with Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

       35-    Ground capacities and plan

       36.    Points regarding Safety at   Sports GroundsCommittee

       37-    Reference to Fire Service statements, copy letters to ambulance and
              Fire Service

       38. Copy report     by Fire Control Operator Davies to Chief Fire Officer

       39. Copy report     by Station Officer Swain to Chief Fire Officer

       40. Copy report     by Leading Fireman Houseley to Chief Fire Officer

       41. Copy report     by Station Officer Fletcher, South Yorkshire Fire Service

 — ' 42. Copy report       by Assistant Chief Fire Officer Hornsby

       43-    Copy transcript Force Operations Room tape recording 1440 - 1520,
              15/4/89, reference     30/9/17-

       44.    Copy transcript Force Operations Room tape recording 1441 - 1519,
               15/4/89 reference     30/15/17-

       45.    Perimeter fencing, Leppings Lane end, Mr

       46. Emergency Services - access and egress, Penistone Road,
            Statements Inspector Gerald Scarfe and Police Constable 2471 Twigg

 \S    47.    Point of information Leppings Lane turnstiles
^8.      Points raised re Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

^9.      Counsel Notes regarding VAUY statements

50.      Emergency Services - ingress/egress, Penistone Road

51.      Summary - Sheffield City Council

52.      Summary - Doctor Eastwoods statement

53.      Summary - Seaman statement

5^•      Summary of ambulance   officers statements

55-      Conspiracy summary Appendix 106 refers

56.______ Policing Hillsborough - 11.6.86 report      _

57•      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club - points to assist

58.      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club - points arising from Tribunal

59•      Counsel Notes re BBC Video on Pen 3

60.      Football League Regs re Kick Off Time
1988 SEMI-FINAL - LIVERPOOL/NOTTINGHAM
THE CENTRAL TUNNEL TO TERRACES, LEPPINGS LANE



You will already have been advised verbally by Chief Inspector Bettison
that police officers appear to have exercised some direction over the
control of fans using the central tunnel giving access to the terraces at
the Leppings Lane end of the ground. Enquiries have been made of the
following officers

    PS 1341 CRAWFORD
    PC 1278 LANG
    Ex Sergeant HIGGINS
    Inspector Raymond HOOLEY
    Inspector Raymond WALKER

Sergeant CRAWFORD was in charge of Serial 13 which had responsibility for
the West Stand in 1988. Part of that duty would include officers in the
Leppings Lane enclosure supervising the stairways to the West Stand
seating area. He recalls receiving an instruction, from whom or how he
does not recall, that there were to be no more fans allowed into the
central pens, and therefore the wooden gates at the rear of the tunnel
were to be closed, denying access. The actual task, according to him,
was undertaken by PC LANG.

PC LANG was a member of Serial 13 andwas responsible for the stairway
giving access to the seating area in the West Stand, this stairway being
at the South end of the Leppings Lane enclosures. PC LANG confirms that
he received an order to close the gates at the top of the tunnel which
gave access to the central pens, he closed the right hand gate and
directed fans to the wings.

Ex Sergeant HIGGINS was in charge of Serial 14. He confirms that because
of the large number of fans in pens 3 and 4 he received an instruction,
again there was no indication as to how or from where, to close the
gates, and thereafter direct fans to the two outer pens.

Inspector Raymond HOOLEY was in charge of Serial 13 with responsibility
for the West Stand. This officer has norecollection of any events
relating to th'e tunnel gates. So far as he is concerned, they were open.

Inspector Raymond WALKER was in charge of Serials 14 and 15» with respon­
sibility for the Leppings Lane terracing. He has no recollection of any
actions being taken to shepherd fans to any particular part of the ground
nor any problems with fans in the tunnel. He recalls passing through the
tunnel himself on several occasions.

You will recall that Chief Superintendent MOLE was not aware of any
policy or instructions in relation to the filling of the central pens.

Superintendent MURRAY, from the control box, also has no recollection of
such action being directed.

It seems therefore that officers have acted on their own initiative to
exercise control and direction of the gunnel. They are, of course,
expected to use initiative and take J^ependent action as circumstances
dictate, which were the very matters we were discussing in respect of
command structure last week. It dofeslpeem, however, that the hierarchy
were not made aware of this independent action.
                                  .. 4
It also seems likely in the light of events to date, 5 June, as revealed
by Chief Inspector CREASER, that we exercised some control over that
tunnel in 1987. West Midlands have already asked for the 1987 Oper­
ational Order, and I anticipate that we shall have requests for state­
ments from serials working at the Leppings Lane enclosures. I do not,
therefore, at this moment in time, propose to initiate our own enquiries
unless you yourself indicate you would like some early indication of what
is going to be said.
                                                     c   ory   -3/' lit, t   i/ / l t o



                                                                 ~2J£>,
NOTE FOR COUNSEL   —       <2o ,




On Tuesday of this week we received from West Midlands, copies of the
video recordings of the 1988 semi-final. They have been perused and
a precise is in the making.

The conclusions drawn from the viewings are appended hereto and
clearly the scenario in 1988 was completely different to that of
1989, particularly with regard to the behaviour of fans. It is quite
clear that there was a steady, continuous flow with which the turn­
stiles coped without apparent difficulty, and the backup never
extended a great deal beyond the outer perimeter gates.

The most significant feature to emerge is the fact that from early
on in the afternoon, 1.15pm time, stewards did place a portable
barrier across the perimeter gates giving access to turnstiles A-G
looking from those turnstiles out towards Leppings Lane, this
portable barrier was on the extreme left. Later in the afternoon
these same stewards are seen to actually close the perimeter gates,
leaving only the extreme right gate open (again looking from the
turnstiles towards Leppings Lane).

In effect, therefore, all the fans using turnstiles A-G were
funnelled down the side of the steel clad fencing.

I am having the relevant video copied and will arrange for it to be
delivered some time later today.




Chief Superintendent
1988 SEMI-FINAL

CONCLUSIONS




1.    3' portable barrier appears to be across the open outer

      perimeter gates leading to the A-G turnstiles.

      Stewards are by these barriers.

      Stewards are more noticeable in this area.

2.    Foot officers are evident outside the. perimeter gates.

3.    There is a continual steady influx of fans - no serious

      pushing or trying to force the outer perimeter gates.

4.    There is no sudden influx.

5.    On the approach to the A-G turnstiles only   one outer

      perimeter gate is open.

6.    The fans appear to be clearing from the concourse area

       quite quickly.

7.    Fans are more orderly outside.

8.     Police officers are seen in the terraces by the tunnel

       during the build up.

9.    Pen 2 is filled.

10.   In the pens the fans are generally more calmer and out­

       side they are more leisurely.
                          SUMMARY OF 1988 SEMI-FINAL

                        VIDEO TAPES (1 - 1, 1 - 2 and 2)


CONCLUSIONS


1.    3' portable barrier appears to be across some of the open outer
       perimeter gates leading to the A - G turnstiles.

      Stewards are by these barriers.

      Stewards are more noticeable in this area.

2.    There are two sets of Portable Barriers in the service road which
       effectively isolates Gate C.

3.     Foot Officers are evident outside the perimeter gates.

4.    There is a 3' Police Barrier inside the West Stand Enclosure byGate C
      which appears to contain Programme Sellers.

5-    There is a continual steady influx of fans - no serious pushing or
       trying to force the outer perimeter gates.

6.    There is no sudden influx of fans.

7.    On the approach to the A - G turnstiles only one outer perimeter gate
       is open and this appears to cope adequately with the numbers approaching
       the turnstiles.

8.    The fans appear to be clearing from the concourse area quite quickly.

9.    Fans are more orderly outside, no pushing or apparent pressure put on
       the outer perimeter gates. No apparent pressure in the concourse areas.

10. Police Officers are in the terraces by the centre tunnel.

11.    The Southern Pens on the terracing are filled.

12.    In the pens the fans are generally more calmer and outsidethey     are
        more leisurely.
                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                             HILLSBOROUGH INCIDENT

                                  15 APRIL 1989

                          SUMMARY OF VIDEO TAPES MARKED
                           No 1 - 1 SEMI FINAL 9-4.88
                              No 1 - 2 SEMI FINAL
                             No 2 SEMI FINAL 9-4.88


TAPE NO 1 - 1

Commences at 1007 and shows views of inside and outside the ground. 1153
shows views of the service road with barriers across isolating Gate C. By
mid-day a small number of fans at Leppings Lane, they begin to gain access
to the terraces. Stewards are by outer perimeter gates. Police are there
and in the service road and the enclosure.

From mid-day a slight build up of fans occurs at Leppings Lane - of no
significance.

Tape concludes at 1306.

TAPE NO 1 - 2

1307     The tape commences and shows views of Leppings Lane and Penistone
         Road outside the turnstiles, and views within the ground. They
         switch from scene to scene on a timed basis. There is a
         distinctive difference in quality compared with the views shown of
         the scene on 15 April 1989. The 1988 video tape shows clearer
         pictures. The views on Leppings Lane are directed towards the
         A - G turnstile area. The 1 - 1 6 turnstiles are visible but not
         clear.

         The views of Leppings Lane from this time shows two mounted
         officers by the outer perimeter gates.

         There are fans in the area but they are sparse, most of them just
         remaining in the vicinity of Leppings Lane.

         Vehicular traffic is moving along Leppings Lane

         A foot officer is by one of the open outer perimeter gates leading
         to the 1 - 1 6 Concourse area checking fans as they come through,
         other foot officers are in the area. The pace of everyone appears
         leisurely.

         There appears to be a 3' high portable barrier across the
         open outer perimeter gates leading to the A - G Concourse area
         which causes fans to file through an open outer perimeter gate
         nearest the large dividing fence.

         Official stewards are by this portable barrier.
                                       -   2   -




    1310.16   At the top of Pens 3 and 4 where the mouth of the tunnel is
              situated a Police Officer is present. He is later joined by
              another officer. Fans are continually filing into the pens but the
              space is available.

    1312      A Police transit van is shepherding fans along Leppings Lane and
              is assisted by a dog van and mounted officers.

    1317      Views show the concourse area and footpaths along Leppings Lane
              have a build up of fans.
              The 3' portable barrier is still in position and manned by
               stewards.
              The fans appear to be entering the ground so there is no compaction
              within the concourse area.

    1327      Pens 3 and 4 contain a good number of fans but they are not

%   1329
               tightly packed at this time.

              Plenty of space in West Stand seating area.

    1330      Fans on Leppings Lane footpath approaching concourse area which is
               not packed.
               3' high portable barrier is still across the outer perimeter gates
               leading to the A - G concourse.
               The outer perimeter gates leading to the 1 - 16 concourse area
               appear to be open and fans are entering.
               Mounted and foot officers are present and stewards are visible.
               It appears a serial of officers are deployed by the outer
               perimeter gates.

    1331.42 Police are present in the enclosure by the A - G turnstiles.

    1333      Pen 6 has plenty of space available. Pen 4 has a lot of fans but
               they are loose.
               The gate on the back of the terracing separating Pens 2 and 3 is
               open.

    1337      A number of foot officers are evident outside the outer perimeter
               gates.

    1343      3' portable barrier across service road by Gate C. There is a 3'
               portable barrier in the West Stand Enclosure by Gate C which
               creates a possible sterile area about 10' wide by the boundary
               wall.   It appears programme sellers are in this area.

              The barrier across the service road by Gate C has stewards in
              attendance.

              A number of Police Officers are in the "sterile area" between the
              portable barriers by Gate C and the outer perimeter gates.

    1347      Shows the service road has two sets of portable barriers either^
               side of Gate C which in effect steriles the area of Gate C outside
               in the service road.

               Stewards are by one barrier.        A number of Police Officers are by
               the other barrier.
                                   -   3   -




1347.47   A steward is closing the outer perimeter gate on the river-side by
          the service road. Police Officer of rank is present.

1348      An influx of fans coming along Leppings Lane is being escorted by
          a Police transit van. They are starting to fill the road. Mounted
          and foot officers are present.

1350      Plenty of space in Southern Pen.

1352.50   Shows rear of Pen 4 to be quite full. Fans are jumping up and
          down. Fans are stood on the brick wall at the back of Pen 4 by the
          tunnel.

1353-35   Shows the areas on both sides of the outer perimeter gates to be
          filling with fans.
          Large number of fans approaching along Leppings Lane.

          Access to the A - G Concourse area is by the open perimeter gate by
          the large dividing fence.

1356      West Stand seating area has plenty of space. Pens 3 and 4 are
           filling up. Southern Pen has plenty of space. Police Officers in
           the enclosure watching fans coming through the turnstiles

1400      Terracing behind goals (Pens 3 and 4) are packed with fans but they
           are comfortable. The tunnel area is packed with fans. Unable to
           see any Police presence. West Stand seating area shows ample room.

          Fans are approaching along Leppings Lane and the concourse areas
          are beginning to fill. On approach to the A - G Concourse area the
          outer perimeter gates by the service road are closed and fans are
          gaining access by the gate nearest the large dividing fence.
          Mounted and foot officers are present and stewards can be seen.

          The concourse area does not become compact and it is assumed they
          are going efficiently through the turnstiles.
           There is minor swaying in Pens 3 and 4.

          There is ample space in the enclosure, Police   are present.

1407.04 Heavy surge in Pen 3.

1408.30 Shows clearer views of stewards in attendance by outer perimeter
         gates.

1409.46 Stewards closing outer perimeter gates after      allowing a vehicle
         to leave. Foot officers by gates.

1411      At this time fans on   Leppings Lane appear orderly - no pushing -
          Gates are opened for   a short time but there is no attempt to rush
          through and fans are   still filing through the open gate by the
          large dividing fence   where a mounted officer is present.
1411 .40   The central outer perimeter gate leading to the A - G turnstiles is
           opened and fans walk through at a leisurely pace.

1412 .09   Break in the tape.

1412 20    Views begin again.

           Fans are congregating outside the perimeter gates.

1413 47    Fans are jumping up and down in Pen 3. A Police Officer is at the
           rear of Pen 3 near the tunnel and later another officer is visible.

1414 05    The central outer perimeter gate leading to the A - G turnstiles
           is now closed.

1414 17    Some people being allowed through Gate C.
           Views of Pens 3 and 4 show it to be quite full.    Fans jumping and
           surging..

1419 02    Officers on foot outside perimeter gates within the crowd.

           Swaying of fans is mainly in Pen 3.

1422 22    Southern Pen is sparsely filled with fans.   Plenty of room.

1430       Fans are approaching turnstiles along footpath on Leppings Lane.
           Vehicular traffic is moving.
           The perimeter gate is open near the large dividing fence leading
           to the A - G turnstiles and fans are filing through. Mounted are
           present. The central gate and the one by the river-side
           appear closed with stewards nearby.
           Fans are entering the 1 - 1 6 turnstiles.
           The service road remains clear.

           Police are in the enclosure watching fans coming through the A - G
           turnstiles. The enclosure is relatively clear of fans.

           Southern Pen has plenty   of space.
           Pen 3 looks packed with   fans.
           West Stand seating area   is filling.
           The fans are reasonably   still.

           As time proceeds fans begin to enter the service road area but no
           problems are apparent.

1436. 25   Southern Pen is filling up.    Police Officers are within
           the crowd at the rear.

1439       Minor surging in Southern Pen.

           Pen 3 is packed but comfortable, space available at the front.
                                       -   5   -




    1441      Slight increase in number of fans entering concourse areas. There
              is never a build up which causes a back log on to Leppings Lane
              itself. Service road area still clear. Mounted and foot officers
              are evident in the area.

              The A - G turnstile concourse area looks full of fans but it does
              appear to be comfortable.

              The 1 - 1 6 turnstile concourse area shows movement of fans
              indicating there is a lot of space available

    1442      Fans attempting to climb from terracing into West Stand seating
              area. Prevented by Police.

    1450      No significant change in events. Fans approaching the concourse
              areas appear to be dwindling. No apparent pressure outside the
              outer perimeter gates. Fans in concourse areas. Service road
              clear. Enclosure has plenty of space and Police are present.
%             West Stand seating area is filling.

              Only the one outer perimeter gate leading to the A - G turnstiles
              is open. There appears to be free access to the 1 - 1 6 turnstile
              concourse area with free movement of fans.

              Fan climbing from terracing into West Stand seating area.

              Vehicles still moving along Leppings Lane.

              Only restricted views now of Leppings Lane and Pens 3 and 4.

    1459-50   Leppings Lane is significantly less crowded.    The concourse
              areas are clearing.

              Pens 3 and 4 are quite full.

              Fans still coming through turnstiles. Southern pens are full of
              fans but they are comfortable. Surging in the pens towards the
              front.

              Fans coming through turnstiles are leisurely.

    1502.05   Heavy surging - Pen 3-

              Fans almost clear at Leppings Lane - few stragglers approaching.

              As time progresses there is continued surging in the terraces.

    1502.44   Two Police Officers at back of terracing by centre tunnel.

    1510.12   Fan climbs from terracing to West Stand seating.

    1514.54   Leppings Lane is clear of fans.
1554.23   Fans in numbers are climbing from terracing to West Stand seating
          area.

1603.58   Tape concludes.


TAPE NO 2

This tape contains views shown in tapes 1 - 1 and 1 - 2 and are in a fast-
forward mode. Additional views are of pictures withifi the ground and fans
leaving after the game has finished.
