                                                                   (pOR 3 5
South Yorkshire Police,nJ *5*33                                                .
wood:; at3 ,                                                              ■/       •*


                 BATTY, Police Sergeant 7j?2.           Group.
                :h::ay,    19S9.


               •e Sergeant of the South Yorkshire Police, Stationed at

 OGCcSS .           a] »                     ies are the arranging of personnell

in relation to manpsver requests by Hararr.erton Hoad, 'F' Division.           The

request is on a n c m a l pro-forn-a and directed to me as the Divisional

i ootoall -laison officer.         -'he rar.power is then raised from the Division

as near as possible equally divided.           A total cf 6 lr.spectors/14 Sgts and

125 P.c’s were requested, oh these 3 Inspectors/ 6 Sgts and 58 P.c's were

obtained frer- ’112' Sub-division.

At “.^5a.~. Saturday, 15th .-%pril, 1939, I co'renced duty at Woodseats Police

station and ensured that all officers attendin'-: duty at the Football match
          0\ddbi> tcTX‘\l^
oetween        f-3r»ld ..’eonesday ana .Liverpool, were on duty and tnat sufficient

transport had beer, provided.
                                         the
Together with other officer we attended at/Killsborougn Football Ground

and prepared for the briefing in the North Stand at 10a.0a.re. that day.

A pre-prir.ted duty sheet had previously been issued and together with previous

knowledge cf the ground I was fully prepared for the Cup Semi-Final.               The

duties allocated were in STB SBTT03 3, Serial 7, SPIOiJ KGP TSRP.AC2S, with

Inspector Calvert being in charge of the Spion Kop.          Other officers in the

detail were PC815 MSS;TTL,PC1103 SDWARDS,PC17S2 T2<PLE, PC 26k HISS?,

PC 2 ^ 3 ~B?:AHAKS, PC 7 j k THORNTON, P C H 83 WL3T, PC 20S0 NSTTLESHIP,

PC 8^1 GTLLGTT, PC 2321 WILLIAMSON.         After the briefing a meal was handed to

all officers, we were instructed to be on our appointed duties by 1 1 .3 0 a.m.

Serial 7 was delegated to the Spion Kop entrances to carry out sporadic

checks for weapons etc carried by fans.          Inspector Calvert carried out his own

briefing on the kop and instructed that we would not carry out the duties appointee

but wou? d remain on the Kop near to a sterile area kept for Liverpool

supporters.    This area was taped off by red and white banded ta-Qfr-stogotn&r          1 -
                                                                      -   2   -
                                                                                    4.C




with a serial of officers dividing the Nottingahm Forest supporters from the

'Sterile area'.   ( In this area there are no escape gates or footpaths away

from the area other than the one leading onto it.     The are is surrounded by

spiked fencing and raised above ground level at one end. )

As time passed the crowd began increasing and at 2.10p.m. i saw four youths

making their way along the Kop and selected a viewpoint in front of tne

'Liverpool si;pporters. This was a deliberate, intended, selected position
                     immediately
 by the youths. They/began chanting and jeering at the Liverpool

supporters.   Police Sergeant Harpies was with a further unit of officers

cordoning off the sterile area.    I appraised him of the situation in relation

to the youths concerned.   I returned to my unit and decided to prevent further

trouble and a serious situation developing, that the youths would have to

be sroken to and removed from the ground.     All four were arrested for being drunk

at a Sporting event and taken to the Police Room.

On writing out the report for the eventual attendance at Court I heard a

message from an officer otoer the p-ersonal radio gliiafttsg for the gates to

be opened at the Leppings Lane end.    A second request was made and the order

was giver, to open the gates.   I did not hear any radio messages after that

for some time, until I returned to the Kop.     On entering the Kop at the rear

from the large central stairway I saw numerous men openly urinating against fences

all along this footpath, in full view of women and Jfssxg others attending the

match.   The youths were toe numerous to warrant any action being taken against

them and a stream of urine was constantly flowing along this gangway.         The

stench cf urine and alcohol was ever present.     The crowd had increased to

such an extent that we had to force our way along the footpath to our

alloted position where the Liverpool fans were segregated.      There was a

strong smell of alcohol on the Kop terraced.

On reaching the area mentioned we were directed by Inspector Calvert to attend at

the opposite end of the Kop and remain there.    I could see that all was quiet
and that we would have been more gainfully employed in assisting him with

the sterile area.       On arriving at the allocated area Chief Inspector Beal

instructed that v:e return to assist Inspector Calvert with the sterile area.

It was at this point I saw that Liverpool were attacking the Notts Forest end

and the ball hit the cross bar.          It appeared at this point that there was a

crowd problem at the Liverpool end and that officers were seating people around ±

the running track behind the Liverpool goal and along the perimieter fence.

It appeared on the face cf it no more than the crowd overflowing.

We returned to the location with Inspector Calvert and ±KK               I saw that the

players had left the field and the game              had been stopped.

Nottingham Forest fans were not aware that an area had been allocated to the

Liverpool fans, and a large number were attempting to make their way into

what they considered ample standing             room.   This obvious —y cau sed great

confusion and certainly annoyance to a number of spectators.                We strengthened

the cordon between the seperate factions of fans.

At this point it still appeared to be a crowd overflow problem with the odd

injury from what appeared to be overcrowding.                      messages wea»«—ae%—h»ard~ami

      conf.-id                 a£--t4?&e— m h x k   I was not aware that anything drastic

had taken place.    Only when I saw the odd stretcher with what appeared to be

a body being carried on it that the             seriousness began to unfold, and then only

slowly as the picture developed.                The mood of the crowd on the Kop was

antagonistic towards the Liverpool fans.             It appeared that they too were

unaware of the seriousness of the incident.

It was apparent that large numbers of Nottingham Forest supporters were the

worse for drink.    Small pockets of supporters were obviously out to cause

trouble, together with a faction in the centre front of the Kop»                btasjocax

jtkMKxsnqeyaxfcKXX that were unruly.           The mood of the crowd altered every

ten minutes or so from one of sheer aggression is              at the garae being stopped

to one of pure sympathy for the injured and the admiration of those attempting

to g render aid.    Many applauded the actions of those attempting to assist the
injured/dying    etc.    Cn> fan was seen to run from the Liverpool^eRd o^ th»>______
stadium and paraded in front of the Spion Kop gesticulating and antagonising

the crowd.     ( He was arrested. )

Several injured and dead were brought to the Kop end of the ground in front

of us.   At this point the realisation that a serious incident had taken

place was developing, I instigated the release of fans from the sterile

area through the Nottingham supporters.       'Bhis easod what I consi defied--t-e tre—a—

B*oteftti.al__dange?eus--si-t-uation that the supporters- ha,d been placed.   This

action was successful due to a majority of the supporters accepting the

opportunity to leave as stated.

Superintendent Greenwood was seen to be walking around the perimteter track

speaking into a megaphone and informing the crowd as to the situation.

The message was not heard by the majority of the crowd but was passed fey

xsx^xBfxxsixikxsr2XH£x    around by word of mouth.     A tanr.oy message wqs given

cut over the public address system but fekio was received ac- a cont-i-auos

gajibi^ noise, no words were heard.       This was not due to any noise being

created by the crowd because they were all stunned by the events taking place

before them.

vvhen the kop began to clear I arranged for a cordon of officers to sweep

across the Kop terraces and clear the remaining people away.          Together with

officers from the unit we then went into Fenistone Hoad North to render aniiy

assistance required.      The situation was in hand although all roads were

blocked with vehicles.

An instruction was then heard over personal radio that all officers not

engaged in actual duties were to return to the North Stand.          This we did.

After a short de-brief I saw Inspector Sewell and volunteered the services of

the units for any duty required.      All weekly leave men were ordered back to

t.neir Divisions and the remainder, together with rryself remained on what

could be described as Security on the gates for the temporary Kortuary in the

Gymnasium.     We remained on that duty until 5.15a.m. the following morning.

We were supplimented with officers from another Division during that period.

A continuous stream of relatives, social workers, ambulances etc; w e ^ see n ^
                                                                                    's***
                                                                                   ✓■
                                                                             - 5 - '6 5




into and out of the area#     iach person 'was escorted into the cuildj.n£r by

an officer from the cate security mentioned.      They were then handed over to m t t x m i

officers working within the jrynaiasiu!?--.   This temporary rortuary was

eventually closed at ~ '5 a •m • and we were rexeased from duty.
                                                                     or      3S
South Yorkshire Police,\01 5 0 3
Woodseats,
Sheffield.
DAVID MICHAEL BATTY, Police Sergeant 752.        'E' Group.
Wednesday, 17th May, 1 9 8 9 .


I am a Police Sergeant of the South Yorkshire Police, Stationed at

Woodseats, Sheffield.     Part of my duties are the arranging of personnell

in relation to manpower requests by Hammerton Road, 'F' Division.          The

request is on a normal pro-forma and directed to me as the Divisional

Football Liaison officer.        The manpower is then raised from the Division

as near as possible equally divided.         A total of 6 Inspectors/14 Sgts and

125 P.c's were requested, 01 these 3 Inspectors/6 Sgts and 58 P.c's were

obtained from 'E2' Sub-division.

At 8.45a.m. Saturday, 15th April, 1989, I commenced duty at Woodseats Police

Station and ensured that all officers attending duty at the Football match

between Sheffield Wednesday and Liverpool, were on duty and that sufficient

transport had been provided.
                                         the
Together with other officer we attended at/Hillsborough Football Ground

and prepared for the briefing in the North Stand at IQaOa.m. that day.

A pre-printed duty sheet had previously been issued and together with previous

knowledge of the ground I was fully prepared for the Cup Semi-Final.             The

duties allocated were in SUB SECTOR 3i Serial 7, SPION KOP TERRACES, with

Inspector Calvert being in charge of the Spion Kop.           Other officers in the

detail were PC815 MOGHUL,PC1103 EDWARDS,PC1782 TEMPLE, PC 264 HIRST,

PC 27^8 ABRAHAMS, PC 734 THORNTON, P C H 83 WEST, PC 2080 NETTLESHIP,

PC 841 GILLOTT, PC 2321 WILLIAMSON.       After the briefing a meal was handed to

all officers, we were instructed to be on our appointed duties by 1 1 .30a.m.

Serial 7 was delegated to the Spion Kop entrances to carry out sporadic

checks for weapons etc carried by fans.        Inspector Calvert carried out his own

briefing on the kop and instructed that we would not carry out the duties appointed

but would remain on the Kop near to a sterile area kept for Liverpool

supporters.   This area was taped off by red and white banded tana^together            ____
with a serial of officers dividing the Nottingahm Forest supporters from the

'Sterile area'.   ( In this area there are no escape gates or footpaths away

from the area other than the one leading onto it.     The are is surrounded by

spiked fencing and raised above ground level at one end. )

As time passed the crowd began increasing and at 2.10p.m. I saw four youths

making their way along the Kop and selected a viewpoint in front of the

Liverpool supporters. This was a deliberate, intended, selected position
                   immediately
by the youths. They/began chanting and jeering at the Liverpool

supporters.   Police Sergeant Marples was with a further unit of officers

cordoning off the sterile area.     I appraised him of the situation in relation

to   the youths concerned.   I returned to my unit and decided to prevent further

trouble and a serious situation developing, that the youths would have to

be   spoken to and removed from the ground.   All four were arrested for being drunk

at   a Sporting event and taken to the Police Room.

On writing out the report for the eventual attendance at Court I heard a

message from an officer ofrer the personal radio pleading for the gates to

be opened at the Leppings Lane end.    A second request was made and the order

was given to open the gates.    I did not hear any radio messages after that

for some time, until I returned to the Kop.     On entering the Kop at the rear

from the large central stairway I saw numerous men openly urinating against fences

all along this footpath, in full view of women and ysMHg others attending the

match.   The youths were too numerous to warrant any action being taken against

them and a stream of urine was constantly flowing along this gangway.     The

stench of urine and alcohol waa ever present.     The crowd had increased to

such an extent that we had to force our way along the footpath to our

alloted position where the Liverpool fans were segregated.      There was a

strong smell of alcohol on the Kop terraced.

On reaching the area mentioned we were directed by Inspector Calvert to attend at

the opposite end of the Kop and remain there.     I could see that all was quiet
                                                                           -   3   -   s*#   ^


and that we would have been more gainfully employed in assisting him with

the sterile area.      On arriving at the allocated area Chief Inspector Beal

instructed that we return to assist Inspector Calvert with the sterile area.

It was at this point I saw that Liverpool were attacking the Notts Forest end

and the ball hit    the cross bar.       It appeared at this point that there was a

crowd problem at    the Liverpool end and that officers were seating people around ±

the running track behind the Liverpool goal and along the perimieter fence.

It appeared on the face of it no more than the crowd overflowing.

We returned to the location with Inspector Calvert and tki           I saw that the

players had left the field and the game          had been stopped.

Nottingham Forest fans were not aware that an area had been allocated to the

Liverpool fans, and a large number were attempting to make their way into

what they considered ample standing room.         This obviously caused great

confusion and certainly annoyance to a number of spectators.          We strengthened

the cordon between the seperate factions of fans.

At this point it    still appearedto be a crowd overflow problem with the odd

injury from what    appeared to beovercrowding.         Radio messages were not heardand

for a considerable amount of time        ksxk   I was not aware that anything drastic

had taken place.    Only when I saw the odd stretcher with what appeared to be

a body being carried on it that the seriousness began to unfold, and then only

slowly as the picture developed.           The mood of the crowd on the Kop was

antagonistic towards the Liverpool fans.         It appeared that they too were

unaware of the seriousness of the incident.

It was apparent that large numbers of Nottingham Forest supporters were the

worse for drink.    Small pockets of supporters were obviously out to cause

trouble, together with a faction in the centre front of the Kop*          itaxjcxs£

tfraggysmyyiay'fepya that were unruly.      The mood of the crowd altered every

ten minutes or so from one of sheer aggression iia        at the game being stopped

to one of pure sympathy for the injured and the admiration of those attempting

to g render aid.    Many applauded the actions of those attempting to assist the
injured/dying   etc.    One fan was seen to run from the Liverpoolx-tywd of tha>»
stadium and paraded in front of the Spion Kop gesticulating and antagonising

the crowd.     ( He was arrested. )

Several injured and dead were brought to the Kop end of the ground in front

of us.   At this point the realisation that a serious incident had taken

place was developing, I instigated the release of fans from the sterile

area through the Nottingham .supporters.     This eased what I considered to be a

potential dangerous situation that the supporters had been placed.       This

action was successful due to a majority of the supporters accepting the

opportunity to leave as stated.

Superintendent Greenwood was seen to be walking around the perimteter track

speaking into a megaphone and informing the crowd as to the situation.

The message was not heard by the majority of the crowd but was passed toy

kHKstxsfXHSMtkxarssHHsbc   around by word of mouth.   A tannoy message wqs given

out over the public address system but this was received as a continuos

garbled noise, no words weee heard.      This was not due to any noise being

created by the crowd because they were all stunned by the events taking place

before them.

When the kop began to clear I arranged for a cordon of officers to sweep

across the Kop terraces and clear the remaining people away.      Together with

of f£ icers from the unit we then went into Penist&ne Road North to render aniiy

assistance required.       The situation was in hand although all roads were

blocked with vehicles.

An instruction was then heard over personal radio that all officers not

engaged in actual duties were to return to the North Stand.      This we did.

After a short de-brief I saw Inspector Sewell and volunteered the services of

the unitx for any duty required.      All weekly leave men were ordered back to

their Divisions and the remainder, together with myself remained on what

could be described as Security on the gates for the temporary Mortuary in the

Gymnasium.     We remained on that duty until 5.15a.m. the following morning.

We were supplimented with officers from another Division during that period.

A continuous stream of relatives, social workers, ambulances etc; wejyff seen >
into and out of the area.   Each person was escorted into the building by

an officer from the gate security mentioned.   They were then handed over to Hifisaaei

officers working within the gymnasium.    This temporary mortuary was

eventually closed at 5.15a.m. and we were released from duty.
