                                              1989 C   No. 5925

    IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                                              Courts of Justice,
    (QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION)                  Crown Square,
                                              Manchester.
    (Liverpool District Registry)

                                              Friday, 5th October 1990


                                     Before;

                               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT


    IN THE MATTER OF THE DISASTER AT HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM
    i5Th APRit i m    ---------------------------------------------

    AND IN THE MATTER OF THIRD PARTY PROCEEDINGS
*   ----------------------------------------------------

    BETWEEN;

    CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                       Third Party Claimant

                AND

    SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC
                                               First Third Party Defendant

                AND

    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS
                                              Second Third Party Defendant


#                          -----------------------------
    M R . R . PAYNE and MR. P. LIMB (instructed by Messrs. Hammond
              Suddards) appeared on behalf of the Third Party
              Claimant.

    MR. E. GLASGOW Q.C. and MR. R. DAVIES (instructed by Messrs
           Davies Arnold Cooper) appeared on behalf of the First
           Third Party Defendant.

    MR. R. TOULSON Q.C. and MR. J. FENWICK (instructed by Messrs.
           Reynolds Porter Chamberlain) appeared on behalf of the
           Second Third Party Defendant.



        Transcript of the shorthand notes of D. L. Sellers & Co.
                (Official Shorthand Writers to the Court)
              10 High Street, Leatherhead, Surrey KT22 8AN.



                       EVIDENCE-IN-CHIEF OF NOEL BURNE
    L. SELLERS   Be Co. / W.   LLOYD W O O D L A N D




^                                                                       Friday, 5th October 1990.

                                                         NOEL BORNE, sworn
                                                       Examined by Mr. Payne

           Q.        Mr. Burne, are you Mr. Noel Burne?                        A.   I am, my Lord.

           Q.       Can you give us your address, please?     A. I practise
g                   from 4 Highfield Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham.

           Q.       Mr. Burne, do you produce the report which you prepared for
                     this trial, which consists of the body of the report and
                     two bundles of exhibits flagged A to S?    A. Correct, my
                    Lord.

           Q.       And in addition to that, I think as a separate bound
q                   volume, you have put in a document published by the
                     Institution of Structural Engineers called "Appraisal of
                    Existing Structures"?     A. In substitute of my own
                    previous Appendix N, in volume 2B.

           MR.         JUSTICE JOWITT:                 That is not a document I have, Mr. Burne.

           MR.        PAYNE:May we give your  Lordship one now, please?
D                    (handed) (To the witness)     I will ask you to refer to
                     that in your evidence when it becomes appropriate. First
                     of all--

           MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT:  This is a new Appendix A?    A. That is
                     correct, my Lord.   It is the total document rather than
                     extracts from it.

E          MR. PAYNE: At Appendix S in bundle 2 of the exhibits, having
               set out your qualifications and experience - can you turn
               first, please, to that?    A. It's the last page in the
               report, my Lord.

           Q.        And you set out your qualifications, which perhaps it is
                     not necessary for meto ask you to go through it orally.
                     After you have set out your list of formal qualifications,
    *               do you describe your experience after service with the
                     Royal Air Force in explosive demolition and crash recovery;
                     you have extensive experience in design construction and
                     repair of a wide variety of structures, foundations and
                     plant in various parts of the world; and in November 1973
                     you established the firm of Elrond Engineering, a privately
                     owned building and engineering consultancy specialising in
q                   expert witness and arbitration work in litigation;
                     chartered engineers and technicians employed directly or as
                     consultants with particular expertise, covering a
                     considerable range of disciplines which you set out, and
                     you have been employed in more than 1,500 cases and you set
                     out the nature of the work that you have been involved in?
                     A. Yes.
^X3.l_ SELLERS & CO. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:    I am not sure I understand the last
 A              sentence. Does    that say anything more than he has been
                 involved in a number of arbitrations in which a decision
                 has been made, or he has been an arbitrator making the
                 decision?

            THE WITNESS:               Both, my Lord.

            MR. PAYNE: That you very much, Mr. Burne. Your report has
                been circulated some time in advance of the trial, and what
                I intend to do to try to identify the material parts of it
                is to ask you to deal with the'partfc of your report which
                relate particularly to three questions which have been
                suggested by the Judge and adopted by the parties, under
                which various other issues have been collected. The first
                question I do not think concerns you - about the pressure
q              at the LeppingsLane turnstiles build-up - except
                indirectly, but the second question is material for you,
                which is should the tunnel have been closed before Gate C
                was opened, and then under the third question (which brings
                in other factors which contributed to the crushing and the
                injuries) particular topics relate to the barriers, the
                gates in the perimeter fence, the means of escape arid the
                certified capacity of the pens and the tunnel gradient.    So
 D             I want you, please, if you would, Mr. Burne, by looking at
                your report, to collect together your evidence and then to
                help my Lord about the documents which are before the Court
                under the topic of the performance of the engineer in
                relation to certified capacity, which is a particular issue
                under the third question identified by the Judge and has a
                significant bearing on question 2 identified by the Judge
                about whether the tunnel should have been closed.   If you
 E             take your report, please, and go to the passages which
                introduce that subject, first of all at page 1 under
                "Summary", paragraph B, you have in very brief terms - can
                you read out paragraph B, please?

                   A.      "No sub-division of capacity or management of flows:

                             1.     Armed with maxima for each subject area of
                                    system of directing by signs, measuring by
                                    counting or controlling by closing off from
                                     further inward movement, could have prevented
                                    overcrowding."

           Q.      I am going to ask you to amplify that in some detail when I
                  have collected together the other parts. So now go to page
 q                6 , paragraph 7, please.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:    Before you do, I follow the argument that
               pens 3 and 4 taken together would have benefited from some
               counting and shutting off method, but would there be any
               need then to distinguish between pens 3 and 4 - in other
               words, to separate the counting in respect of each? I ask
                the question for this reason.   If I think of myself as a
 H             football fan, I can see that pens 3 and 4 will be more
A.L. SELLERS   Be Co. / W.   LLOYD W OO D L A N D




                 attractive to me than the pens out on the wings. As
                 between pens 3 and 4, either is likely to be equally
                 attractive to me, save for whether one is more full than
                 the other.  It seems to me if I envisage the crowd going
                 down the tunnel there is the radial fence dividing pens 3
                 and 4 half-way across the mouth of the tunnel, and it
                 strikes me that between pens 3 and 4 I might expect them to
                 fill up roughly equally while it might be said you should
                 come into the tunnel and there would no need to have a sub­
B
                 division.   What do you say about that?   A. That would be
                 absolutely correct, my Lord. There is no point in
                 attempting to sub-divide when the access down the tunnel
                 meant that those who went there could go into either pen.

        Q.       So you would say you could treat pens 3 and 4 as one whole
                 for the purpose of this monitoring/shutting off exercise?
q                A. In these circumstances, my Lord, for monitoring pens 3
                 and four in total and closing off the tunnel on the
                 turnstile end, rather than the pen end.

        MR. PAYNE:                  Now go on to page 6 , paragraph 7?

                 A.             "In my view, the overcrowding would not have occurred
                                if appropriate numbers had been ascribed by the
D                               Engineer for each separate entity within the terraces
                                identified by physical separation, namely each pen.
                                They should have been self-contained and provided
                                with a counting management system.  If such a system
                                could not be achieved, then overload provisions by
                                means of additional radial fence gates should have
                                been installed at the front of each pen. Separate
                                pen capacities were essential."
E
        Q.      Just pausing there, in the penultimate sentence of that
                paragraph you are drawing attention to the relationship
                 between the need for a counting management system and the
                related need for adequate means of escape?
                 A. Absolutely. Without it, there is no safety.

        Q.      Page          11 then, please, paragraph 2.3(c)?

                 A.           "In my view, the ordinary reasonable practising
                              consulting engineer ought to have identified specific
                              numbers of persons to be controlled as a maximum for
                              each of the pens and divided areas of the ground and
                              communicating such information, together with its
                              importance, to those responsible for stewarding or
                              control."

        Q.       Why, from the point of view of an engineer, Mr. Burne, is
                 it necessary for the Engineer to communicate information
                 about specified numbers to those responsible for
                 management?    A. It is pointless to establish numbers of
                 capacity without there is a system of control to limit
                 those numbers, and without both the limitation of number
    H


                                                       3
A 1- SELLERS & CO. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




          and the control is communicated to those who are responsible
          for the control.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: In other words, action has to be taken
              when the numbers reach a certain level?    A. It is
              pointless creating the numbers, my Lord, if one does not do
              that. They are numbers which are adduced to having been
              safe.
B
          MR. PAYNE: Collecting together under this topic the other
              paragraphs which deal with it, just go on, please, with
              (d)?

                  A.       "Identify safe means of access and egress, including
                           signing for those persons".

q         MR. PAYNE:             Page 12, my Lord.

          THE WITNESS:  In that context, my Lord, I regard signing as a
              means of control.

          MR. PAYNE: What is the next thing which the Engineer ought to
              have done is (e)?

D                A.      "Should recognise that the licensed capacity ought to
                          be broken down to pen size and the available space
                          between individual barriers for the purposes of
                          comparing means of access and barrier design."

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: I understand what you mean by saying the
               licensed capacity ought to be broken down to pen size; I am
              not sure what you mean by the words "and the available
E             space between individual barriers for the purposes of
              comparing means of access and barrier design". Do you mean
              regard must be had to the available space?
              A. Absolutely, my Lord.

          MR. PAYNE: What is the next thing that the Engineer ought to
              do, please, (f)?   A. "Address the capacity of individual
 F            pens.

          Q.      And (g)?    A. "Ensure that there was a system of control
                  to allow effective closing off in a safe way of each of the
                  pens.

          Q.      And (j) and (k)?    A. "Investigated emergency escape;
                  advised appropriate sizes for the emergency gates
 G                constructed in the perimeter fencing."

                  Those seem to be the paragraphs which deal with or bear
                  upon the question of the certified capacity. Go on,
                  please, will you now, to page 79? We are here, part-way
                  through Chapter 5, which begins at page 76. The general
                  heading of which you have given as Spectator's Progress,
                  Analysis of the Defects", and the defects which bear upon
    H


                                                     4
JQ.L. SELLERS   Be Co.   / W. LLOYD W OO D L A N D




                  certified capacity begin at page 79 at 5.8, and so will you
                  begin reading there, please?

                  A.           "No figures for spectator capacity in the individual
                               pens was added to the Safety Certificate either in
                               1981 when the first radial fences were installed or in
                               1985 when the remainder were installed. Nevertheless
                               E & P (the Engineers) gave an arbitrary capacity of
                               1,200 to pen 3 and 1,000 to pen 4 in respect of plant
                               8945/1A showing the ground layout in 1987. This needs
                               to be judged against the emergency evacuation
                               capacity"

                  (this is calculated from the Green Guide)

                               "at 937. That in turn reduces to 717 if pitch gate
                               number 3 is omitted from the calculation.
    SELLERS & CO. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                   Is that 937 an evacuation figure for
             pens 3 and 4?                     A.  No, just for pens 3, my Lord.

A        MR. PAYNE:        If you continue, please, Mr. Burne. A. Toilets
             and refreshments could only be accessed from the external
             c on c o u r s e .

         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                   Is that anything to do with causation in
             this case?

         MR. PAYNE:  I did not want to just jump the paragraph.                   GO on
B            to 510.

         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I take it you agree, Mr. Payne.  If you
             say "No, it has some bearing on it", I will pay some
             attention to it.  If you say that it is not causative, I
             will pay no further attention to it.

         MR. PAYNE:  My Lord,  it is not causative.  One cannot ignore
C            it altogether because of the provisions of the Green Guide
             which suggests divisions of terraces, with their own
             separate access and turnstiles and so on which has the
             necessary consequence that these extra facilities have to
             be provided, but it is not causative to the distaster.

                      Yes, 510, please.     A. "Fixed control access to the
                 central tunnel  could only be by the use of a pair of wooden
D
                 doors which open inwards into the tunnel.  These would
                 only open against the would-be exit flow, but could not be
                 expected to be used whilst there were spectators in the pen.
                 A second pair of doors which opened against the in-coming
                 flow was set in the east wall of the terrace end and would
                 individually close off against the north fence between pens
                 3 and 4."
E
         Q.      And you photographed them.     A.  This is the point your
                 Lordship understands, I believe, that the pen radial fence
                 separating 3 and 4 starts at the pitch end of the tunnel,
                 and the 2 gates which are provided - the 2 wooden doors
                 provided in that end of the tunnel close off against the
                 central fence between the 2 pens.

         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   The point which was going through my mind
             was this: let us suppose the total capacity of the 2 pens
             together is 2,000, divided 1,100 to one pen, 900 to the
             other.   I can see the utility of a counting device which
             counts 2,000 people into the tunnel, I do not see that
             there would be any need to have a counting device which
             would count 1,100 into pen 3 and 900 into pen 4, because
             the fans would see the state of affairs in the pens and
             and would choose the one they thought offered more space.
             A.  It would be also very difficult, my Lord, in that
             confined area to institute any system of counting, and
             the difficulty that this paragraph attemps to address
             is that only those doors at that end were the appropriate
             way to open outwards in case of emergency against the
             flow of people trying to come in.   Whereas the doors at
             the front of the tunnel allow people in and are closed
H
                 off again.             There would be the other alternative of having



                                                         6   .
^JQ.L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                   some form of, your Lordship referred to it as 2 Land
                   Rovers, possibly some form of street fence, trestle
 A                 fence, which are frequently used for crowd control
                   which could be drawn across to provide a physical barrier
                   to prevent access.

            MR. PAYNE:  And at what stage would that be drawn across,
                Mr. Burne?     A.  As soon as the pens had reached the
                capacity which had been attributed safely to them.

 B          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  The joint capacity?             A.   The joint
                capacity for pens 3 and 4, my Lord.

            MR. PAYNE:  On to page 80.   Are you referring still to the
                gates in the tunnel?   Just continue, please.  Just wait
                one moment.   I beg your pardon.     A. "These would
                also be difficult to use as spectators wanting to enter
                the pens would have already gone down the tunnel before
 ^              finding the doors closed."

            Q.      Yes.           A. "There was no system of counting the numbers
                    passing through the tunnel, nor official estimates of
                    individual pen capacity against which to control such
                    n u m b e r s ."

 D          Q.      Well, I think that collects together the points which
                    deal with the capacity of the pens and the need to
                    certify.  I am going to ask you to try to help my Lord
                    by reference to the documents and ask for your comments
                    on the performance of the Engineer in relation to the
                    duties which you have been described in your report.

                         To do this I ask you, please, and you will be
  E                assisted - I think Miss Norcliffe is the best person -
                    to look at the agreed core bundle documents, and begin,
                    please, with the appointment of Dr. Eastwood and the
                    letters that he was sent at page 66.   Volumne one.  This
                    letter is an invitation to Dr. Eastwood to discuss his
                    appointment as an Engineer, from the Club to Messrs.
                    Eastwood and Partners dated 25th October 1978, pointing
                    out that under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 the
  F                Club has been designated and it is necessary for the Club
                    to provide information.   Do you see that?    A.  Yes.

             Q.    So that they can apply for a general Safety Certificate.
                    And in the middle paragraph: "For your information I am
                    enclosing a copy of a note which sets out the type of
                    information and plans which the County Council will
                    require".  Just remind yourself of that at page 57, please,
  ^                 will you, Mr. Burne.     A.  "Notes for the guidance
                    of applicants for Safety Certificate".

             Q. The material paragraph for the topic that I am asking
                 you to deal with is 4 at the bottom of the page, which
                 says that the following information must be supplied:
                 the estimated spectator capacity for each separate stand
  j_l           and each separate area for spectators standing.


                                                  7   .
,JP.L_ SELLERS   Be Co. / W.   LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                         Will you go on, please, to the Safety Certificate.
                    I think we can miss out the intervening documents and go
 A                  to 159.     A.  This is schedule 3.

          Q. Schedule 3.  Just remind yourself of the beginning of
              this document which is at 151.     A.  Safety at
              Sports Ground Act 1975, General Certificate of Safety.

          Q.       And it describes the address of the premises for which
                   this Certificate is issued as the Hillsborough Stadium,
 B                 occupier of the premises and holder of this Certificate
                    is the Club, and paragraph 2, the terms and conditions
                   in the schedules are hereby imposed.   Then over the
                   page, would you go to 153, 2 pages further on.   Paragraph
                   3 under general terms and conditions.      A.  "The number
                   of spectators admitted to the stadium and to the several
                   areas of spectator accommodation within the stadium
                   shall not exceed the figures specified in part one of
 c                 shedule 3".

          Q.        That is what we find at 159.  And there are the crowd
                    capacity figures for the various areas of spectator
                    accommodation within the stadium, and those are figures
                    which have been worked out by Dr. Eastwood in response
                    to his appointment by the Club following the letter which
 q                  you looked at a moment ago.      A.  That is as I
                    understand the position, my Lord.

          Q.        And two-thirds of the way down the column you see the
                    figures for the west terrace 7,200, and the north-west
                    terrace 2,900.

                         I am going to ask you to look at the schemes and
 E                 ask you to comment on the way in which they affect the
                   position   from the point of view of an engineer.   Just
                   before doing so would you look at the first of the
                   annual Safety Certificates given by the Engineer at 226.
                   A.   This is 1st October 1981 annual inspection of
                   Hillborough as required by the Certificate of Ground
                    Safety.

 F        Q.        In the second paragraph do you see that?     A.  "In
                    my opinion the various structures on the ground are in a
                    satisfactory condition and appropriate for the stadium to
                    be used to the full capacity laid down in the Certificate
                    of Ground Safety.

          Q.        Against the background of those documents I ask you,
                    please, to look at the schemes which were proposed by
 G                 Dr. Eastwood during 1981.    They are listed in the
                    drawing at page 206-7.   Yes, 206-7 is the narrative
                    introduction to the drawings which are then set out at
                    208 and 209.  Just spend a moment on those, please, will
                    you, just to refresh your memory.    Do you see that
                    drawing 35631 at 208 proposes a scheme of division of
                    the terrace and the concourse area, and the allocation
  j_l              of a particular number of turnstiles to particular


                                                       8   .
JB-L. SELLERS   Be Co. / W.   LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                    sections or areas of spectator accommodation on the
                    terrace.     A.  Correct.

          Q.        And also that numbers have been worked out by the
                    capacity of those sections of areas of spectator
                    accommodation on the terraces.     A.  Correct.

          Q.        And also that numbers have been worked out for the
                    capacity of those sections?     A.  Yes, not, I can't
                    see any, oh yes, I am sorry, I can't see any number for
B                   the central pen.

          Q.        Well, it looks as if it is 2,400, but it has been
                    crossed out.     A.  Yes.

          Q.       Do you see that?     A.  That's right.  It is 2,400
                   which has been deleted.  And that is pens 3 and 4 which
^                  were not at that time sub-divided.

          Q.       Do you see that by the sub-division of the concourse
                   area by those lines which must have been intended to
                   reflect some kind of fencing or barrier, separate
                   access has been provided to each of the areas on the
                    terrace.      A.  The central wall, the one which is the
                   horizontal line is in the proximate location of an
 D                 existing brick wall dividing the concourse into 2, but
                    the other' lines all appear to be new divisions.

          Q.         You mean existing at the moment?     A.  Existing at
                     the time of disaster,  it has in fact since been
                     demolished.

          MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT:  Just before we leave 208, if I have
 E                   understood that correctly, the scheme along those
                     lines would have left, is it 4 turnstiles?     A.  It
                     says 4 turnstiles on the right, my Lord.

           Q.      Two pens, 3 and 4.  So that would have given your
                    joint account into those 2 pens?     A.   Absolutely,
                    my Lord, and it would appear that the arrows are
                    intended to indicate means of escape at the end, or
 F                 leaving the ground at the end of the game.




 G




 H
                                                      9   .
^[3.L. SELLERS 8cCo. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




 A       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                      Yes.

          MR. PAYNE:   Over the page at 209 is the alternative scheme  and do
               you see here, Mr. Burne, that the same divisions of the terrace
               down the right side of the diagram are proposed, each with a
               number, sometimes crossed out, thought has been given to what
               the number should be, do you see that?   A.  Yes, the central
               area of pens 3 and 4, the number of anticipated spectators is
 B             deleted and the number of turnstiles has gone up to 5.   There
               are 10 turnstiles feeding the concourse which includes the
               access to the west stand.

          Q.      So the scheme appears to intend that 5 out of those 10 should
                  be allocated to standing areas, pens 3 and 4? A.   I would
                  believe so from this layout, my Lord.

 C       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   Does this scheme mean that sofar  ascounting
              through the turnstiles is concerned, if it were adopted, your
              count would be a gross count for pens 1 to 4?  A.  No, my Lord,
              the 10 turnstiles, 2 groups of 5, would limit the counting to
              those who were to go to pens 3 and 4, and those who were to go
              into the stand.

          MR. PAYNE:             Just taking it in stages---
 D
          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   I am sorry, I missed the tiny bit of wall at
               the bottom.  So it is those 4 turnstiles, bottom centre, which
               feed pens 1 and 2? A.   That's right, my Lord.

          MR. PAYNE:  And in order to service those turnstiles the author of
              the drawing has proposed that there should be a new turnstile
 E            providing a queuing area which involved demolition of the wall
              which must have existed at that time and still is there now,
              and reconstruction of the wall biting into the concourse area?
              A.  That's right, my Lord, yes.

          Q.     Now having looked at these two proposals, Mr. Burne, and
                  observed that an assessment has been made of the capacity of
                  the new areas of spectator accommodation, and of the number of
                  turnstiles provided for each area, and the fact that each area
                  is separated from the others in the concourse approach so that
                  the spectators are directed from the turnstiles to their own
                  particular area, what is your comment about these proposals
                  from the safety point of view as an engineer?  A.  There is an
                  automatic control which can be limited to whatever numbers one
                  safely decides is appropriate for the capacity of each of the
                  areas to which the turnstiles give access.

          0.     From the engineering point of view are these schemes safe?
                  A.     Yes.

          Q.     Now those being the proposals would you look please at what    in
                  fact was done.  There are two documents I would like you to


 H

                                                         .10
^p.L. SELLERS 8tCo. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




               have before you.    First of all appendix 4 in the Taylor
 ^             Interim Report and also in the bundle, page 342.

         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                     You ask for 342 and appendix 4?

         MR. PAYNE:   Yes please, my Lord.  Now looking at those two
             documents together one can now get the picture of what in fact
             was done after the Dr. Eastwood schemes which you have just
             been looking at.   First of all looking at page 342 do you see
 B           that this is a Dr. Eastwood drawing entitled Sheffield
             Wednesday Football Club, P.L.C., Existing Layout of Leppings
             Lane Entrance dated 1985?   A.  Absolutely.

         Q.    So this is what in fact was done after the schemes had been
               discussed as proposed in the drawings you were looking at.   So
               that is at the back of the terrace on the concourse.  Then look
               at the Taylpr appendix 4 drawing and can you see the pale
 C             green, or in the photocopy faint grey lines which show the
               position of the radial fences which were introduced in 1981,
               dividing the terrace into three sections?  A.  Absolutely, pens
               1 and 2, 3 and 4 and 5, and 6 and 7.

         Q.     So that putting those two drawings together you can now get the
                combined effect of what in fact was done in 1981 looking at the
                concourse area of page 342?  A.  Yes.
 D
        Q.      Appendix 4 shows what has happened inside the stand.                    Now, Mr.
                Burne---

        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Just so that I follow, before the radial
            fences were put in the only radial fence was dividing the west
            from the north west section?  A.  That's right, my Lord.

         Q.     Then come the two grey fences and at a later stage the two
                black fences which had the effect, the first one of dividing
                pens or making pens 3 and 4 and the one to the right having the
                effect of providing that column, that alleyway---

        MR. PAYNE:             Refuge.

        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                      ...which isolates pen 4 from pen 6?

        MR. PAYNE:             Yes.         A.    That is also known as pen 5, my Lord.

        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  In between,                     yes,?   A.   The access gate to the
            pitch was so numbered.

        MR. PAYNE:  The purpose of that being to provide a sterile area
            between two fans and also to provide a safe place for the
            Police to be able to go up and down?  A.  To gain access to the
            rear of the terraces.

         Q.     That being the result after 1981, Mr. Burne, can you comment
                please upon the effect of what actually was done now that the
                terrace has been divided up but that no      A.  There is now
L. SELLERS 8cCo. / W. LLOYD W O OD L A ND




            no system of individual control to any part of                  the whole   of the
            terraces, including the north west terrace.

     MR.    JUSTICE JOWITT: Just a minute.   You say there is now no
            system, but is it more accurate to say there is still no
            system?  A.  In the previous proposals, my Lord---

     Q.     I know what the proposals are but you are now speaking of what
            was there on the ground and you say there is now no system of
            control.  There is still no system of control is the accurate
            way of putting it, isn't it, it has not altered the inability
            to count into separate pens?  A.  Absolutely, my Lord.  These
            proposals abandon any possibility of a counting system being
            introduced for individual areas.  The turnstiles 1 to 6 still
            lead to the north stand and the remaining turnstiles from 7 to
            23 will lead to any part of the west stand or the whole of the
            west terrace and the north west terrace.

    MR. PAYNE:  The difference, of course, between the pre-existing
        situation and what can been seen in these diagrams now is that
        previously the terrace had been entirely open?  A.  Yes.

    MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  It does mean there is now only one way to go
        into what has become the pen 3, 4, 5 area?  A.  Or through the
        radial gates.

    MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                     Or through the radial gates,   yes.

    MR. PAYNE:  I am sure my Lord has the point but, before the
        introduction of the 1981 radial fences, if someone had come
        through any one of that bank, there are 17 turnstiles
        altogether that give access to the back of the west stand, and
        then someone had gone down the tunnel, they could then have
        gone left or right anywhere along the terrace?

    MR. GLASGOW:    My Lord, I am very sorry, that does just show the
         mischief of leading because, of course, he is working off the
         plan which ignores the wall which we know separated the
         concourse.   It is so dangerous to lead.   Please don't.

     MR. PAYNE:  Mr, Burne, if someone had come through any of those
         turnstiles and made their way down on to the terrace by any of
         the routes which were available round the back of the west
         stand before the radial fences had been put in, having got on
         to the west terrace, what could they have done then, where
         could they have gone along the terrace?  A.  In any location
         along the terrace via the radial gates if they were open, or,
         if the radial gates were closed---

     Q.    I am so sorry.   I think Mr. Glasgow's intervention has made                    you
            lose the thread of it.

     MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Just help me.                    When was the wall in which
         there is gate C erected?
^.L. SELLERS 8cCo. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




         MR. GLASGOW:              I am so sorry,       my Lord.
 A
         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   When was the wall in which gate C stands, when
             was that erected?

        MR. GLASGOW:  That is on the plan and that has been there since
            time immemorial.  That's a very old wall.  If I may help, and I
            am trying to help and not interfere, the wall that is missing
            off this plan is a wall which divides the concourse laterally.
 B
        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  So in other words the drawing of 342 does not
            show the wall which at that time was in situ?

        MR. GLASGOW:  No, my Lord, you get that on appendix 1, if you need
            it, I think, of Lord Justice Taylor's Report.

        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT;                     That has always been there?
 C
        MR. GLASGOW:  My Lord, not always.  It is not one of the exterior
            walls but it has been there at all material times and I was
            only concerned, I know my friend is doing it entirely
            innocently, I am only concerned that the witness should not be
            misled into thinking that if he came into pens 18 to 8, 7 as
            drawn on 324, he would have had access to both the north west
            terrace and the terrace as has been put.

        MR. PAYNE:            Thank you very much.

        MR. GLASGOW:              That was the mischief of the leading.

        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Let me just amend my own plan, page 342 so
            that I do not confuse myself.
,-Q.L. SELLERS 8cCo. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




          MR. PAYNE: What Mr. Glasgow is saying on behalf of the Club -
              do you have Appendix 1, Mr. Burne?  A. Yes.

          Q.      At the back of the Taylor Report?   A. It may be helpful
                  to look at 208 as well, the previous plans, which in fact
                  show that centre wall.
 B
          Q.      The question that I was asking was this: Before the
                  introduction of the radial fences, if you take Appendix 4
                  in the Taylor Report, you see the 1981 two radial fences
                  that you were dealing with?   A. Yes.

          Q.      Before those were put in 1981, if someone had come through
                  the bank of turnstiles at the back of the west stand and
                  got on to the concourse and then had made their way round
                  the back of the west stand or down the tunnel on to the
                  terrace, where could they then have dispersed themselves,
                  do you say?   A. Wherever they wished, if the radial gates
                  were open.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: The effect of putting up the two grey
              barriers, if the radial gates are shut, is that access to
D             what later became pens 3, 4 and 5 is through the tunnel
              only, via what later become turnstiles A - G, and access to
              what later become pens 2 and 3 is round the side, again via
              turnstiles A - G; and access to what later become pens 6
              and 7 is via turnstiles 7 to 16. Have I understood
              correctly?

          MR.      PAYNE:        7 to 18 at that time, my Lord.

          MR.     JUSTICE JOWITT:   7 to 18, I am sorry.                I misread that.
                  That is the position, is it?

          MR. PAYNE: That is what we understand the position to be, my
              Lord, yes.

P         THE WITNESS:               And to       the north west terrace, my Lord, 7 to 18.

          MR.      JUSTICE JOWITT:  Yes, that is T-7hy I said "what later become
                  pens 6 and 7", 7 being the north west terrace, is it not?
          A.      There is also the north west terrace as well, my Lord. I
                  think it is all one huge area.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                     Have I misunderstood this --
G
          MR. PAYNE:             If your Lordship looks at Appendix --

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   Is that what you mean by the north west
              terrace?   (Indicating document). A. That is the lower part
              of the north west terrace, my Lord, pen 7. In addition, if
              you move up to that part there, my Lord, that is the north
              west terrace, the 2,900 figure about which there has been
H             discussion.


                                                          14.
J3.L. SELLERS 8cCo. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




^         MR. GLASGOW:  If it helps your Lordship, it is referred to in
              the documents as the upper north west terrace, in the
              Licensing Notice.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                    The upper north west terrace is the 2,900?

          MR. GLASGOW:               2,900, my Lord,

g         MR. PAYNE:             The white area.

          THE WITNESS: The 7,200, my Lord, is in respect of the areas 1,
              2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7.

          MR. PAYNE: Now, having looked at the effect of the 1981
              alterations against the background of what had been drawn,
              can you give your comments, Mr. Burne, about the
C             performance of the Engineer? In the mind of Dr. Eastwood,
              should the introduction of the radial fences in 1981 on the
              west terrace have any effect on the capacities which you
              have seen recorded in the Safety Certificate?    A. I
              believe that the cul-de-sac created by the two green
              barriers added in 1981, to which access could be obtained
              primarily by the tunnel, ought to have had a safe capacity
              addressed to it at that date.
D
          Q.     Bearing in mind that the Certificate is issued by the
                 Licensing Authority, what was the duty of the Engineer in
                  the circumstances which had arisen?   A. In identifying
                  the installation of those radial fences and the creation of
                  the sub-division, I believe the Engineer ought to have
                  identified the safe capacities of the sub-divided areas --

 E        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   When you say "identified", do you mean
               calculated them?   A. Calculated them, yes; and reported
               them in his annual report.

          Q.     In other words, there should have been three or four pens.
                  The upper north west terrace is left untouched, so our
                  7,200 should have been split into three figures? A.
 p               Correct, my Lord.

          MR.      PAYNE: From the point of view of an engineer, Mr. Burne,
                  can you help my Lord as to the reason for applying a
                  particular number to a particular enclosed area on a
                  terrace such as this. When I say "applying", I mean
                  working out, calculating a particular number. Does it have
                  any safety implications?    A. Primarily to establish that
 G                each of the people who were allowed in there had a
                  reasonable area to be able to occupy; but, in addition to
                  t h a t --

          MR.     JUSTICE JOWITT:   Wait a moment; yes. A. In addition, to
                  be able to get those people out with safety.

          MR. PAYNE: Assuming that he had done what you say he ought to
 H           have done and worked out the safe number for each of the


                                                          15.
D.L. SELLERS 8tCo. / W. LLOYD W OO D L A N D




»                new areas, from the point of view of an engineer, is there
                 a foreseeable consequence if those numbers should now
                 become exceeded?   A. There is an inevitable consequence
                 of risk of not being able to get people out if the
                 appropriate means of escape is not provided, and there then
                 i s --

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   Just a moment. When you say "appropriate
3             means" do you mean appropriate to the numbers admitted into
               that area?   A. A safe route for each and every person who
               is admitted, my Lord, yes.

          Q.     Does it have to have regard to the number of people there?
          A.     Yes.

          Q. In other words, what may be safe for 200 may be unsafe for
C            600?     A. Absolutely, my Lord. It will perhaps be safe
              for 2 0 1 .

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                  Yes.

         MR. PAYNE:   Having calculated the capacity of each of these new
              pens, would the Engineer, Mr. Burne, have any duty to
              consider how those numbers were going to be controlled?
D       A. Yes. There is no point in producing capacity figures which
              you have calculated for safety if the numbers are going to
              be ignored.

          Q. What means of control would an engineer specify if he was
              performing his function correctly?   A. The ideal would be
              a control at the perimeter of the premises in the form of a
              turnstile.

          Q.     Giving access to what?   A. Restricted entirely to the
                 area to which those people who pass the turnstile can only
                 gain access.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  In other words, feeding one area only?
          A. A set number of turnstiles feeding one area only, my Lord.
 r
          Q. When you say "perimeter of the premises", I am not quite
              sure what you mean by that phrase?   A. Where the
              spectators are admitted to the ground at the outside of the
              line of turnstiles.

          Q. In other words, the turnstiles situated in the places that
               we have seen at page 242 but each group of turnstiles
 G            feeding one area only?   A. Discrete turnstiles for
               discrete areas.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                  Yes.

           MR. PAYNE:   Should the Engineer consider any other means of
                control of the capacity in the individual pens? A. If
                there were not to be turnstiles, then some other system of
 H             management counting is essential, in my opinion.


                                                      16.
'-'^.L. SELLERS 8cCo. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




           Q.      And how could such counting in practice be done? A. By
                   firstly directly flows of people by signs, and specific
                   counting at the entrances to the discrete areas.




  B




  D




   E




   H


                                                   17.
 //
      D.L. SELLERS & Co, / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                   and the necessary corollary of a physical control mechanism when those
                   discrete areas are counted to be full.
           MR. JUSTICE OOWITT:              Physical closing off in other words?      A. Yes, my Lord.
      A
          MR. PAYNE: Where would the Engineer's part come in in identifying the need
               for one or other of those systems?      A. At the very beginning when he
               issues his annual letter relating to safety.
          Q.      In fact my Lord knows that neither of those systems was introduced or
                   recommended and in fact the system which was operated was one of visual
      R           impression, by which someone was required to look at the number of people
                   in the pen to make an assessment by that means of the number who have
                   gone in and were going in. From the engineering point of view, Mr. Burne,
                   can you comment please on the system which was in fact relied upon by the
                   Engineer and the Club?     A. I find it extremely difficult to even begin
                   to estimate the number of people in a crowd in a discreet area. The
                   photographs --
4}    q    Q. Yes, you are about to refer to some photographs which have just recently
               been produced by Mr. Thorburn who is one of the Engineers, expert Engineers,
               who are giving evidence on behalf of the other parties. I think those have
               found their way into the bundle in some way. I did not put them in myself?
               A. And also appendix 5 of Lord Justice Taylor's Report.
        MR. JUSTICE OOWITT: Rather than look at appendix 5 which is a xerox copy, is
             there a proper print of these photographs. It is easier to follow?
      D      A. It might help my Lord if there is a part of that reproduced in my own
             report in colour.
          MR. JUSTICE OOWITT:              There seem to be copies about.
          MR. PAYNE: My Lord, we do have a copy of the Interim Report inwhichthere is
              a colour photograph.
      E MR. GLASGOW: What was your Lordship asking for. There is a bit of dispute in
             Counsel's row.
          MR. JUSTICE OOWITT:              If there is a copy of appendix   5 rather than justthe xerox.
           MR. GLASGOW: To the Taylor Report?
           MR. JUSTICE OOWITT: Yes. Simply that it is easier than making head or tail of
      *         the xerox.
           MR. PAYNE: My Lord, in the bundle the other photographs which have been produced
                by Mr. Thorburn and are now being referred to by Mr. Burne have found their
                way into the bundle at page 864. I am not sure whether that applies to
                everybody. I see my learned friends have theirs bound up and with a flag
                on.
      Q
           MR. GLASGOW: My Lord, I wonder if it would be more convenient to have them
                separately so you do not have the whole bundle.
           MR. PAYNE: These are documents which we understand were produced shortly before
                the commencement of the trial.
           MR. JUSTICE OOWITT: Then may I hand you back your copy.                 I do not think this
      H         in fact includes appendix 5.

                                                            -18 -
1>
     ,J\L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




           MR. GLASGOW: No, my Lord, it does not. Your Lordship still needs the report.
                I thought you were handing it back a little prematurely.
           MR. PAYNE: Mr. Burne looking at this bundle, have you got the bundle of
      A         photographs referred to by Mr. Thorburn?    A. Yes, 864 in core bundle 2.
           Q.     Have you got them there?                 A. Yes, they are black and white photocopies.
           Q.     You need to be supplied with the originals?                A.   I have the original that
                  Mr. Thorburn suggested to me directly.
           Q.     Can you show me which one that is and I will be able to give the number
      B           which appears in this bundle that I have just been handed?    A. It is
                   that which appears at 863A.
           MR. JUSTICE OOWITT: Do we know what time this photograph was taken?
        MR. PAYNE: My Lord, if I can ask the witness, it is a new document. Mr. Burne
             what do you understand this is being produced. What does it show please?
             A. It shows the second half of the Nottingham Forrest/Liverpool semi cup
      c     final 1988 my LOrd. The clock is at 16.20.
           MR. JUSTICE 00WITT:               1988?    A.    1988 my Lord.   I am sorry I do not know the
                date in 1988.
           MR. JUSTICE OOWITT: It does not matter, another occasion?                    A. But between
                the same two clubs.
      D MR. PAYNE: You have drawn attention to this photograph in answer to my question
             to invite you tomake a comment from the point of view of an Engineer about
             the system of visual impression, so what is your comment please? A. I
             ask you to compare my Lord the view of pens 3 and 4 and the west terrace
             in general in 1988 as compared with a similar view which appears in appendix
             5 of Lord Justice Taylor's report, which is at — the clock say one minute
             to three but it is understood to be a minute out — three o'clock on the
      E      day of the disaster.
           Q.      What is your comment?    A. The difficult is to attempt to compare the
                   very substantial differences that are actually there in numbers of
                   spectators, and the complete inability on my part to be able to see any
                   difference in apparent numbers.
           MR. JUSTICE OOWITT: I confess, looking at the two photographs myself, and
       F        comparing them, appendix 5 does suggest to me that the people at the front
                they can be seen more readily because the sun is shining on them, are a
                good deal more squashed up than appears at 863A, the 1988 photograph. You
                say that is a wrong impression?    A. I believe so, my Lord. I have
                attempted to address this very long and very hard.
           Q.      Can you tell me this this accurately represents what you say Mr. Burne:
                    " In comparing the 1988 photograph with appendix 5, one cannot detect any
       ^           difference in the degree of packing between the two photographs, although
                    as we now know there must have been a substantial difference? A. Absolutely
                   my Lord.
         MR. PAYNE: It is the system I am asking you to comment on Mr. Burne from the
              point of view of an Engineer and when the system depends on visual
              impression it is clear that different people can have different impressions,
       H     simply by even looking at these photographs, but I want you to comment from
              the point of view of an Engineer about the effectiveness of such a system?

                                                                 - 19 -
    L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




              A. It is simply that I am unable in that situation to note a difference
              of twice the number of people.
A MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: May I add to this answer. Would you expect any difference
       in the ability to distinguish, not looking at photographs, but in the
       flesh on the days in the stadium? A. Only if one can see spaces my Lord.
       When you see a moving mass of heads it is almost impossible to get any
       genuine understanding of numbers.
  MR. TOULSON: My Lord, I rise to object at this stage and I do so on two grounds.
       The first is this: that there was an order in relation to expert evidence,
B     that expert evidence be admitted at the trial limited to the substance of
       the reports. The second point is this: this expert has given his
       credentials. The claimants inthese contribution proceedings have a very
       large number of officers who have been present at football grounds and
       who apparently it is said on their part attempted to work this system.
       We have heard no evidence from them and we are told we shall hear no
       evidence as to what you can and cannot see and I challenge the qualification
       of this Engineer to be able to state what you can and cannot see if you
C      are attempting to perform that function at a football ground. He is not
       commenting on primary factual evidence. Indeed we are not going to have
       that. Those are the two grounds of objection.
      MR. PAYNE: No, I accept the second ground and I would be grateful Dr. Burne
           if you would confine yourself to dealing with the idea of the system.
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: I am not going to stop the evidence. It may assist me
u         in weighing Mr. Burne's evidence when he is making comments on the
           problem of making a visual impression, and indeed part of the difficulty
           if there are difficulties in having a visual impression is whether you
           can by the use of one's eyes distinguish between packed and the absolutely
           over packed.
      MR. TOULSON: My Lord, having heard your Lordship's comment I withdraw my
£         objection.
      MR. PAYNE: Mr. Burne, would you on this question of system look in the bundle.
           Go back to page 159, the crowd capacity numbers.
^Q.l_ SELLERS & CO. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                  On this Certificate, Mr. Burne, you see the crowd capacity
 A               numbers which at some stage were allocated by the certified
                  authority on the calculations which have been done by the
                  Engineer and put in the Certificate. Do you see that?
                  A . X do.

          Q.      I want to ask you a question which I raised hypothetically
                  in the course of opening, and I want to ask you to deal
 n               with it from the point of view of an engineer. When these
                  figures were allocated to each particular area of the
                  ground, if there had been a meeting attended by the
                  Engineer at which this question of how the numbers were
                  going to be controlled had been raised, suppose somebody in
                  the room had said it was going to be done just by having
                  some people looking at the crowd to see when the numbers
                  were reached, what in your opinion, Mr. Burne, would have
 q               been the response of a responsible engineer in the position
                  of Dr. Eastwood?    A. My view is that the Engineers
                  should have said that one cannot control numbers visually.
                 There may be potential to attempt to estimate density of
                 packing; it is discrete, numbers have been established - it
                  is extremely difficult to count the heads in a moving
                  crowd.

 D        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                    Those are two separate matters?
               A. They are, my                   Lord, I quite accept that.

          Q.     May I just be sure that I have that accurately noted? You
                  say there may be a possibility of assessing the degree of
                  packing, but not of helping others?    A. Correct, my
                  Lord.

  E       MR. PAYNE: A point which has been addressed to my Lord in the
              trial is that this sub-division of the terrace, which you
              have just been looking at in the Taylor Appendix 4 drawing,
              is something which was requested by the Police in order to
              control the whereabouts of the spectators so that the idea
              was proposed by the Police?    A. Yes.

          Q.     When such an idea is proposed, what is the function,
                  Mr. Burne, please, of the Engineer in response to such a
                  suggestion by the Police? What should his response be?
                  A. There is a need to e s ;
                                            : ^Liish discrete numbers to
                  discrete areas; the idea of separating groups of different
                  spectators in order to avoid fights between people, for
                  whatever reason, necessarily means that the numbers must be
                  known.
  Q
           Q.    Where would the Engineers part come into the planning of
                  this new arrangement?    A. Simply to say what numbers
                  each of the areas which were to be allocated was a safe
                  figure for that area.

           Q.    If it be said (as we understand it may be to my Lord) that
                  the Police were the ones who had said that they wanted
     H           these fences in order to control the crowd, therefore it


                                                          21
,-A .L .   SELLERS & CO. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                       was reasonable for the Engineer to assume that the Police
 A                     would actually do that and that they would control the
                       crowd. What is your comment, please, about---

                MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                   That is not a matter for me.

                MR. PAYNE:           Well, my Lord---

 g            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:    I think you could put the question in this
                   way and it may be acceptable:   did you as an engineer think
                   it right to leave it to the Police to control the numbers?

               MR. PAYNE: My Lord. I am happy to adopt that suggestion.
                   (To the witness) What is the answer, please, Mr. Burne?
                       My answer is that whoever controls must know numbers
                   who can safely be accommodated and they must carefully
q                 count those numbers and manage them.

               Q.     You have produced now, in a separate volume, a publication
                       called "An Appraisal of Existing Structures , Mr. Burne,
                       and I ask you just to turn to that in context, please.

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                    This is Appendix A, is it?

D             MR. PAYNE:             My Lord, it is the one that has replaced N.

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                    Yes.

               MR. PAYNE: I am going to ask you to refer to this certainly
                    twice in the course of your evidence, and so just identify
                   what the document is, please, Mr. Burne, for the first
                    time, would you? I will take it in stages: it is
E                  entitled        A. It's a document prepared by the
                    Institution of Structural Engineers some ten years ago, my
                   Lord, entitled "Appraisal of Existing Structures".

               Q.     It is published in July 1988, it gives the constitution---
                      A. Sorry, my Lord, it was first published in July 1980.

               Q.     Sorry, 1980. Thank you very much.   It gives the
                      constitution of the ad hoc committee, a list of
                      distinguished engineers, and a list of ex officio members
                      of the committee headed by Dr. Eastwood, another
                      distinguished engineer, 1976-77.

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  May I say, Mr. Payne, I see there are 60
                   pages to this document.   I shall only look at those pages
q                  that I am invited to look at.

               MR. PAYNE:             My Lord, I am very relieved to hear it.,

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: You need not necessarily ask the witness
                   to identify them all, but I shall want a list.

               MR. PAYNE:             Certainly.
 H


                                                               22.
AJ- SELLERS & CO. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   Unless it is just a very few passages you
A             are going to take me to.

          MR. PAYNE:   I am happy to say it is very few; I am going to be
               selective, but the document is available for anyone if they
               should care to ask.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   As I say, I shall not go through the
_             document generally; I shall only look at those parts which
              it is said are material.

          MR. PAYNE:   Thank you, my Lord.  (To the witness) On this
               topic that I am asking you to deal with about the function
              of the Engineer when proposals such as this are put up.
              will you look at 2.3 at page 8 under "Responsibilities ?
              Do you see that?
C
                 A.       "No engineer can avoid responsibility for his actions.
                          However, if the appraising engineer states his
                          opinions and advice clearly, gives the bases for these
                          and can be seen to have acted wholly objectively and
                          prudently, he should have no need to fear legal action
                          against him, even if his opinions are later proved to
                          be wrong or his advice unsound."
D
         Q.      Just in that context, Mr. Burne, are you aware of any
                 evidence over this period that Dr. Eastwood raised any
                 objection to the introduction of this first set of radial
                 fences without there being any means of controlling
                 particular numbers into the new pens?    A. I am not aware
                 of any.

E        Q.      Over the page, please, there is a checklist of points the
                 Engineers should have in mind at the top of page 9. I just
                 ask you to read the first three?

                 A.       "The Engineers should decide whether the brief is
                          morally and professionally acceptable; decide whether
                          to accept it, reject it or persuade the client to
                          alter it; remain objective at all times, be aware of
                          his responsibility for public safety, and decide
                          whether to report factors or findings not covered by
                          the original brief."

         Q.     That completes what I want to ask you about the first set
                of changes in 1981 and I want you to go on comment, please,
                in relation to the performance of the Engineer as to the
q               certified capacity, about the changes which took place in
                1985. Can you remind yourself, please, of the drawings
                which were produced by Eastwood and Partners, beginning in
                the bundle at 284? This was the occasion that further sub­
                division of the west terrace was being proposed, and this
                is the first of a series of drawings produced by the firm
                in connection with that alteration. Just remind yourself
                by looking at the concourse area, Mr. Burne, of the
H               proposals which were then put forward for separate


                                               23
    P-J- SELLERS   Bt   Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                         turns tiling access to the various new pens. Do you see
                         those?     A. Yes, it's a very radical alteration.

             Q.         I think one can just go through now the sequence of
                        proposals.    The next one is at 292. Do you see that this
                        is another scheme involving a different configuration of
                         turnstiles, each providing separate access to the new
                        separate areas in the pens?     A. Yes. Insofar as the
                        central pen and the two end pens are concerned; it does not
    B
                        separate out pens 6, 7 and the north west pens 1 and 2
                        separately.

             Q.         Looking at  the central pens at page 292 on drawing 3, one
                        cannot see the pens but one can see the entrance to the
                         tunnel?   A. Yes, there are four turnstiles labelled 23
                         to 26.
•   c        Q.          When my Lord asked; you at the beginning of your evidence
                         about your response to the idea of whether it was necessary
                         to provide separate capacity for each of pens 3 and 4, and
                         you replied--

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Not quite separate capacity, but provide
                 separate entry control.
    D
             MR. PAYNE; Separate entry control to those pens.
                 (To the witness) You gave your answer « you see the
                 proposal which was being put forward at 292, drawing 3,
                 when there are four turnstiles for visiting supporters to
                 the centre terrace?    A. That leads directly into pens 3
                 and 4.

    E        Q.          What is your comment, please, from the point of view of
                         safety of that proposal if it had been implemented?
                         A. That proposal is fine in terms of monitoring the people
                         going in.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                         Into where?   A.   Pens 3 and 4, my Lord.




    G




     H


                                                                  24
,X).L. SELLERS & CO. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                   It fulfills my philosophy of discrete turnstiles to
                   discrete areas.

           MR.     JUSTICE JOWITT:  And then when you are up to your
                   allocated number, you simply close down those
                   turnstiles?     A.  You stop the turnstile, yes.

           MR. PAYNE:  The last of the proposals before Dr. Eastwood
               was stopped is at 302, drawing 4.     A.  This is a
               similar proposal with 3 turnstiles specifically to feed
 B             pens 3 and 4 together.

            Q.     Comment from the point of view of safety, please, Mr. Burne?
                   A.  In terms of limiting numbers it is an ideal solution.
                   Since the turnstiles can be identified on the outside as
                   to the areas to which they lead.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  That involves the fans, as long as the
 ^             turnstiles are open, making their choice of which area
               if they know which turnstile leads to which area before
               they try to go through to the terrace?     A.  Absolutely,
               my Lord.  And the opportunity for that information to be
               put on their tickets.

            Q.    I am just wondering if you buy your ticket for the
 jj               terraces and then your ticket determines, if you have
                   got the instructions properly according to the plan,
                   which pen you are going to go into, whether there is
                   another problem which arises then with fans with their
                   terraced tickets going through the wrong turnstile, not
                   the stand turnstile, but simply the wrong pen
                   turnstile, and in that way causing a problem.  Do you
                   follow?     A.  I am sure that the Club would have enormous
 E                experience in that regard, my Lord, in terms of clearly
                   identifying the turnstiles and the tickets if there was
                   to be a restriction to a central terrace.

            Q.     It depends on the individual fan either having the nous,
                   or taking the trouble to see that he goes through
                   turnstile so and so or so and so?     A.  They were labelled
                   on the day, my Lord, with very large letters: A, B, C and D.

            Q.     I understand so, yes.     A.  That is what I am suggesting
                   here, my Lord, that the potential possibility for those
                   who had tickets specifically for the central pen would
                   have to go to turnstile labelled C.

            Q.      Yes.  I am just thinking of the fans anxious to get
                    in and one knows generally these are the terraced
                    turnstiles, but does not look properly at his ticket
                    and goes to pen 6.D.     A.  In this particular scheme,
                    my Lord, there is a group of turnstiles for the southern
                    end of the west terrace, but in the centre is the group
                    of turnstiles for the west stand.

            Q.      Yes.     A.  So that it might be more easy visually to
                    interpret by the location of the turnstiles which are
^£J.L. SELLERS & CO. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                    feeding directly into the areas they serve, because
                    that is the central set of turnstiles for the central
                    turnstiles;   those are the turnstiles for the southern
 A                  end separated visually.

            MR. PAYNE:  On the problem which my Lord   is contemplating
                of a fan turning up at the turnstile at the head of a
                number of other people also trying to get in and
                finding that he has arrived at the wrong turnstile, would
                a solution be available to the operator to let that
                particular person through to release the bottom end, and
 B              then he could remain inside on the concourse without
                the total number being admitted through those turnstiles
                into the pens would still be known by the turnstiles
                counters?     A.  The question of admission and the
                numbers, knowing the numbers is the important function,
                not whether a specific fan has gone to the particular
                part of the terrace that is what he expected.
 C
            Q.      I think another way in which the fans might be assisted
                    to go to the right turnstiles of course is by a system
                    of colour coding on the tickets, Mr. Burnes?     A.   Yes.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  It involves in effect a booking, not
                for the stands or the terraces, but for a particular
                area of the terracing.  It may be that lost in those
 jj             terraces you get there people who get there reasonably
                early to get a good pitch, and it may be a bit annoying
                if you get there early and instead of getting your
                position there you end up on the wings, because that is
                the ticket they have got.   In other words, there are
                many considerations.

            MR. PAYNE:   Mr. Burne may I ask a question arising from my
 E              Lord's observations: in the light of the Engineer's
                responsibility to be aware of his responsibility for
                public safety in the document that you have just been
                looking at, the kind of consideration that my Lord is
                raising are these: the kind of things which the Engineer
                ought to have in mind when drawing up this sort of scheme.
                A.   I believe so, my Lord, primarily because signs are an
                extremely important part of crowd control.
  F
             Q.      I do not think that point can go much further.

                         I ask you to go on then, please, to look now at
                    what exactly was in fact built after the various schemes
                    that you have been examining, and look at 333, please.

                         Looking at drawing 8.A at 333, Mr. Payne, do you
                    see that this is the configuration which is in fact
                    adopted in the 1985 alterations?     A.  Largely, yes.
                    The allocation of south-west terrace, west stand and
                    so forth is not appropriate, but the number of turnstiles
                    is correct.

             Q.     I would ask you just to look at the annotations which
  jj                have been put on this drawing as to the destinations of



                                                  26.
ELJ_. SELLERS & CO. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                 the spectators approaching the various turnstiles starting
                  from the left-hand end of the shorter range: turnstiles
                  23 and 26, it must be 26, are they designated south?
A                A.   That is 20, the first 4 turnstiles at that end are
                  left-hand ones, being 23, the right-hand one is actually
                  I think 20.

          Q.     Right.  That is given the designation south-west terrace,
                 visiting supporters.  Do you see that?     A.   Yes.

          Q.     And next to it are 3 turnstiles for people in the west
B                stand.     A.   19, 18, 17.

           Q.    And the other side of the gate, there are 3 more turnstiles
                  for the west stand.     A.  16 to 14.

          Q.      Yes, and then 5 for the north-west terrace.        A.   That is
                  13 to 9.
r
           Q.     And the balance of 8 for the north stand.     A.    Yes, my
                  Lord.

           Q.    So that with the scheme as finally introduced, Mr. Burne,
                  there is some measure of control proposed by the
                  turnstiles for division of the fans between, as we look
                  at this diagram, the pens on the left-hand side of the
jj               terrace and those to the right-hand side of the terrace.
                 A.   Yes.  The difficulty that I am faced with with this
                  plan, my Lord, is to know whether the central pens 3 and
                  4 is allocated to the south-west from the north-west.

           Q.    Yes.   If they are coming from the south-west entrance they
                  have got 4 turnstiles, and they can either go through the
                  tunnel to pens 3 and 4, or round the corner to pens one and
E                2.       A.  When they get through the turnstile, yes.

           Q.    And in the other section if they come through the
                  north-west terraced turnstiles ----     A.  They have
                  to go through pens 6 and 7 across the head of the
                  radial fences if the gates are open.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   You mean they have to get into pens 3
 F             and 4.      A.  To get into pens 3 and 4.  So that north­
                west terraced area is restricted to effectively pens 3
                and 4, sorry, pens 6 and 7 and ---

           Q.      The upper north-west terrace.     A.   And the upper
                   north-west terrace, my Lord, yes.

           MR. PAYNE:  And they can go in any one of those pens from
 ^             those turnstiles?     A.  That's correct.

           Q.    Having proposed this layout for turnstiles in drawing A
                  which was then adopted by the Club, do you see that in
                  the middle of what is called "a new wall" from the
                  corner of the turnstiles to the back of the west stand,
                  there is provided a personal access door?     A.   Yes,
                  my Lord.


                                                 27.
    SELLERS &   CO.   / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




         Q.      If this were   an existing structure on which the
                  Engineer was making a report, he would find some
                  guidance in the publication that you looked at, and
A                 in this context I would like you, please, just to look
                  at the guidance that he has given in the separate copy
                  of appraisal of existing structure at paragraph 2.4.1.
                  A.  This is in writing reports.

         Q.      Yes.   Report  and General Considerations.   I appreciate
                  that this is guidance given to the Engineer in the
                  context of if he has been given a job to report on in
®                 existing structure, whereas here this is a mixed job
                  of partly reporting on a mixed structure and partly
                  advising a new scheme for 8.A.   Do you see under 2.4.1.
                  General Considerations, the second paragraph, would you
                  read that, please?      A.  "The report should be
                  logical and have continuity and be easy to follow.     The
                  contents be relevant to the brief, nothing of importance
                  should be left out, or any unnecessary material included.
                  The report must be based on factual data and should be
                  objective in approach.   Any reservations or limitations
                  implicit in the method technically employed, or
                  interpretations of results should be clearly stated.
^.L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




 ^      Q.      And over the page?

                A.      "Conclusions should be explicit and the use of vague
                         generalities avoided.  Where either there is insufficient
                         information or the results of the survey and/or tests are
                         inconclusive, this should be clearly stated and the
                         conclusions qualified accordingly.  Any recommendations
                         should include the appropriate engineering solutions
 B                       clearly defining disadvantages and advantages.   The
                         Engineer should indicate his preferred solution.   The
                         client must be made aware of any risk to public safety."

        Q.     Now on that point, when presenting this drawing to the Club,
               from the point of view of an engineer, Mr. Burne, did the
               engineer have any duty to make a reference, any reference to
               the way in which these turnstiles should be used on future
 C             occasions, particularly big occasions?  A.  Absolutely.  There
               is a need in my opinion for the figures in terms of capacity of
               each of the areas identified for persons to pass through, to
               gain access to, in terms of the turnstile.

        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Can you say that again?  I have not followed?
            A.  I believe he has a duty, my Lord, to identify the discrete
            figures for individual areas.
 D
        Q.      By identify you mean calculate?  A.  Calculate them and report
                them, so that specific numbers can relate to specific
                turnstiles in the way they have been allocated.

        Q.      Report them to whom?            A.   To the Club and to those issuing the
                Safety Certificate.
  E
        Q.      You say so that people can be counted into those areas up to
                the capacity limit?  A.  Counting and control, my Lord.

        MR. PAYNE:  You mean through the turnstiles allocated on drawing
            8A?  A.  Yes.

        Q.      Now I want you to look---

        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   Just a minute please.  You spoke of people
            being controlled.   Did you mean by that the numbers being
            controlled?  A.   Yes, my Lord.

        MR. PAYNE:  Now of course drawing 8 A , looking at the left hand side
            of the drawing where 4 turnstiles are provided for pens 3 and 4
            and 1 and 2 collectively, provides no means of separation of
            those going into pens 3 and 4 on the one hand and pens 1 and 2
            on the other?  A.  Nor to those who are wanting to go to the
            west stand.

        Q.      So that does this design provide any means of control of
                capacity of numbers going into pens 3 and 4? A.   Not
    SELLERS   &   Co. / W. LLOYD WO O D L A N D




               sufficient.                There is no way of limiting the number into pen 3
^             and 4.

      Q.      When you presented this drawing to the Club   would there be any
               duty on the part of the Engineer to say anything about it?
               A.  Yes, in my opinion.

      Q.       What should the Engineer do?  A.  He should have pointed out
               that there was no way of dividing up those who were to go to
B             two separate discrete areas without some additional system of
               control.

      Q.      Did the lack of that system have any implications for crowd
              safety?  A.  The potential is for all of those going through
              turnstiles 20 to 23 to go into pens 3 and 4 without some
              additional system of control, with the necessary resulting lack
              of safety.
C
      Q.      Does the duty of the Engineer of presenting   a drawing such as
              8A include making any reference to the Club of the future use
              of any combination of these turnstiles if the use will alter
              the destinations of the spectators?  A.   If it does not provide
              a system of control it is not appropriate.

      Q.      What I am asking you is can the Engineer, having presented
D             drawing 8A, say to the Club, "Right, there you are, that's it,"
              and have no further responsibility for how the turnstiles are
              in fact to be used?  What is your comment about that?  A.  I
              believe it appropriate that safety conditions should be applied
              so that the Club would be advised that additional control
              systems were necessary.

£     MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I think what Counsel has in mind is something
          slightly different. This shows a layout for entry to the
          stadium on ordinary days, and you see both home and away
          supporters may be going via the Leppings Lane.   What Counsel
          wants you to tell me about is this, ought the Engineer to
          anticipate that a decision may be made that all supporters for
          one team come through Leppings Lane and not from the Penistone
          Road, so you have that kind of segregation, ought he to
F         anticipate that, and if he ought, why ought he, and what ought
          he to tell the Club? A.    I don't believe that it is very
          important to identify different clubs, different types of
          spectator, except insofar as there is a need to control and
          limit.

      MR. PAYNE:  Yes, well, we understand, Mr. Burne, that you are
          criticising the layout which Dr. Eastwood, in fact, proposed in
G         8A because it does not provide separate access for fans to
          separate areas on the terrace?   A. Yes, without further
          additional control.

      Q.      Quite, but I am asking you then to perhaps make the difficult
              step to accept this defective layout as you have described it,
              and say well, even so, if that is what is presented, defective
H

                                                        30
^q.L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




               though it is, does the Engineer have a duty to go further and
 \            to consider that on special occasions, for example the 1988
               Semi Final and the 1989 Semi Final, on both occasions of which
               the supporters of one club were all allocated  to one end, does
               the Engineer have any duty to give any advice  to the Club about
               the use of the turnstiles on occasions such as that?   A.  I
               believe what I said was that I see no importance in whether the
               spectators were related to one particular club or several
               clubs.  It is purely the process of handling people and putting
 B             them in safe numbers into discrete areas.

        Q.      So boil it down, what should the Engineer say   to the Club when
                he gives them this drawing?  A.  That it does not break down
                the inflow of people satisfactorily in sufficient detail to
                ensure that each individual pen is used safety.

        Q.    Yes, you stay on that.  Accordingly, then, that situation
 C            having been reached after the 1985 exercised, I want you to
               look at the Certificate issued by Dr. Eastwood before the
               disaster at page 933?  A.  2nd August, 1988?

        Q.    Yes.   By this time the evidence is that the layout in drawing
               8A we have been looking at had been adopted and further fences
               had been introduced on the west terrace dividing pens 3 and 4
               and providing the refuge area to the right of pen 4.   That is
               illustrated at page 932, the immediately preceding page?
               A.  Yes, the drawing we were looking at at 333, is that not
               dated 1989?




 E




  H

                                                 51
    SELLERS   Sc Co. /   W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




*              No, 333. That is '85?                        A.   '85, yes, so that at that time
               had the --

      Q.       Just get the sequence in your mind, Mr. Burne. A. The
               light green radial barriers had been introduced then, but
               had the dark green ones been added?

      Q.    No, the dark green ones were added as part                         of the 1985
B          exercises ---

      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                           They are black in mine.   A. That's right
          my Lord.

      MR. PAYNE: Black, yes. So that the final result now, Mr.
          Burne, is shown in the form of a diagram at page932,    which
          is one of a series of drawings, the 64 series, by which
C         time at 932 it has got 64E. A. Yes.

      Q.      Theonly reason I ask you to look at it is to see the
              arrangement of the barriers as shown in the Taylor Appendix
              4 drawing with the light and dark green lines?
      A.      Yes. The dark green ones were added in 1985.

      Q. Yes. The evidence is that no amendment had been made or
D        was proposed to be made to the annual Safety Certificate to
          give any particular numbers to any of the new pens, and now
          I ask you to give your comment on Dr. Eastwood's
          Certificate dated 2nd August 1988, at page 933, the last
          paragraph.   A. "I certify that in my opinion the various
          structures on the ground are in a satisfactory condition
          and appropriate for the stadium to be used to the full
g        capacity as laid down in the Certificate of Ground Safety.”

      Q. Your comment, please, on the performance of the Engineer,
          the professional performance of the Engineer in producing
          that Certificate in the light of the documents that you
          have been looking at?   A. I believe that it ought to have
          had an additional sentence drawing attention to the need
          for control to limit the numbers in the pens to the figures
p         which appear on Drawing 64E, to which it relates. If you
          look at 64E, 932, there are three figures in a single row
          on the pitch path: south west pen, 2,600 persons, central
          pen 2,200 person, north west pen 1,600 persons. Then, on
          the left-hand side of the page, just above the words "North
          Stand", you will see "North west corner lower, 800
          persons", and on the right-hand side of the page above
          that, "North West corner upper, 2,900 persons."
G
      Q.      When you say "means of control of the numbers", what are
              you referring to?   A. That those who were to go into
              those discrete areas should be limited to those numbers, by
              means of a physical counting and control system.

      Q.      And what is your comment on the failure of the Engineer to
              qualify his Certificate by the addition of those comments?
    SELLERS   &   Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




       A.         I believe that he ought to have added such comments and
                  that he was failing in his duty of care not so to do.

       Q.         With that Certificate in mind, I want you to look at the
                  Drawing which shows what the use of the turnstiles in fact
                  was on the day of the disaster. That is at 1238. Do you
                  have that, Mr. Burne?   A. Yes.

B     Q.      You will remember that the Certificate that you have just
               criticised was issued in August 1988?   A. That is
               correct, yes.

       Q. Which therefore fell between the date of the 1988 cup final
           and the date of the 1989 cup final? A. Yes, I understand
           that.

C     Q.      For which matches the ticketing arrangements were the same,
               in other words, the same ticketing arrangements had taken
               place in 1988 as then followed in 1989? I do not know
               whether you know that, actually, Mr. Burne? A. No. I
               understand that that may be the case, but I haven't
               addressed myself to specific knowledge on the subject.

      Q. That is at paragraph 21 in the Taylor Report. Looking at
D         1238, what you are looking at there is the use of the
          turnstiles which is in fact made for those two matches, one
          in 1988 and one in 1989. Do you see that?    A. Yes.

      Q.      And what in fact was done was to allocate the whole of the
              batch of turnstiles A - G to the whole standing area of the
              west terrace.   If you look at the boxes on the left-hand
              side, the top one is headed "North Stand, 10 gates, 9,882
E
              persons"; and then there is "West Stand". Do you see?
      A.      Yes.

      Q. And the last box is "A - G, West Terrace, 7 gates for
          10,100 persons"? A. Yes.

      Q. And you will remember that that 10,100 is the certified
F         number which had stood since 1979?   A. Absolutely.

      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Access to pens 6 and 7 and upper north
          west terrace through the open gate - is that right?
      A. Yes, through the open gate in the wall, my Lord.

      MR. PAYNE:                 That is right, my Lord.

G     THE WITNESS: And, coincidentally, in conflict with the flow of
          those trying to get to the southern stairs leading to the
          west stand.

      MR. PAYNE: Mr. Burne, what is your comment on the use of those
          turnstiles A - G for the purpose of attempting to fill the
          whole of the west terrace, now sub-divided as it is by the
          radial fences?   A. There is, in the first place, a
H         reduction in the number of turnstiles. There is, in


                                                   33.
^.L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




 A                addition, a conflict of flow through the open gate for
                   those wishing to go to the north west terrace and pens 6
                   and 7.

           Q.     And does this ---

           MR. TOULSON:   My Lord, before my learned friend continues, I
                would be grateful for his assurance that this is not
 B             intended to form the basis of any criticism of the
                Engineer.  I ask that for these reasons:  (a) it is not
                pleaded;  (b) it is not in the Issues; and (c) it is not
                in the expert's report.

           MR. PAYNE: The exercise which I am asking Mr. Burne to deal
               with is to explain and illustrate the comments in his
                report about the certified capacity of the ground and how
 C             it ought to have been changed by appointing separate
                certified numbers to each of the new pens and providing
               means of control of access to those pens. Forgive me, but
                that is certainly set out at some length in Mr. Burne's
                report, as I started off this passage by asking him to draw
                attention to it. All I am doing — -

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Yes, but are the problems, if problems
 D             there were, arising from the allocation of turnstiles
                consequent upon the decision that all the Liverpool fans
                should enter through Leppings Lane? Is that something for
               which the Engineer is criticised?

           MR. PAYNE: Certainly, for this reason: that the Certificate
               issued in August 1988 was issued after this configuration
               of turnstiles had already been used at least once, and the
 E             Certificate being issued by the Engineer made no comment
               about the use to which the turnstiles had been put at the
               1988 match and accordingly he adopted it, and his
               responsibility accordingly applies to this arrangement --

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  So your Particulars of Negligence should
               run in this way, should they not - "Knew or ought to have
 p            know that at the match only seven turnstiles would be in
               use for the whole of the west terrace and north west
               terrace, and that there would be a conflict of flow in the
               open gate" - and that would be Gate A - "between those from
               turnstiles A - G wishing to enter pens 6 or 7 or the upper
               north west terrace, and those from pens 11 to 23 wishing to
               enter the west stand". That is the way your Particulars of
               Negligence would be framed, is it not?
 G
           MR. PAYNE:            Yes, my Lord.

           MR.      JUSTICE JOWITT: Is that pleaded?

           MR.     PAYNE: My Lord, it is not pleaded in   that way. For my
                  part at the moment - although I would like a moment to
                  think about it if the Pleadings are to be criticised - what
  H              I have in mind at the moment is that this is merely another


                                                 34.
,D.L. SELLERS   &   Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




^               aspect of the failure of the Engineer to warn about the
                 lack of allocation of numbers to particular pens and means
                 of controlling, and this is merely a consequence of his
                 failure to do so.

        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: If it is said that the problem of control
            was exacerbated by a decision to allocate the turnstiles
            differently from what we can see in the plan at 1238, it
g          may be that the Engineer would have wanted Further and
            Better Particulars of how it is said that he should have
            known about it.

        MR. PAYNE: My Lord, I am slightly surprised by my learned
            friend's intervention, because this arrangement is one
            which had already been certified by the Engineer as --

q       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                          Which arrangement?

        MR. PAYNE: The arrangement at 1238. It was used at one of the
            major events in the previous 1988 season.

        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Mr. Payne, you have, it seems to me, to
             distinguish between a use which is envisaged in the plan
             that we looked at on 932 and the different use made of the
D           turnstiles on the day of thematch, which is the plan at
             1238.

       MR. PAYNE:                  Yes.

       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: If you are saying that the different
            allocation of turnstiles consequent upon all the Liverpool
            fans coming in at Leppings Lane exacerbates the problem,
k          then you have to say, do you not, that the Engineer knew or
            ought to have known that that would be the case, that the
           Leppings Lane end would be used?

       MR. PAYNE:                  Yes.

       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                           For all the fans.
F      MR. PAYNE:                  Yes.
R.L. SELLERS & CO. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




             That is why I say from the facts of the allegation I can imagine the
             Engineer would have wanted further and better particulars of how it is
             said he should have done. I think Mr. Toulson does have a complaint.
A      MR* PAYNE: Well, if I need to              amend the pleadings to include this allegation
           expressly I will do so.
     MR. JUSTICE 30WITT: You mean you will ask for leave. Whether you get it may
          be another matter.
  MR. PAYNE: My Lord, I will ask for leave to do so. My Lord, for the moment
      I intend to ask Mr. Burne to comment upon the use that was in fact made
B     in the light of the lack of any certified capacity for the indivitjual
      pens.
     MR. JUSTICE 30WITT:I think you are entitled in any event to ask about the
         effect on safety of the decision to use the Leppings Lane end solely for
         (inaudible) supporters that has a bearing upon the case against the Club.[
         It also has a bearing on the responsibility of the Police.
C      MR. PAYNE: Certainly.
    MR. GLASGOW: My Lord, with the very greatest respect it does have a bearing on
         the case against the Club and that is why I rise.
    MR. JUSTICE 30WITT:               You say it does?
D MR. GLASGOW:             It does.
    MR. JUSTICE OOWITT:               Yes.
  MR. GLASGOW: And the reason why I object to it being done in this way, my Lord
       is two fold. Firstly it is not part of the experts report and we have gone
       through our comment on the report, as your Lordship will see, very carefully
       and restricted ourselves to two aspects, because this matter was not raised
E      against us. Secondly, my Lord, it is not pleaded against us either. If it
       had been pleaded we would have addressed different pleadings, I regret to say,
       both against the Engineer and against the Police, because the decision to
       use that end of the ground may be one thing, but the pleaded complaint against
       us is simply in failing to have sufficient turnstiles to accomodate the
       crowd of 24,000. There is no pleaded complaint, be it our responsibility
       or the Engineer's, of the way in which we allocated those turnstiles, and
       if there had been it would have rebounded on the Police and I would have
F     wanted to address that matter in the pleadings. My Lord, I do object to it
       being taken further with this witness, both on the pleadings ground and
       because there is nothing at all about in his report.
    MR. JUSTICE OOWITT: Are you proposing to argue in due course that the Police
         decision that the turnstiles should be used differently exacerbated the
         matter?
G MR. GLASGOW:             Yes, my Lord.
    MR. JUSTICE OOWITT: You say that is one of the contributing factors to the
         build up in Leppings Lane?
  MR. GLASGOW: Of course, my Lord, and putting it at its lowest it had a —
       horrible phrase and I wish I could think of a better one — a knock on
„     effect, a consequential effect, on policing that had been recognised before
       and we would have to go into considerable detail on the way in which 1987
A L SELLERS   &   CO. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




            and 1988 had been policed if this matter had been raised, but I repeat
            my Lord, it is the pleaded case that I failed to accomodate 24,000 people.
  MR. JUSTICE 30WITT: At the moment it seems to me personally that the decision
A      that all the fans should come in through the Leppings Lane end and that no
       turnstiles should be used for the Liverpool fans in Penistone Road, —
       obviously one does not have to be an Engineer to appreciate this — that
       there has to be a greater throughput through the turnstiles and consequently
       at least the risk of the build up of people waiting in Leppings Lane to get
       through the turnstiles. At the moment it seems to me, if that is a point
       you are proposing to make against the Police, you can hardly complain if
       the Police say you also should have known about the effect of the Police
B     decision?
       MR. GLASGOW:          No, I would not complain about that and I am not complaining about
            that.
       MR. JUSTICE 00WITT: I do not think Mr. Payne at the moment is going beyond that.
       MR. GLASGOW: My Lord, he is. That is the objection. I amsorry I put it badly.
L          I have already accepted that the pleaded complaint against me, whether I
            like it or not, is having not enough turnstiles to deal with 24,000 people;
            but it is not about allocation of turnstiles, cross-flow,gates in walls
            and that kind of thing. If that had been the case,related as it now is
            specifically to 12.38, I would have pleaded to it differently, because
            as your Lordship can now see very graphically it introduces a major conflict
            between myself and my Engineer.
D MR JUSTICE 00WITT: I do not think there is any reference in the Engineer's report
       to cross-flow.
       MR. GLASGOW:          No, my Lord.
   MR. JUSTICE 00WITT: I do not remember and we may have to look at the pleadings,
        but my recollection is that so long as Gate C was closed there was not a
 E      great mass of people in the concourse.
       MR. GLASGOW:          Your Lordship is absolutely right.
   MR. 3USTICE 30WITT: And I do not remember snarl up of people round Gate C.
        So while, of course, there will be people going one way through the gate
        and others going the other way, one remembers that the Gate was enlarged
        at the request of the Police. It maybe that the factual basis for complaint
 F      about there being a cross-flow, i.e. that it caused problems is missing.
    MR. GLASGOW: My Lord, the difficulty is, and it is said with great respect,
         that your Lordship with characteristic thoroughness you have just analysed
          some of the matters that I would have needed to plead. These are matters
         which, if the allegation had been made against me, I would have taken those,
          and as I say other points. I do not want to stop it if it is helpful to
         your Lordship. I will register my protest now and address your at greater
 **      length at an appropriate time.
       MR. JUSTICE 30WITT: Mr. Payne, the video film does not show that as long as
            Gate C is closed there are problems about people going one way through
            the Gate and not --
       MR. PAYNE: The middle gate.
 J_|
       MR. JUSTICE 30WITT: --                      and others going backwards.

                                                                - 37 -
.4 ^
       D.L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




           MR. PAYNE: My Lord, I do not think cross-flow has got anything to do with it.
                Mr. Burne has mentioned it as a consequence of the use of the turnstiles in
                this way. It has got no causative effect in this case.
       A MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: It was not a problem.
           MR. PAYNE:          No.      I am not relying on cross-flow at all.
            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Mr. Burne hypothesised                  that it wasbutinfact it was not.
         MR. PAYNE: It is not a problem. It is not certainly notcausative of the
              disaster so I am not saying anything about that. If I need to answer
       B     the pleading point, then if my friend would be kind enough to refer to
              Issues 14 and 15, in Issue 14 the question is were the turnstiles at the
              Leppings Lane end adequate to cope with the number of fans expected to be
              admitted on the 15th April 1989. Does your Lordship have that?
           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:               Yes.
           MR. PAYNE: The question is spot on, the number of fans expected to be admitted
       ^       on the 15th April 1989. The Police comment: "Yes, if the spectators had
                arrived at a rate similar to that in 1988. The number of turnstiles provided
                was the responsibility of the Club and Engineer. The number of tickets issued
                per turnstile was the responsibility of the Club. Negligence by the Club
                is as follows: failing to provide an adequate number of turnstiles for the
                number of tickets issued; failing to heed and implement the provisions of
                the Green Guide for coping with large numbers of spectators; failing to
       q       head and implement 44 sufficient turnstiles whereby no unduly large crowds
                were kept waiting for admission."
           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:               Let us see what the Club said.
           MR. PAYNE: My Lord, what is being said against me by both the Club and the
                Engineer at the moment is that it is not pleaded. I submit that it is.
       E MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: I am simply looking at what the Club say to see whether
              those pleading for the Club were obviously well aware of the factual
              issues being raised about this. I am bound to say I think they were.
          MR. GLASGOW: My Lord, I am so sorry. It is a different factual issue as I
               said. If it is a bad point, of course I will be corrected but the pleaded
                issue is the failure to accomodate a crowd of 24,000. Issue 14 as I
               pleaded to it is were the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end adequate
       F       to cope with the numbers of fans expected. The only reason for my rising
               to object, and I think it is the same objection that my learned friend
                for the Engineer has, is that we are now not talking about the adequacy
                of the turnstiles for 24,000, we are talking as I understand it about the
                allocation within those turnstiles. This is a wholly new complaint. I think
                what is being said and what the expert is being invited to comment upon
                is whether turnstiles A to G should have been allocated for use of both
                west end and the central pens of the stadium. Now that is not pleaded
       0       anywhere, and the whole objection that I am now making reflects that made
                on behalf of the Engineer because it raises a conflict between the two of us.
                It should be pleaded and there is no pleading of the wrong allocation of
                the turnstiles within the Leppings Lane end. I simply cannot understand
               my learned friend's failure to grasp the point. There is a difference
                between saying there are not enough turnstiles for 24,000 people and saying
                you have used the wrong turnstiles within those which there are for
       pj      different parts of the stadium. That is my worry. If that is to be made
                                                               - 38 -
:* 2 i( * f
              DJ- SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                          I would like it pleaded so that we can see the way it is pleaded and
                          if necessary object, and your Lordship has my assurance that if it is
                          something we have notice of we will not object.
              A MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: The only difference between this day and an ordinary
                     day so far as admission is concerned, the two differences so far as
                     admission is concerned to the west terrace, is that the fans were a 11r
                     from one side.
                  MR. GLASGOW:          Yes, my Lord,
              g MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Secondly, that whereas A to G would normally be used for pens
                     I to 4, now they are being used as well for pens6 and 7 and the north
                     west terrace. That is the only difference?
                  MR. GLASGOW: Yes, my Lord. The balancing exercise with which your Lordship
                       may be concerned about is whether those who were responsible for making
                       that choice were sensible in increasing the overall number of turnstiles
                       available so as to cut down the density of the crush outside Leppings
              q       Lane, or whether they should have maintained the system as we see on the
                       Eastwood drawing of only having four turnstiles for the terraces and
                       sending everybodyelse for the north west terracethrough the other bank.
                               My Lord, I am not arguing the point and, ofcourse, I would not
                         trespass on it at the moment. That is for me to deal with if any evidence
                          is presented that is worth dealing with at a later stage. At the moment
                         all I am asking, and I think I am entitled to know, how is that being
              D          put against me or is it put against the Engineer, or both of us, because
                          I for my part would like to reply to it and I think my friend for the
                         Engineer would also like to reply to it if it is a question of allocation
                         of the turnstiles as distinct from their number. That is all my Lord.
                MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Mr. Payne is not the real point here simply this: that
                     because — and I forget how many it was — however many turnstiles from
                      Penistone Lane for understandable reasons were not going to be used
              E      to allow entrance to the north stand that a greater pressure was placed
                      upon the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end?
                  MR. PAYNE:         Certainly my Lord.
                  MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: And you say?
              F MR. PAYNE: I say this was the fault of the Club by failing to appreciate that
                     by allocating seven turnstiles only for 10,100 expected standing
                     spectators at the Leppings Lane end they ought to have anticipated that
                     this would lead to a build up of turnstiles and a large number of
                     spectators kept waiting contrary to the provisions of the Green Guide.
                  MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:              Just remind me, how many spectators were allowed in the
                       north stand?
              Q
                  MR. PAYNE: According to the safety certificate, it is 9,882.
                MR. TOULSON: My Lord, normally 6,000 would be fed from Penistone Road and it
                     is those 6,000 who are diverted to Leppings Lane. My Lord, I am conscious
                     of having started this. May be it has taken more time in argument. Your
                     Lordship appreciates my concern is simply this: if there is a suggestion
                     that the Engineer knew this had happened in 1988 and should have know in
              H      1989, it has never been pleaded; it has never been put.

                                                                   - 39 -
-CM- SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




             It is completely novel.
     MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Mr. Payne, the result of the decision to facilitate those
         controls was to put an extra 6,000 people into Leppings Lane?
A
     MR. PAYNE: Yes, my Lord, that is right.
     MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:               We have got to decide who is at fault.
     MR. PAYNE:         Certainly.
     MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Whether the Police, the Club or both?
B
    MR. PAYNE:          Certainly.
  MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Does it add that there are seven turnstiles being used
       for 10,100 whereas ordinarily it would have been seven turnstiles being
       used for something less than 10,100, because if there are seven turn­
       stiles used for 10,100 people, true there may be pressure on those, but
„     equally there is less pressure then into the others. When you ask
       yourself how that has affected the throughput, because that is the
       point, is it not?
    MR. PAYNE:         Yes.
    MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: By the time the trouble occurred there were still a lot
         of people waiting to come through.
D
    MR. PAYNE:         There were.
    MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:I wonder whether it really helps   one to decide what went
        wrong to say which turnstiles were allocated for which people. Ithink-
         if you say it does, then I think it does have to be pleaded.
    MR. PAYNE: I think what matters is that the people coming through those
E       turnstiles had access to any of the pens on the terrace.
    MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:               That is a different point.
    MR. PAYNE: That is the significant point.
    MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:               That has never changed since the Taylor Inquiry.
F MR. PAYNE: No. It also does have the effect that when the turnstiles A to G
        are allocated to 10,100 people instead of the other proposal whichyour
        Lordship has seen and the other turnstiles at Penistone Lane are closed,
        thereby diverting people who would have gone through those into these
        two banks of turnstiles as well, it means the cumulative effect of those
        decisions made a substantial contribution, a material contribution, to the
        build up at the turnstiles.
G MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Then you see if you have turnstiles A to G serving a
        smaller part of the pens and then you have turnstiles 1 to 23 serving
        as well as the north west stands part of the pens. I just wonder whether
        it sound right. If you want to say that the Club were at fault in not
        allocating more turnstiles for admission to the terraces, or to the west
        and north west terraces, that is something that ought to be pleaded.
        You may like to think about it over the adjournment whether it really
H      is a live issue.
,_Q.L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




      MR. PAYNE: I will give it some thought and see whether it is necessary to make
           any amendment.
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:If you want to say whether the    Engineer should have known
 A           about this I think he does have a (inaudible)
      MR. PAYNE: My Lord, may I ask your Lordship to look at Issue 14 on the question
           of the involvement of the Engineer and whether in fact he is taken by
           surprise because I submit that he plainly should not be. Does your
           Lordship have the police comments on Issue 14.
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:               Can you direct me to paragraph 9A of the particular of
 B         negligence.
      MR. PAYNE: Yes, my learned junior has been trying to get me to do that for
           some time. My Lord 9H. My Lord I am afraid my numbering is not quite
           the same as the bundle which your Lordship has. I have got 22 at the
           top of the page.
 c MR. TOULSON:             Page 24 in the bottom right hand corner.
      MR. PAYNE: H says:     "Failed to advisethe second defendants that the
           existing turnstiles facilities at the Leppings Lane end were inadequate
           to accomodate a crowd of 24,000 and that for such facilities tobe
           adequate they should include the matters set out in paragraph A above,
           of the particulars of negligence."
<^.L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                  My Lord, Issue 14.
A
          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                     I was going to look at paragraph (a).

          MR. TOULSON:  My Lord, the pleadings do not finish there,
              because  your Lordship saw what we pleaded in ourdefence in
              express terms on page 58.

g         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                     You say you did not know?

          MR. TOULSON: Then we get the request for the further and
              better particulars and nowhere have we a plea of knowledge
              that in   the previous year 6,000  had beendivertedand
              therefore there was going to be    24,000.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I think in fact, Mr. Toulson, you had
q             knowledge of the allegation; did you ask for particulars of
              how you were said to know?

          MR. TOULSON:               Yes.        We find those at page 92.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                     You can sit down, Mr. Burne.

          MR. PAYNE:  I am sorry to interrupt, but we - namely the
D             Police - have made nearly all these bundles which your
              Lordship is using and given the numbers and organised them
              all and supplied them to my learned friends. One of the
              few jobs that was allocated down to that end of the bench
              was to make paginated bundles of pleadings.  I am afraid I
              am trying to struggle with my own bundle, because we have
              never actually been supplied with one.

E        MR. TOULSON:   My Lord, I think we found, as second third party,
              that nobody had prepared a pleadings bundle, and we have
              prepared one for all parties and prepared indices. I will
              see if we have got an additional paginated bundle. We did
              want to know what the source of knowledge alleged was, and
              in question 36, "In each case giving full particulars of
              all facts and matters relied upon". Plainly, there was
              going to be a plea of actual knowledge that that is what
              happened the previous year. That was an express request
              and there is not a plea of action of actual knowledge.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   I would have thought that you had notice
               of the allegation which is made against you and you asked
               for particulars of how it is said you should know.

q        MR. TOULSON:                And     your Lordship sees the answers.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: And you get the answer.   I think Mr. Payne
              is entitled to adduce evidence in support of the
              allegation; that is what he says about knowledge, and it
              will be a matter of whether what are said to be your means
              of knowledge are sufficient in fact to give knowledge.
              What he is not saying is that you should have known that
^ L . SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                   the people in the north stand would be admitted by way of
                   Leppings Lane.

           MR. TOULSONs               Absolutely.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: It is really a matter for comment on the
               state of the evidence and the state of the pleadings.  I
               think you have got notice of that here, but he is
               restricting in what he can say against you simply that you
               knew that the Leppings Lane end was a visitor's stand.

           MR. TOULSON:               Yes.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITTs                   Very well, let us carry on.

           MR. PAYNEs   (To the witness) Mr. Burne, I want to just
 q             complete my examination of this drawing at page 1238                  by
                asking you to give your comment on--

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITTs I will just complete the answer that was
               never quite finished.   I think one has to add "Those
               wishing to go to the west stand, they are part of the
                contraflow"?    A. Some of those going to the west stand,
               my Lord, because there are two sets of stairs, one of which
 D             ~ this layout on 1238 - leads directly to.

           Q.     Not that it matters now, because Mr. Payne               does notattach
                  any importance to the contraflow.

           MR. PAYNE:             No.

           THE WITNESS: The main difference between this and the previous
 E             scheme is that instead of the left-hand part of the
               concourse behind the turnstiles A to G relating purely to
               the discrete numbers in pens 1, 2, 3 and 4, identified on
               drawing 64E as 4,800.  In addition, there is all those who
               are to go to the north-west terrace upper, north-west
               terrace lower and pens 6 and 7, in total 5,300. 5,300, my
               Lord: it is 1,600 for pen 6, 800 for the lower north-west
               corner, pen 7, and 2,900 for the north-west terrace, which
               is 5,300. Those people were to go through the gate open--

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: This is what I have written: "Instead of
               as formerly, those between the outer gates and turnstiles A
               to G have restricted to those going to pens 1 and 4. They
               now include also those who were going to pens 6 and 7 in
               the upper north-west terrace, which means an additional
 q             5,300 people who will approach turnstiles A to G and be on
               the south instead of the north side of the sheeted fence?
               A. That's excellent, my Lord. What has concerned me most
               about that problem is the lack of any indication to those
               5,300 that they needed to go through a gate in a wall which
               was unmarked.

           Q.     So it is that which concerns you rather than the build up
     U            of extra people who were going to pass to the south side of


                                                          43.
,O.L_ SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                  the sheeted fence?    A. To the south end, my Lord, there
                  were only 2,600 to go; they had a very small sign to direct
                  them.

          Q.     I have not made myself clear.  If you look at the plan at
                 1238, you will see on the street side of turnstiles A to G
                 a sheeted fence - it is labelled "sheeted fence"?
                 A. Yes, I see it.
B
          Q.     And it is what happens  tothose 5,300 people once they get
                 through the turnstiles rather than what happens before they
                 get through the turnstiles which concerns you?    A. My
                 Lord, I have not addressed the problem external to the
                 turnstiles.

         MR. PAYNE:   Would you look at the photographs, Mr. Burne, and
q            remind my Lord of whatwould then be displayed to those
              extra spectators and the ones who would normally go through
              this side of the dividing wall, by looking at your
              bundle 1, tab B, page 6?

         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                     Which bundle is this?

         MR. PAYNE:   It is the first                   of the two bundles of exhibits,      my
D            Lord, tab B, page 6.

         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                     Yes.

         MR. PAYNE: What view is showing                        in thisphotograph,please,
             Mr. Burne?   A. Sorry?

                 Have you got tab B, page 6, paragraph 5?    A. Paragraph 5
 E               is a view taken by the police at approximately quarter-past
                 four on the day in question.  It shows the entrance to the
                 tunnel, with the word "Standing" over it.

                 Where is the photographer standing?                     A.   Inside, just
                 inboard of Gate C.

                 And there is a close up of the entrance to the tunnel at
                 tab D (for donkey), page 2?    A. Yes. That is a Police
                 photograph; we don't know the time of that, but it was on
                 that day,

         Q.      In those two photographs, whereabouts is the wall that you
                 have been speaking about?    A. On the left. There is a
                 photograph of the wall; if we go back to the beginning of
q                my Appendix B, B2 shows a Police photograph of the
                 turnstiles A to G and Gate C from outside.

         Q.      And the wall is at?A. The wall is inside the ground.
                 If we look at photograph 3 on page 4 of my B there is the
                 wall on the left, unmarked, with the open gate.

         Q.       Just to complete this examination of the photographs, would
 H                y ° u 8° on in the B tab to look at page 7, photograph 6,

                                                          44.
/■^L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                   where the camera swung round to the right of it and you can
                   see at the far right-hand end the way round the pens
                   numbered 1 and 2?    A. And in the shadow, on the last
                   column of the west stand, there is a sign.

            Q.     Where is that shown in the better photograph?    A. Two
                   pages over, at page 9 - there is a policeman without his
                   helmet on. One can see the sign on the column, two-thirds
                   of the way up the column.
  B
            Q.     You can see where it is, you cannot see the sign itself?
                   A. That's right. Then I have taken two shots from the
                   Police video.

            Q.     Is that page 10?    A. At page 10, where the video was
                   taken of the cameraman walking down towards the sign to see
 q                 what the wording was.

           Q.     You have told my Lord already (if I might just finish this
                  point before the adjournment) the importance of signing in
                  your belief as an engineer in relation to the system of
                  control of access to separate areas. What is your comment
                  about the signing system which you have just illustrated in
                  those photographs?    A. It's frightening. There are
  D               5,300 people to go through the gate on the left of
                  photograph 4, and there is no sign of any sort.

            Q.    If you remind yourself, by looking, if necessary, at the
                  photograph in the Taylor Report, Appendix 5?     A. It
                   shows the ground at three o clock.

            Q.    The spectators sparsely standing on the terrace in the
  E                foreground are in pens 5 and 6, are they not?   A. Pen 5
                   is the narrow channel.

            Q.    And those spectators, to get there, must have gone through
                   the gap in the wall?   A. Absolutely.

            Q.     Not many of them have found it?     A.   Very few.

  F         Q.    Are you able to make any comment about the effect of the
                   signing system on the way in which the crowd dispersed
                   itself on the day of the di uiter?    A. It has failed to
                  have any effect because it simply was not there. There are
                   only two signs in that concourse: one in letters eight
                   inches high over the tunnel in the centre of the stand, and
                   clearly obviously going to the area behind the goal, and an
  q               unreadable sign to the extreme right for 2,600 people, and
                   no sign at all for 5,300 people.




     H


                                                 45,
^ ).L .   SELLERS &   CO.   /W. LLOYD WOODLAND




  ^        Q.    Pause a minute.   Sorry to interrupt.  So did the signing system
                  in your opinion make any contribution to the disaster?
                 A.   Insignificant.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                  Insignificant?   A.   Insignificant.

            MR. PAYNE:            What do you mean?       A.    None at all.

  B        Q*    No, no, Mr. Burne, just address yourself to the question.              You
                  have criticised the lack of signing?  A.  I do.

            Q.    Do you mean that the lack of signing made n o ---  A.  It had no
                  effect on people whatsoever because it did not exist.  There
                  was no system of control by signing in existence on that day.

            Q.    So what did the people do, for that reason?  A.  They went
  C               wherever they saw appropriate that they could go, unless they
                  were physically prevented.

            MR. PAYNE:             Very well.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  We will break off there.    It seems to me that
                a consequence of having turnstiles A to G for all the standing
                area was for people who on an ordinary day, if they were
   D            standing, not all,   some ofthose with standing  tickets, would
                have gone through turnstiles 1 to 23, which would have taken
                them on to pens 6,   7 orthe upper northwest terrace.   Having
                them all through A  to G on this day because of the signing and
                because of the attractiveness of what the fans would know lay
                ahead of the tunnel, means a slow down in the rate of fill up
                of pens 6, 7 and upper north west terrace and a faster fill up
                of pens 3 and 4.
   E
            MR. PAYNE:             Yes.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Anyone applying his mind to what are the
                effects of the allocation of turnstiles at the moment, it seems
                to me, would very easily be able to work that out looking at
                the signposting that there was there.  Very well. 2.15.

                                                    (Luncheon A d journment)




   G




    H

                                                           4o
J3.L_ SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD WOObLAND




        MR. PAYNE:  Now, Mr. Burne, I think you still have open in
            front of you diagram/1 at page 1238?     A.  I have.

        Q.     And you were commenting before lunch by reference to the
A              photographs in your exibit bundle about the inadequacy
               of the signing, and you   expressed your opinion.about that
                to my Lord.

                     I wonder if you could help my Lord, please, about
               the duty of the Engineer in relation to the signs which
               are displayed inside the ground to direct spectators to
               where they have to go.   What, Mr. Burne, are you able to
®              help my Lord about that, about the duty of the Engineer
                in relation to that part of the structure?       A.  I
               regard signs as the essential first step in any
               controlled system and in respect of the signs over the
                southern end of the west terrace, ends one and 2, that
               would have been part of the scheme which was on the
               original proposal drawing.

^       Q.     What do you mean by that?     A.  The original proposal
               for that area of those turnstiles A - G, dealing with
               pens 3 and 4 and one and 2.

        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   ...         (inaudible)...   A.   It should
            have been, my Lord.

D        Q.    Is this right: the Engineer should have given advice
                in connection with the plans you are looking at as to
                the content, format and position of signs for the route
                to areas one and 2?     A.  As well as 3 and 4, my Lord.

         MR. PAYNE:  Can you express an opinion, please, about the
             degree of importance of this matter.     A.  I think it
             is fundamentally important.
 E
         Q.    And in what respect does this matter affect safety of
                people attending on the terrace?     A.  With a crowd
                of several thousand it is absolutely vital that strangers
                to the ground, as well as those who are familiar with it,
                are properly directed.

         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  What do you say is the consequence if
 F            they are not?     A.  Then people will attempt to go
             where they want to go, which is to the central area behind
              the goal in general terns.  If they are attracted to
              the only sign that is visible to them to go to that very
              area, there is nothing to divert them to any other area
              to which they should go if there is no sign related
              thereto.

 G        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  You say that more often than not fans
              like to go behind the goal, how do we envisage that a
              fan as a result of signing would decide against that and go
              to one of the what I will call the wing pens?     A.   One
              can guarantee nothing in that respect, my Lord, it purely
              your first line of control to indicate where you want
              people to go, rather than just allowing them to go where
              they wish.

          Q.     I asked the question because I want to understand your
                 evidence.  You say signing is of fundamental importance,

                                              4 7   .
^4- SELLERS & CO. / W. LLOYD WOODLAND




              that prompts me to ask again, let us suppose you have got
              all these areas clearly signed, if you have your fan who
              knows because he is used to football grounds, who is
              likely to go to the area behind the goal, is signing
              going to affect him in making his choice of where to go,
              do you think?      A.  To some extent it must do, I hope,
              my Lord.   If there is only one sign and that attracts him
              to go to the very place which he is led to anticipate he
              wishes to go, then there is a negative effect of that
              sign.   If the signs attempt to attract him to other areas
B             then there is a positive benefit to be gained from it.

        MR. PAYNE:   The questions which I have been asking you and
            which my Lord has been addressing to you are based on
            the layout as it can be seen in the drawing which is open
            in front of you, 4241, Mr. Burne, do you follow that.
            A.  Yes.
C
        Q.   And you criticised that layout earlier in your evidence
              on the basis that there ought to be separate turnstiles for each
              of the separate sections in the west terrace.    So the
              questions which you are now dealing with are proceeding
              on the basis of a system which you have already criticised.
              A.    If there is not a system of descrete control, then
              one does the next thing of putting in an effective control
D            o f ' firstly, signing, and then some form of counting
              to manage people who go into specific discrete areas.

        Q.   It is part of         the control system, but it cannot be
              looked at in         isolation.    A.  No, it is a total composite
              of different         available tools to assist, the signing
              is the first         fundamental.

E       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  For the moment I can see how if all the
            entrances are properly signposted, and there is
            somebody at the tunnel mouth saying "That's all now,
            go round the side", but what of something like, for the
            moment I do not see how signing the other approaches
            to the terrace is going to have the effect of diverting
            all the people there.     A.  That may be so, my Lord.

F      MR. PAYNE:      But once you have got an open concourse where
            people can go where they like, my Lord, is pointing out
            if they have got a completely free choice to go anywhere
            they like, they are just as likely to go into the central
            pens whatever signs you put up, because they will not take
            any notice of them.        A.  That may be so, the difficulty
            is if there is a gap in a wall, or a gap underneath the
            end of a stand which is not obvious, it may be that they
            do not - strangers to the ground do not realise that
            that is where they are supposed to go.     In considering
            t h a t ----

        MR. PAYNE:   So if they have a choice, they may not take it?
             A.  Well, three-quarters of the people were anticipated
             not to have to go down the central tunnel.
H


                                               48.
     ^JQX. SELLERS & GO. / W. LLOYD WOODLAND




               Q.    On the question of the duty of the Engineer             about the
                     signing and the significance of the signing,             I wonder
                     if you would just do a little exercise, Mr.             Burne, by
                     looking in core bundle one, I appreciate it             is difficult
                     to manage the documents there.    A.   It is            all right.

               Q.    At page 157, paragraph 24 of the Safety Certificate,
                     which directs the Club to arrange for the stadium to be
                     inspected by the Engineer annually.  Do you see that?
                     A.  Yes, 24.
      B
               Q.    Yes.  And to provide a certificate by the Engineer, hal f ­
                     way down that paragraph, as to the current compliance or
                     non-compliance  with good engineering and building
                     practices and with the relevant British Standards,
                     specifications and codes of practice, and with the
                     appropriate provisions and recommendations of the
                     Guide - that is the Green Guide - of all structural
                     parts of the stadium excluding the crash barriers and
                     hand rails.  So when the Engineer makes his report he
                     has to take into account the recommendation of the Guide
                     in respect of structural parts of the stadium, excluding
                     the crash barriers and hand rails.   I wonder if you would
                     look in the Green Guide, the 1986 version, at 29.15, page
                     15.  Paragraph 29.15, page 15.     A.   "To provide
      D              direcitonal flow exit and emergency exit signs".

               Q.    That is included in the summary of management
                     responsibilities?     A.  Yes.

               Q.   Of course it could be said that these  signs are not
                    a structural part of the stadium upon whcih the Engineer
                    has specifically to report under paragraph 24, do you
      E             follow that?    A.  Yes.

               Q.    What is       your opinion, Mr. Burne, from       an Engineer's point
                     of view       as to the attention that the        Engineer ought to pay
_/                   to this       matter when he is making his       report?       A. I
                     believe       the permanent signs ought to        be included in his
                     report.

      F       Q.    When he gives his annual Certificate, if the directional
                     flow signs are inadequate, is this something that should
                    be mentioned?      A.  I believe so.

               Q.    If it is possible I would like you, please, to still keep
                      open in front of you, and put away the Green Guide, the
                      reference to the Safety Certificate.

      G       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Really that last question is a matter
                   of the proper construction of paragraph 24.

               MR. PAYNE:         Well,        it is not a statute.

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  It does not matter,               if it is a document
                   the judge can consider it.
       H
                                                          49.
Q.L. SELLERS 8tCO. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




          MR. PAYNE:             Certainly, my Lord, yes.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  It is not as though it is some
              technical matter that one needs help with to understand
              it.


          MR. PAYNE:  I want you to keep in mind your, keep open page
              1238, which all these questions are focussed upon.
              I would like you, please, to look at the thinking of the
              Engineer during the period of 2 years or so before the semi­
B             final as it is illustrated in a pair of memoranda which
              appear in the bundle at 511 and 512.




D




E




F




G




H

                                                  5 0   .
J3.L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD WO O D L A N D




 ^      Q.     Now these memoranda relate to the state of knowledge of both
                the Club and the Engineer.  Do you see at 511 the memorandum
                dated 26th February, 1987 entitled, "Ground Capacity for
                Possible Semi Final,"  do you see that?  A.  Yes indeed.

        Q.     It is from Mrs. Sharon, that is Mrs. Lane of the Club, and it
                is to Mr. Strange of Eastwood and Partners, do you see that?
               A.   Yes.  I can't see the reference to Mr. Strange.
 B
        Q.     It is his initial, "To: JBS", Mr. Strange,      do you see that?
               A.   I see, right, yes.

        Q. Now it says,

                         "Sharon has been sent a form from the Football Association
                         to fill in for Hillsborough to be considered for this
                         year's semi-finals.  She wanted to know present capacity
                         of Spion Kop - 21,000,"

               and the next paragraph deals with flood lighting,       and then
               paragraph 3:

                         "Has any account been taken for alterations done on
                         Leppings Lane over last few seasons?    Is the 10,200 or so
 D                       figure   still correct? I said," Mr. Strange said, "in my
                         opinion it needs to be adjusted.   Better to do it now than
                         later.  It could also affect ticket sales for Coventry
                         game.  She will speak to Graham,"

               that   is Mr.Mackrell. Over the page a memorandum two days
               later dated 2nd March, 1987 from Mr. Strange.   The first
               paragraph deals with lighting.   The second paragraph deals with
               lighting again.

                         Paragraph 3:

                         "Dr. Eastwood says leave the capacity at Leppings Lane end
                         as it was, providing Police have gates under west stand
                         open so that people can distribute throughout the terrace
                         e v e n l y ."

                    Now with that in mind can you open the Taylor Report again
               at appendix 4, if it is not too many documents.

        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Can you first of all help me to identify the
            gates under the west stand.  Are those the radial gates at the
            back of the terrace?
 G
        MR.    PAYNE:  We believe so, the radial gates at the back of the
               fences?  A.  Yes.

        Q.     That is what I wanted you to look at, Mr. Burne,      appendix 4 in
               the Taylor R e p o r t .


 H

                                                51
„p.L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD WOO D L A N D




        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                    Yes.
 \
        MR. PAYNE:   By now, 1987 when this memoranda was being written, do
            you see from those two memoranda that what is being considered
            is the possibility of a semi-final match being played at
            Hillsborough and in that context attention is being given to
            the certified capacity of the ground and in particular this
            terrace?   A.  Absolutely.

 B      Q.     In appendix 4 the layout of the terrace as it existed at the
               time of that memoranda can be seen with the two sets of radial
               fences installed over the years now in place, do you see that?
               A.  As shown on appendix 4.

        Q.     As shown on appendix 4, with the position of the gates shown in
               diagrammatical form where it abuts the west stand?  A.  Yes, my
               Lord.
 C
        Q.     And what the Club and the Engineer have spoken about in this
               telephone conversation and agreed is that the capacity, the
               10,100, although they think it is 200, the capacity of the
               Certificate, should be left as it is for the whole terrace
               without any amendment, do you understand that?  A.  And this is
               a record of the telephone conversation, of the communication of
               that to the Club?
 D
        Q.     That's right, they are saying leave it as it is,                  10,100,
               notwithstanding the alterations.

        MR. GLASGOW:  With great respect, my Lord,                   that simply is not true.
            It is a question that is being asked.                     The Club is not
            expressing an opinion on it, I think.
  E
        MR.    JUSTICE JOWITT:  I am looking at 512.  That does seem to be the
               answer, doesn't it, the third paragraph, "Dr. Eastwood says..."

        MR. GLASGOW:  My Lord, yes.  The question being put, the leading
            question being put to the witness was that 511 was the Club
            saying they wanted to leave it as it was and I was merely
            directing your attention because it seems to be a question and
            the difference is rather vital to my case.

        MR. JUSTICE J O W I T T :              The answer is over the page,   isn't it?

        MR. GLASGOW:              Yes, my Lord.

        MR. PAYNE:  It is Dr. Eastwood saying leave the capacity as it is
            in response to the question posed by the Club, do you follow
            that Mr. Burne?

        MR.    JUSTICE JOWITT:                 Provided the radial gates were left open?

        MR.     PAYNE:        Yes?       A.     Yes I do.

        Q.      Do you follow what the Engineer is recommending there to the
  H

                                                            52
D.L. SELLERS 8c Co. / W. LLOYD WOOD LAND




            Club in relation to the use of this pen, Mr. Burne?   A.  That
^           the capacity figure which is not corrected in the telephone
            message from the erroneous 10,200 should be left as it is
            provided the gates in the radial fences are left open.

      Q.     So how does that message envisage that this terrace is in fact
            going to be used on an occasion, for example, at a possible
            semi-final which is the subject that they are discussing here?
            Work that out for my Lord, would you please.    Looking at
B           appendix 4 and looking at it in conjunction with the layout on
            the concourse area at page 1238, then we can see both outside
            and inside the tunnel.

      MR.    JUSTICE JOWITT: That is not a question, it merely invites the
            witness to speculate, because it may depend upon what
            additional arrangements may or may not be made.  All that
            answer tells one is that Dr, Eastwood thinks the present
C           capacity is alright for a semi-final, provided the radial gates
            are left open.

      MR. PAYNE:  Quite, but from an engineering point of view I would
          hope that Mr. B u r n e *s comment to your Lordship about how this
          would work in practice might be helpful to indicate where the
          crowds would go and how they would make this proposal work,
          which is being stated here at 512, how it is intended that this
D
          should work.  Your Lordship will remember that it is part of
          the case, as we understand it, brought strongly against the
          Police by the Club and the Engineer, that the Police were very
          wrong and seriously at fault to follow a system of finding
          their own level.     I am inviting Mr. Burne now as an engineer to
          comment on the Engineer's recommendation that at a semi-final,
          provided the gates at the end of the radial fences are left
£         open, the certified number should remain as it is.

      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I don't know that that is an engineering
          matter.  What will happen is that the pens will fill up.
          Whether there would be a check on the numbers going in will
          depend upon how the ground is managed on the day.

      MR. PAYNE:           Certainly.
F
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                  That is not an engineering matter.

      MR. PAYNE:           I wonder if Mr. Burnt.---

      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:     An expert can say whether he thinks that is a
          good idea or n o t .

G     MR. PAYNE:           If Mr. Burne---

      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                  It depends on what arrangements there are
          going to be.

      MR. PAYNE:  Yes.  Mr. Burne, from the point of view of an engineer,
          if this question had been asked about leaving, as on the
H

                                                     53
D.L. SELLERS 8cCo. / W. LLOYD WO O D L A N D




              previous page, whether account had been taken for alterations
^             done on Leppings Lane and is the figure still correct, and that
              answer had been given, what answer in your opinion ought to
              have been given to the question which was put?  A.  Since the
              telephone message addresses safety work, as indicated at the
              top, I believe it would have been at least prudent to have
              corrected the figure to 10,100, and I believe it prudent,
              indeed further it ought to have been drawn attention to, that
              there was no sub-division to that number in respect of pens.
B
       MR. PAYNE:            What document is being handed to the witness.

       THE USHER:            A lady brought it in and said it was very urgent.

       MR. PAYNE:  I don't think Mr. Burne can take messages when he is
           giving his evidence.

C      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I saw the word "urgent."  If it is nothing to
           do with this case and really is a matter of some urgency I
           don't mind if Mr. Burne looks at it.

       MR.     PAYNE: It seems to run to several pages.               Would your   Lordship
              forgive me a moment.

       MR.     JUSTICE JOWITT:   Yes.  Whilst Mr. Payne is looking at that,
              that last answer was a little cryptic. Do you mean that it
              should have been pointed out that there were no numbers pen per
              pen and no way of checking that the numbers in each pen were
              not exceeded?   A.  That would be the case, my Lord, yes.

       Q.     That is what you meant by that answer?   A.  That is what I
              meant.   I think there is a danger in this exchange for the Club
£             to be misled into believing that 10,200 was a safe figure.   The
              correct figure was lower and it ought to have been pointed out.

       MR. PAYNE:   Thank you very much.  The message that has come for Mr.
           Burne relates really to his examination.   It is something that
           he ought really to consider when we come to the appropriate
            stage in his evidence but it may well be that time will run dut
            before that happens.  I will show it to my learned friends and
F          if it is material then it can be taken further.

                   Now I want to ask you some questions about the tragic
              event? themselves, Mr. Burne, by reference to the drawing on
              page 1238 which I hope is still open and has not been lost
              sight of?  A.  Yes.

       Q.     The Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor found that the---
G
       MR. TOULSON:  Before my friend goes off, I don't want to interrupt,
           but actually the correct transcript of that passage is not to
           'leave' the gates open, but to 'have' the gates open.

       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                     You are quite right.
    ^.L. SELLERS 8cCo. / W. LLOYD W OO DLAN D




            MR. T O U L S O N : The relevance of that being that one of the
                requirements of the Working Party when these radials were put
                in was that those gates should at all times be manned and under
                active Police control.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                 Yes.

            MR. PAYNE:          Thank you very much.

     B      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                 What are we to look at, Mr. Payne?

           MR. PAYNE:  I would like your Lordship to look at the Taylor Report
               at 184    I draw this to your attention, Mr. Burne, in
               preparation for the questions I want to ask you about the
               effect of the layout as it appears on drawing 4241.  Do you see
               that, the finding for the Inquiry

•    c                       By 2.52 p.m. when gate C was opened, pens 3 and 4 were
                           oyver-full even by the test," of what the fans would
                           t d e r a t e . "Many were uncomfortable. To allow any more
                           into those pens was likely to cause injuries; to allow in
                           a large stream was courting disaster."

                  Do you see that?              A.     I do indeed.
     D     Q.     And look at 115, please:

                            his disaster was the worst in the history of British
                           ootball.   It happened because pens 3 and 4 became grossly
                          overcrowded.   They were uncomfortably overcrowded by 2.50
                          p.m. at least to a degree which required that they should
                          b® closed to further arrivals."




     F




     G




     H

                                                            5b
,-q.L. SELLERS 8t Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




 ^                Do you see that passage?                  A.    I do.

           Q.     With those passages in mind, look at the Drawing at page
                   1238, please, will you?    A. Yes.

           Q.      And bring yourself to the time with which the Taylor Report
                   is dealing with, 2.50 p.m. or 2.52 p.m., by which time pens
                   3 and 4 down the tunnel had become grossly overcrowded and
 g                uncomfortably overcrowded. Do you see that?     A. Yes.
                   "They should not have been uncomfortably overcrowded
                   because this system of control should have been place to
                   prevent that eventuality happening."

           Q. Can you look back to a Drawing that you looked at in an
               early bundle at page 302? That is in Volume 1. A. Yes.

 C         Q.      If a system such as was being proposed in that Drawing had
                   been in place, what effect would that have had on the
                   happening of the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4? A. There
                   are three turnstiles discretely controlling the area of
                   pens 3 and 4.

           Q. So if that or a similar system had been in place, what
               effect would that have had on the happening of the
 D             overcrowding?   A. If the number of people who were to be
               allowed into the pens had been calculated, then the
               turnstiles could have been used to measure and control that
               number in.

            Q.     And would the pens have become overcrowded if that system
                   had been used?   A. No.

  E          Q. At 2.52 p.m., Gate C, which is shown on Drawing 4241 just
                next to the rank of turnstiles A - G, was opened for the
                second time. Do you see it?    A. The one adjacent to
                 turnstile A.

            Q. That is right; it was opened?                      A.      Yes.

  P          Q. And a large influx of spectators came through the gate and
                went across the concourse and down the tunnel?   A. Yes.

            Q.      If there had been a system of control of entry into pens 3
                    and 4 at the concourse end of the tunnel, as you were
                    telling my Lord at the beginning of your evidence, would
                    any of those people from Gate C have been able to get entry
                    to pens 3 and 4 which were already overcrowded?

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                    Is that not stating the obvious?

            MR. PAYNE: My Lord, we think it is but we hoped that it might
                be helpful for your Lordship’s note. If your Lordship
                thinks it is obvious, I am happy to move on. (To the
                witness) I would like to ask you to do another exercise
                while you are looking at --



                                                            56.
D-L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD WOOD LAND




^      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: It is like asking "If someone shuts the
           door, would anyone go through it?"

       MR. PAYNE: We are happy to accept what your Lordship says.
           (To the witness) I would now like to ask you about the
           opening of Gate C and the effect that it had, and I want to
           ask you to help my Lord about an argument which was
           addressed to his Lordship yesterday by Counsel for the
B          Engineer on the question of foreseeability. Mr. Burne,
           given that there was no system of control of numbers going
           into pens 3 and 4, and given that the system for assessing
           how many there were in the pens was that it relied on
           visual appreciation, lookout, by those responsible --
       A.  Yes.

       Q*     — from the point of view of an engineer, what will happen
C             if this system is put into effect?

       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                In what circumstances?

       MR. PAYNE: In the circumstances at this stage of ordinary use
           of the turnstiles and ordinary people coming into the
           concourse area shown in 1238.

D      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                You mean if that just continues in that
           ordinary way?

       MR. PAYNE: Yes. From the point of view of an engineer with no
           control and visual appreciation, Mr. Burne, what will be
           the consequence for the arrival of spectators in those
           pens?    A. There can only be two things happen. Either
E
           people are turned away or people will continue to go into
           the tunnel and try to find a place at the other end and be
           followed by others coming in behind them. It is inevitable
           that there will be a build up of people in a location such
           as that.

       Q.    You mean because it is behind the goal? A. And because
             there was only the one sign showing"Standing”;   this is
p            the place to come.

       Q.    So given that configuration, Lord Justice Taylor found that
             pens 3 and 4 became grossly overcrowded by 2.50/2.52 --

       MR.    JUSTICE JOWITT:             Which paragraph is   this?

       MR.    PAYNE:       Paragraph 115, my Lord.
G
       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                Yes.

       MR. PAYNE:          Do you see the line --

       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: That is not quite what the paragraph says.
           The paragraph says:
H


                                                   57.
    — PL. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




     \                         "This disaster was the worst in the history of British
                               football.  It happened because pens 3 and 4 became
                               grossly overcrowded. They were uncomfortably
                               overcrowded by 2.50 p.m."

              MR. PAYNE:             That is right, my Lord.      I said, "2.50/2.52".

              MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Lord Justice Taylor is not saying that by
     B            2.50/2.52 p.m. they were grossly overcrowded. He is saying
                  that they were uncomfortably overcrowded by 2.50 p.m. Just
                  read the text and you will see what I mean.

              MR. PAYNE: Yes.   If your Lordship would go to paragraph 63,
                  here Lord Justice Taylor deals with the same topic in the
                  second sentence.  I ought to perhaps read all of it:

®    C                       "In the 20 minutes from 2.30 p.m. to 2.50 p.m. there
                              were crucial developments both inside and outside the
                              ground.  In pens 3 and 4 there was a steady increase
                              in pressure as more fans came through the tunnel to
                              the favoured area behind the goal. By 2.50 p.m. these
                              pens were already full to a degree which caused
                              serious discomfort to many well used to enduring
                              pressure on terraces."
    D
                     My Lord, the other paragraph which dealt with this subject
                     w a s --

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                     184.

             MR. PAYNE: 184, yes, your Lordship has that. Mr. Burne, I
                 want you just to take the position from here. At 2.50, the
                 pens are seriously overfull, if I may be allowed to use
                       expression. The turnstiles A - G amount to seven in
                 number, do they not?    A. They do.

             Q.     I want you to just look at the rate at which they were
                    ?oo6^ e1^      admitting spectators, which can be found at
                    188 in the Taylor Report. Do you see it says:

                              "The Green Guide recognises that the rate at which
                              spectators can pass through turnstiles depends on a
                              variety of local circumstances but states ’in general
                              based on observation and experience, it is unlikely
                              that the maximum notional rate per turnstile would
                              exceed 750 per hour’."?
             A.     I do.

             Q*               "Since the semi-final was an all ticket match
                              requiring no cash transactions, the Club considered
                              that a higher rate of about 1,000 per hour per
                              turnstile could be expected."

                    Do you see that?   A. Well, there would be 7,000 people
                    theoretically able to get through.


                                                            58.
^-Q.L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




           Q.     Yes. Just work out, would you, please, how that would work
                  and what would happen after 2.50, by which time the pens
                  were uncomfortably overcrowded. At the rate of 1,000 per
                  hour per turnstile, by arithmetic, that works out at
                  sixteen per minute per turnstile?   A. Yes.

           Q.    Seven turnstiles in the period immediately leading up to
                 the kick-off, at sixteen per minute, is 112 per minutes?
 g       A.     Of that order, yes.

          Q.      And the figure that my Lord was asked to consider was a
                  period of eleven minutes between 2.52 and 3.03, so that
                  eleven times 112 would give the result of 1,232, by
                  arithmetic, Mr. Burne?    A, Yes, I hear what you say. I am
                  not absolutely certain that arithmetic is perfect.

 C       Q.   It will be corrected if it is wrong, but I want you to
               comment on a proposition that was put to my Lord yesterday.
               If that is correct, namely 1,232 in eleven minutes through
               the turnstiles, suppose that 80 per cent of that number are
               attracted by the only obvious sign of 'Standing1 over the
               tunnel, that would arrive at 985, just under 1,000 people?
          A • Yes•

 D        Q. And just suppose that half of them on their way as they go
              down the tunnel go into pen 3 and half into pen 4. A. Yes.

          Q.     This will result in an increase of numbers in each of those
                 pens of 500 or so in the space of eleven minutes after
                 2.52?   A. Yes.

          Q.    From the point of view of an engineer, what is the
 E               foreseeable consequence of that when the pens are already
                uncomfortably overcrowded?    A. If they are uncomfortably
                 overcrowded, they would have to have had something like 900
                people in each pen, so the addition of another 50 per cent
                at least would obviously mean a very serious situation.

          Q.    What would be the consequences for the safety of people
 F              already in those pens?   A. It would be completely unsafe.

          Q.    And what consequences can reasonably be foreseen of what
                      happen in the pens?  A. If there is no means of
                escape, then the obvious consequences will be that of
                crushing.

          Q.    Is this matter something which ought to be in the mind of
 q              the Engineer when putting forward schemes such as you have
                been discussing?

         MR. T0ULS0N: My Lord, what in the mind of the Engineer?        A
             lot of things have been put.

         MR. PAYNE: The development of the situation as you have just
             described it to my Lord, Mr. Burne, in the light of the
 H


                                                  59.
    _^>.L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD WOODLAND




                    absence of any system of counting and control and the
                    signing matters that you mentioned?




     B




•    c




     D




     E




     F




     G




                                               60.
J^.L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD WOODLAND



           A. A system of counting and control is essential and fundamental to the
           management system for safety reasons alone. The consequences of not having
           a management system are those of an unsafe area in which people are being
           asked to attend. If there are no ways in which those people can escape
A         the consequence of that unsafe situation must be that of crushing.
    Q.    Will you therefore go please now, moving slightly away from that topic,
           to consider the means of escape, and I ask you just to go back to your
           report now to refer to those passages which describe the subject and where
           you deal with this subject and then I want you to illustrate your report
           by reference to the documents. In your report can you find page 2 where
           in your summary under B.2?A. "Similarly outward        emergency or exit
B         flows could have been managed by safe routes, signs and facilities for
           emergency operation."
    Q.    I have now got a note 5.14 which is at page 81. In these paragraphs you
           are discussing now the means of escape in the pens. The first paragraph
           5.14, could you read that please?       A. "There were accesses into
           adjacent pens via gates 1.1 metres, or 3*7i" wide, through radial fences
           1.7 metres, 5'7" high. The top rail is at shoulder height. These accesses
C         were without the benefit of any sign or indication of their presence for
           use either as communication into a less densely filled pen or as a means
           of escape. The gates could notbe seen whether they were open or not."
    Q.     You have got a photograph there but that is a finding which has been made
           by Lord Justice Taylor, so you can go on to 5.15?     A. "There was an
           emergency route on to the pitch via a gate. Access to the gate was up
           three steps, a total height of .6 metres, 2', from the well of the pen.
D         The only sign from the gate with its number oriented towards the pitch.
           It could only be unlocked from the pitch."
    Q.     Could you now then turn to your photograph 40, appendix D.3 please. A. That
           shows the back of the perimeter fence in pen 3.
    Q.    My Lord has visited the site so you can take it fairly shortly, but it
           illustrates the step up that you were talking about and the fact that there
^          is no means of opening the gate from the inside?     A. Yes.
    Q.     Go on to 5.16?     A. "There are no emergency escape signs of any kind.
           The only real emergency exists were completely unmarked. Even the normal
           exit routes were unmarked.", that is to say there was no sign on the end
           of the tunnel to show the way out.
p Q.       From the point of view of an Engineer, bearing in mind the annual certificates
           which were produced by the Engineer, what is your comment about the absence
           of any such signs?     A. I believe there ought tohave been emergency signs,
           emergency exit signs and that if tr.~y were r.ot present then I believe that
           the attention of the Club should have been drawn to this fact.
    Q.     By whom?         A. By the Engineer in his annual letter.
G Q-       At 5.17?      A. "The only means of escape in emergency were (a) normal
           exit route retracing entry through the tunnel, which would be up quite
           a steep slope against the flow of an incoming crowd; (b) exit through
           the unmarked gate in the radial fence separating the next pen and which
            is not visible in crowded conditions; (c) through a narrow unmarked
           not panic operable from the inside gate on to the pitch up three steps
           and 2' higher than the well of the pens."
H Q.       As to the design of the gate and the operation of the catch on the gate,
           can you look in the bundle--
^Q.l_ SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




      MR. JUSTICE OOWITT:               That     is the perimeter gate?
      MR. PAYNE: The perimeter gate my Lord. Could you look in the bundle at 690
 \        in the bundle of documents, which is a letter from Dr. Eastwood to the
           local authority dated August 1987 enclosing four copies of the two
          sketches showing proposals for gate release devices, and over the page
          at 691 and 692 are the designs which were put forward. If you look at
          691, can you explain to my Lord how this gate hatched is intended --
      MR. JUSTICE 00WITT: I can see they are designed deliberately so as not to be
          able to be opened from the inside.
 B
      MR. PAYNE:         Your Lordship has it. Thank you very much.
      MR. T0ULS0N: Your Lordship will also recall the unchallenged finding of Taylor
          in paragraph 72 that the gate in pen C in fact sprang open twice from
          pressure within and was shut by the Police.
      MR. JUSTICE 00WITT:              You will be able to draw my attention to that later.
 C
      MR. PAYNE: Finally, just completing your examination of the means of escape
           or lack of means of escape from these pens, can you read 5.18?    A. "33.1
           per cent of those of pen 3 and 32.3 per cent of pen 4 were more than 12
           metres from the tunnel. 29.1 per cent of pen 3 and 30.8 per cent of
           pen 4 were 12 metres from the tunnel or radial gate. In appendix M is a
           drawing --
 D MR. PAYNE: Would your      Lordship be kind enough to look at that.         I know your
        Lordship has made a comment about this and I will not dwell upon it,
        because I understand what is in your Lordship's mind, but it might be
        helpful just to have in mind the drawing Mr. Burne has made at appendix M.
        The Green Guide describes a 12 meter escape limit route. What is the
        significance of this drawing. Oust take my Lord round it would you please
        Mr. Burne?     A. The Green Guide echoes what is already stated in British
 E     Standards as an accepted minimum in respect of distance. 12 metres from
        the tunnel for pen 3 and pen 4 is a green hatched area of each flank of
        the pens, my Lord. Those people are also within easy access of radial
        fence gates. There are in addition the areas which are evaluated in
        number terms, 29 per cent and 30.8 per cent which are cross-hatched in
        red. Those people are more than 12 metres from either the tunnel or
        the radial fence gate. All those people are thereby very seriously at
        risk because they are so far away from an emergency exit, unless you
 F      count that one narrow gate on to the pitch.
   MR. JUSTICE 00WITT: In the situation which developed on the occasion of this
        match in pens 3 and 4, had their radial gates been two or three times the
        size with excellent sign posting and maybe closer, it really would not
        have helped those being crushed at the front, would it. There was only
        one way and that was forward?    A. If there were extra gates either in
        the radial fences, but more particularly, as your Honour has said, inthe
 G     front of the pitch fence, there should have in my opinion been more gates
        in the pitch fence.
      Q.In the situation which developed, the only thing     which could have helped
           those in danger of being crushed and those being crushed would have been
            adequate means of access on to the pitch, is that right?     A. Absolutely
           right.
 ^ Q.         Nothing else could have helped?    A. Nothing else at all in the form of
              a substantial amount of removable surface such as the gate.
    SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




    Q.      Radial gates and escape from the tunnel were out?    A. Absolutely
            useless, because--
.     Q. I do not mean because of limitation of numbers, simply from the fact
A        that you could not go back?    A. That is what the 12 metre rule means
         my Lord, because it is not the fact of 12 metres being a long way to run
         when it is exposed space, it is 12 metres of people who are already going
         out through those routes which prevents your exit through those routes
         which reinforces the need to provide additional exits for those who are
         more than 12 metres from an exit route.
B     Q. I am trying to get you to direct your mind to the circumstances which
         developed in pens 3 and 4. I have had the benefit not merely of reading
         the Taylor report, but being able to see the video films. One sees on the
         video films police officers and civilians on the pitch gesturing to the
         people in the pens — at first sight one might think they are just saying
         "Don't try to get out", but with better understanding one can see they
         are telling those who are further back to back off and it is not happening.
         That is why I say those unfortunates who were being crushed, if they could
C        have escaped they could only have escaped , had there been the means, on
         to the pitch?      A. Absolutely.
     Q.     And however good other methods of escape were they would not have worked
             in this situation?   A. That is exactly what the 12 metre rule is trying
            to say.
     MR. PAYNE: I think you can take it this way Mr. Burne and then you will be able
®         to explain the point you are trying to make. Is there a connection from
           an engineering point of view between the control of the numbers who can go
           into the pen by means of counting such as you have been describing at
           turnstiles or some other means. Is there a connection between that and
           what one finds on entering the restricted area as here,and what the
          means of escape and distance from the means of escape ought to be?




F




G




H
                                               - 63 -
J=S_ SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                  A. Yes. The British Standard, which establishes the use
A                of a 12 metre number to guide us in the design of spaces in
                  which people will gather together in large assemblies of
                  this kind, has arrived specifically at that figure because
                  it is sufficiently large for the crowd through which you
                  would have to try to pass to get to your exit to be too big
                  to penetrate and, therefore, you must find another route
                  -           another means of escape must be provided - which is
„                exactly what your Lordship is saying; that the only way for
                  these people, who were within a narrow distance from the
                  pitch fence - the only way - was for them to go out through
                  that fence by means of the provision of gates.

          Q.      My Lord is confining the question to the events which
                  occurred on the 15th April.

q         MR. JUSTICE JOWITTs My impression was that let us suppose
              within five metres of an escape gate - if that had meant
              moving sideways or backwards or sideways and backwards,
              such was the crush that you could not have made it?
              A. I am with you 100%, my Lord. We are saying exactly the
              same thing. All of those people who were at the front of
              the pen--

D         MR. PAYNE:              I think I can bring you to assist his Lordship--

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Just let me make a note of that.
              Mr. Payne. I have written this - and I hope I have it
              right -   On this day as the overcrowding developed,
              however near the access the people being crushed were
              escape through an access which required movement to side or
              rear would have been impossible. The only way of escape
E             would have been if they could have gone forwards on to the
              pitch."

          MR. PAYNE: My Lord, that is my understanding of what Mr. Burne
              has said.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                   Thank you.

 F         MR. PAYNE: Mr. Burne, my Lord has addressed his questions to
               you on the basis of what happened on the 15th April. Do
               you follow?    A. Yes.

          Q.     But in the light of the 12 metre rule as illustrated on
                  your drawing, Appendix M, from the point of view of an
                  engineer what ought to have been provided leaving out of
g                consideration altogether the events of the 15th April?
                  Once one has got the situation as shown in Appendix M,
                  forgetting all about the disaster, what ought to be done
                  here in engineering terms?    A. There should have been
                  two or even three gates of at least 1.1 metres wide on to
                  the pitch for each pen.

           Q. And from the point of view of an engineer, without the
    H         provision of such gates, in the event of a capacity crowd


                                                         64.
      /P4r SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                        attending, what are the implications for the safety of the
      A                people in these red hatched areas, leaving out altogether
                        the events of the 15th April?    A. They are in an unsafe
                        situation.

                Q.     Bearing in mind that unsafe situation, could you just bring
                        to mind the estimate of visual impression which was being
                        relied on by the Engineer to assess the capacity of these
      g                pens? Do you follow that?      A. Yes.

                Q.      I want you to put in mind the two matters together, first
                        of all the proximity of the exit route and secondly that
                        the system of capacity depends upon look-out. Bring those
                        two to mind and I am going to ask you a question about it.
                        Put yourself in a position now of the Engineer writing his
^                      annual safety certificate and he now has to address his
w       c              mind to what he is going to put. What ought a reasonably
                       careful engineer to put in the Certificate?     A. That
                        there are many people, nearly a third of the potential
                        occupants, who will be unsafe, and their lack of safety is
                       unlikely to be recognised by visual attempts to define the
                       density of the crowd.

                Q.     And you are aware from the letter we looked at, 933 (the
      D                certificate in 1988) that the Engineer in fact gave an
                       unqualified certificate in relation to the safety of the
                       ground - I do not think it is necessary to look at the
                       document again?     A. Yes.

                Q.      What is your comment about that?    A. I believe there
                        ought to have been clauses added to that letter drawing
                        attention to what is a serious safety risk.
      E
                Q.     One last thing I want you to do, please:   Looking at your
^                      Appendix M and the cross-hatched areas shown in Appendix N,
W                      I want you to bring to mind also your criticisms of lack of
■w'                    means of counting and control of numbers going into the
                        pens and the lack of any system of turnstiles or management
                        system to control the numbers going into these pens. Do
                        you follow?    A. Yes.
       F
                Q.     So that I want you to bring together in your mind the
                        dangerous situation shown by the cross-hatching together
                        with the lack of means of counting and control (which you
                        have already been describing)?    A. Yes.

                Q.     Now I want you to do the same exercise:   Here you are, the
      q                Engineer, sitting down to write the Certificate.   Should
                        your certificate include anything about that?    A. The
                        Certificate ought to have, in my view, recognised that
                        there were some 30% of the people--

                Q.     Never mind about recognised, what should it have said?
                        A. "Put more gates into the pitch fence".

       H


                                                      65.
    SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




         Q.     What about control of access to the pens?    A. That would
A              have been an absolutely essential matter which ought to
                have been addressed earlier.  In this situation, you simply
                don't know how many people are in the tunnel coming in.

         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   Just looking at Appendix N, the perimeter
              gates which are there seem to be fairly evenly spaced
              - spaced on the basis that there were no radial fences
g             there. For instance, pen 4, the perimeter fence there does
              not seem to be sited with the position of radial fences in
              mind?    A. I don't know when the gates were introduced,
              my Lord. The very clever design of Dr. Eastwood for the
              release device is dated 1987, which post-dates the
              installation of both sets of radial fences. So that
              suggests that the device at least was attached to the gates
              after the radial fences were installed, and it may well be
q            that the gates previously existed before then.

        MR.      TOULSON:          As a matter of fact, some did and some didnot.

        MR.      JUSTICE JOWITTs  I doubt, for instance,whether the
                perimeter gate in pen 4 would have been sited there if it
                were put in after the radial fences.

D       MR.     GLASGOW: If it helps the note, my Lord - I am sure it is
                not contentious - that isan old one. They were all
                existing - there is no secret about

        MR. PAYNE: Thank you very much - most helpful.
            (To the witness) I am going to ask you to move on now to a
            different topic, please, Mr. Burne - the question of the
            barriers. Will you begin that, please, by reference to
E           your report, beginning at page 32? Will you begin to read
            Chapter 9, please?    A. The foreward of Chapter 9 of the
            Green Guide indicates that:

                          "Many hazards can be eliminated by provision of well
                          constructed, correctly positioned and properly mounted
                          crush barriers."

        Q.      So you ought to have open, please, Chapter 9 of the Green
                Guide, which is in fact this page that you are referring
                to. It is at page 35. You draw attention to the foreward
                - please go on?    A. I have only quoted a part of 110.

         Q.     Yes, 110 relates to the height of top rails?    A. That's
                right, and it relates to the part which is the most part of
                the body able to tolerate pressure.




H


                                                   66
    SELLERS & CO. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




                The recommendation is for the height to be between 1.02
                metres and 1.12 metres.

         Q.     That is supposed to work for most people is it?                 A.   Yes,
                it is between 3 ft 4 and 3 ft 8.

         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   Where does that come to?    A.  In the
              soft part of the anatomy between the pelvis and the rib
              cage.
B
         MR. PAYNE:    In your report at page 32 you have made a table
              of barriers and the height at which you have measured
              them, and one can just run one's eye down that and
              compare the height you found with the recommended height
              of 1.02.      A.  Yes, there are of necessity two columns
              of figures there partly because the barriers are not
              absolutely level, but because the Green Guide is
q            recommending an interpretation of the height above the
              nosing of the step immediately behind the barrier.

         Q.    Very well.   Did you find in summary in pen 3 that 4 of
                the barriers were below the recommended height?
                A.  Yes, the majority are all below the recommended height.

         Q.     The majority are?    A.  Yes.  There are 2 types of barrier,
D              my Lord, in the whole of this terrace, one: the newer
                barriers which have been installed under Dr. Eastwood's
                jurisdiction, and then those which were there in 1929.

         Q.    This will have to be done, I think, by reference to a
                diagram, which you have got in your appendix, I think it
                is D.l.     A.  The appendix of Lord Justice Taylor's
                report?
E
         Q.    No.   In your drawing which shows which barrier you are
                talking about.   I am afraid I ask you to look at that,
                please.

                      You have given the numbers of the barriers in your
                 report, page 32.   If one looks at pen 3 you refer to
                 barriers 124A, 125, 136 and 136A, so that is all of them
                 except the one furthest back.      A.  Yes, those are the
                 ones at the front.

         Q.      You give the ----     A.  149 at the back, the taller one,
                 is one of the new barriers installed under Dr. Eastwood's
                 j u r i s d ic tio n.

q        Q.    Moving now to pen 4 where you measured the barriers.
                A.    126 is the single gate barrier immediately behind
                t h e ----

         Q.      Is it necessary to look at all of them?               A.     No, that
                 is a new one.

         Q.    That is a new one.              132 is a new one and 144 and   150 are
H              new ones.

                                                     67.
,-q.L. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD W O O D L A N D




            Q.     If my arithmetic is right, it looks as if on your schedule
                   at page 33, you found that 7 of the barriers in pen 4
 A                 are below the recommended height?     A.  They are all the
                   old ones, yes.

            Q.    The old ones.  Is my arithmetic correct, 6 numbers: 125,
                   127, 128, 137 and 138, in fact that is wrong, that is 5.
                   A.  5.

            Q.     What is the significance of that, please, in safety
 B                 terms, Mr. Burne?     A.  Well, the first thing is that
                   the level is appreciably lower than the recommendation
                   which puts the pressure at the level of the pelvis,
                   whereas if it is at the higher level there is the
                   opportunity, my Lord, to push with the hands to attempt to
                   protect oneself.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:    Can you just explain that to me so that
                 I follow?     A.  If the rail is low down, my Lord, then
                 it is at this sort of level and it is impossible to use
                 the hands to push oneself away.

            Q.      You have got no leverage?    A. No leverage at all.
                    Whereas if it is at the higher level there is the opportunity
                    to help to try to push oneself.
 D
            MR.    PAYNE:  In a case of a serious crush asoccurred, that
                   clearly does not have any application.   What is the
                   significance of the height of the barriers then when the
                   pen is absolutely packed?      A.  In a situation where
                   everybody is without the opportunity of defending
                   themselves in the lower barrier there is the tendancy
                   for the load to be pushed over the top   of the barrier
 E                from behind, so that the barrier is not dividing the
                   crowd up effectively.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   You mean that the barrier will only
                 restrain a part of the human load that is there behind
                 it?    A.  It is preventing the legs from moving, my
                 Lord, but it is not preventing the torso from moving
                 over the top of the barrier which of course is increasing
 F              the load on the barrier.  The Health and Safety address
                 this problem, my Lord, and call it a "leaning crowd".

            Q.    Are you saying that if the barrier is too low so that
                   people are bent over it, the weight, there is some
                   transfer of pressure on the man immediately behind the
                   barrier on to the man in front of the barrier?
                   A.  Yes, my Lord.
 G
            Q.    That will not be the full pressure, it will be a part
                   of the pressure because the barrier holds some?
                   A.  The barrier is holding the legs, but the amount of
                   pressure on the top part of the body can only be
                   controlled by the stiffness of the humans themselves,
                   the barrier is doing nothing to prevent transfer of the
 H
                                                  6 8 .
    kL. SELLERS & Co. / W. LLOYD WO O D L A N D




                   upper p a rt o f           th e b o d ie s o f th o se b eh in d , th a t p r e ssu r e
                   fo r w a r d on t o        the backs o f th e p e o p le in fr o n t o f the
    A             b a rrier.

            Q. It is not wholly effective, but it is not as effective as
                it should be?     A.  I cannot put numbers to it, my
                Lord.

            MR. PAYNE: Apply that, will you, to the layout of the barriers in
                pen 3 as shown on your appendix D.l, and looking in
    B           particular at barrier number 136, and at page 32 in your
                report you have recorded the effective height of that
                barrier as three-quarters of a metre.    A.  .83 of a
                metre.

            Q.    That is actual height?                        A.    That is actual height.

            Q.    What is the difference between actual    and effective?
    ^             A.   The effective height is from the nosing of the step
                   behind, the next step on the terrace up.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  That is equated with the Green Guide?
                A.  That is what the Green Guide says to do.

            MR. PAYNE:    So the height of the barrier from slightly along
                 its length from .83 to .86 of a metre?     A.  That's
    D
                 correct.

            Q.    Is      that the lowest barrier in the terrace?                             A.   Yes.
                   It              is about 2 ft 10, my Lord.

            Q.    So that when the crush occurred what would be the
                   consequence then for the pressure which developed below
    E             barrier 136 on the crowd immediately behind 124A?
                   A.  The people between, behind 136, between 136 and 149
                   in leaning forward over the short barrier will
                   necessarily be leaving on the backs of the people in front,
^                 who in turn would be pushign on the people in front of
                   124A.

            Q.    You mean resting on 124A?      A.  Being pushed, their
    F             bodies leaning against one another, the more it happened
                   the worst is becomes.

            Q.    Would that increase the pressure upon that barrier?
                   A. It would increase the pressure on the barrier itself
                   and on 136 and 124A and on the people in front of 124A,
                   who had no way of leaving because there was a fence.

    G       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                   Just a minute.

                        I understand what you say about the increase of the
                   pressure on 124A, because those between 136 and 124A
                   have got a load from the previous barrier on to their
                   backs being transmitted down to 124A.  What I have not
                   quite followed is how if a person can transmit X pounds
    pi            pressure on to a barrier, that is what he will transmit


                                                              69.
.=■<_ SELLERS & CO. / W. LLOYD WOODLAND




                if it is at the appropriate height, how, if it is too
                low, he will be able now to exert X + Y pounds, or
A               perhaps I should say, X - Y + Z where the total is
                more than X pounds.  Do you follow my dilemma?
                A.  If one imagines a slices loaf, my Lord, and the slices
                of loaf are in a toast rack which is only holding the
                bottom part of those slices, there is the opportunity for
                the whole of the top to lean right over each of the
                divisions in the toast rack, but the last lot, the last
                slice of toast is against the pitch perimeter fence and
®               has nowhere to go, so that it is not only the subject of
                pressure within the group because there are people
                pushing in, but in addition to that, those who ought
                to be protected by this barrier, are not so well
                protected because the upper part of the load is leaning
                on them as well, and that is aggravated from -----

r         Q.    That I follow, and that is why I say I follow you.   The
                people who are leaving over barrier 136 on to the people
                in front of barrier 136, that they would transmit the
                greater pressure on to barrier 124A.     A.  Yes, my
                Lord.

          Q.    What I do not follow is why also in transmitting the
                greater load on to barrier 136, if barrier 136 were at
                the proper height, so much pressure was applied, it is
                by some of that pressure to the person in front rather
                than to the barrier.     A.  He is not applying more
                lateral pressure to the barrier than he would have done,
                but there is also a vertical element of pressure because
                of the weight now offered as well.

          Q.     Bearing down?             A.   Yes.
E
          Q.    I see.  In other words, you have got force on the
                barrier in two directions: one more or less horizontal
                and the other oblique: going down?       A.  More or
                less vertical.

          MR. PAYNE:   My Lord, it is 10 minutes before the Court
               is proposing to rise for the day.  My Lord, I have
 F            received a message from my learned friends, and from
              my instructing solicitor, in consequence of which we
               invite your Lordship to rise now and not to hear any
               more evidence today, and that is all I am able to say
               to your Lordship at the moment.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:            Very well,             I will do that.   Half-past
    _          10 on Monday.
 U




    H



                                                       7 0   .
