"3G6
 n$-


3,62.


y > (

3 6 0



1 5 7


'VS'S
 MICHAEL WHITTINGHAM POLICE CONSTABLE 725 S.YORKS POLICE.

At 8.00a.m. on Saturday 15th of April 1989 I came on duty at Rawmarsh police station
along with a number of other officers who were to attend Hillsborough football ground
to police the football semi-final between Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham forrest F.C.
 On arrival at Hillsborough I attended the pre-match briefing and was informed that my serial
No.43   was to be positioned on Halifax Rd. to observe the arrival of fans in coaches and
to ensure the correct parking of private vehicles. The coaches were to park along the
side of Halifax Rd. facing away from the ground, and private cars to,be allowed     to
park in side roads adjacent to Halifax Rd.

  The serial was to be in position at 11.30a.m.   At that time coaches had started to
 arrive and also several private cars . The fans all seemed to be in good spirits
 and a good day with little or no trouble was all that I could foresee.
  During the course of the day several fans all with Liverpool accents asked the location of t
 the nearest public house to the football ground that would be open and most were               j
 directed to pubs further up Halifax Rd. but were told that they probably wouldn't be open
 anyway.                                                       ;
   At approx. 3.00 p.m. our serial was directed to go to Claywheels lane depot to have          I
 meal break, on the way down to the depot it was seen that a large number of fans were
 still making thier way to the sports ground and quite a few of them were asking the time and 1"
 how far it was to the ground. It was obvious from the way they were rushing that they had
 misjudged the time and were afraid that they might miss the kick-off. It could also be
 seen that the majority of the fans had been drinking quite heavily and that many of them
 were carrying cans of beer to the ground intending to drink the contents before they
 entered.
   At approx. 3.15 p.m. we arrived at Claywheels lane and were approaching the depot when
 an inspector ran from the building and told our sergeant P.S.1253 GRAHAM that there had
 been a pitch invasion at the ground and that we were to go immediately to the Leppings
 lane end of the stadium to assist in the quelling of a large fight that was supposedly
 taking place behind the stand. We were picked up by a transit van   and conveyed to
^fhe gates on Leppings lane where we got out of the van and appraached the gates where a
 large number of uniformed officers were standing, apparently forming a cordon. At this
 point I could see a number of fans running from the rear of the stands, these people were
 all crying and one person said to me that there were people in the stand dying and to get
 in there as quick as possible, on hearing this I ran into the rear area of the west stand
 and could see an ambulance with the rear doors open and a casualty at the side being
 treated by ambulance personnel. I ran to the open tunnel mouth which as I was unfamiliar
 with the layout of the ground seemed to be the only f>lace to go, I then saw a man who
 looked quite old being carried from the tunnel mouth. He was almost naked and I could see
 that he was in a very poor physical condition, I thought that he must have had a heart
 attack because he was very pale. I continued into the tunnel in order to gain access to
 the playing surface where I believed there to be some fighting,I made my way down the
 terracing to the perimeter fence, climbing through it and onto the field. I could see that
 the game had been stopped and that there were a large number of people on the pitch, I
                                                                                  QM 1U.
 looked around to see if there was any fighting to be dealt with but could only see groups
 of people standing around apparently awe struck. I turned around to see what my serial
    sergeant wanted us to do only to see that the stand I had just come through was almost
 empty at the front and that there were injured people laid on the floor with officers
 helping to remove them from the enclosure. Problems wrer being caused by the perimeter
    fence and I assisted other officers who were attemting to remove sections of the netting
    of the fencing to allow more casualties to be extracted. It was at this point that I
    realised that the people being carried from the stand were all very seriously injured if
    not dead, I remember thinking that this many people couldn't have died and that I must be
    mistaken. I assisted in the ferrying of bodies from the fence to the touchline area where
    I assumed that they would be treated by ambulance staff, I must have carried approx 10
    people when I realised that the ambulance staff weren't coping with the vast numbers of
    casualties and I decided to try and treat the next person that I carried out.This was a
    young man approx 25 yrs. HE WAS OBVIOUSLY BEYOND HELP, I still checked for a pulse but
    could not find one, his lips were blue (cyanosis) and his skin was a pale colour. The
£ fa n smelled of alcohol                                           his clothing was in
    dissarray his trouser being pulled down, his shirt t o m open and his shoes missing. On his
    chest I could see patterned bruising indicative of external pressure being placed on his
    chest, as a result of this cursory examination I concluded that this man was either in need
    of attention that I could not possibly give or beyond all human aid, I therefore
    returned to the fence to assist in the removal of more bodies, all of which seemed to be
    in the same condition as the man I had examined. When the stand had been cleared of the
    fallen casualties and they had been transported to the other end of the ground I helped
    several walking injured to the pitch to seek attention.
      I had become seperated from the rest of my serial during this period and the work I did
    was all self motivated doing what seemed right at the time taking no direct order from
    any senior officer.
^     At this point I was instructed to return the fans on the pitch back to the west stand
      was told to do this by an inspector that I do not know but it was an impossible task
    as the fans would not return to the place where they had seen so many people die. They
    also wanted to find friends and relatives that they had been seperated from in the crush.
       Several officers were standing at the pitch side crying overwhelmed by the events
    that had taken place, I do not blame them though as it was all I could do to carry on
    working in the circumstances, I can only think that I went on "autopilot".
      Tension was mounting in the stands as the Notts forest fans were still chanting which
    was upsetting the Liverpool fans, a deal of hostility was also being directed towards the
    police and I heard several shouts that it was all the fault of the police.
      I then rejoined the rest of my serial and formed part of a cordon accross the field
    to seperate the two sets of fans in case they tried to get to each other. The game was
    then offically abandoned and a replay announced over the tannoy system, this lead to the
    ground being emptied of spectators in a very short time.
          f
                  ■ ‘                                                          Qpft HC
  At 5.00p.m. my serial returned to Halifax Rd. in order to supervise the leaving of the
coaches and private vehicles. On the way up the road a number of people were abusive
towards the rest of my colleagues and one particular man said directly to me; "IT'S ALL
YOWR FUCKING FAULT AND W E ’LL GET THE BLAME AND IT WASN'T US." He had approached me as if to
engage in a fight but a friend of his came up and stopped him saying that he'd got a lot on
his plate and not to take any notice of him. A lot of coach drivers were concerned that
people who had travelled to the game with them had not returned to the coaches and were at
a loss as to what to do. They were told to wait till they were sure the passengers would
not return and then to leave, After being assured that should the people turn up they would
be conveyed back to Liverpool by the police    and not left stranded.
  When the coaches had all left we returned to the traffic depot at Claywheels lane and
wre stood down   at 6.30 p.m.   We were then conveyed to Rawmarsh police station to be
debriefed by C.I. LINE. At 7.30 p.m. we were released from duty.
  During the period of time that I was awaiting orders at the west end of the pitch I saw
two youths approx llyrs old walking in the area of the cinder track apparently picking up
money which had been dropped by the fans etc during thier escape from the stands over the
Tence, they appeared to be smiling and obviously thought it was thier birthday being able
to get so much money without ccaning to the attention of the police. That was really something
that was not to be expected after a tragedy like the one that had happened but it wasn't
apparent to me at that point just what the scale of the destruction was, we were told
that about 50 people had lost thier lives, but that soon became 70 plus, it was only after
seeing news reports that I knew the extent of the tragedy, and that 94 people had been
killed.                                                         '
