                                               Sheffield Archives Ref: fbt* fa I 115 1$ %
                                                                                                   M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                    Date and tim e raised •z ^ - l c y y   .   i v f e i            Number



T itle   C oC ^N ^                                   > v tiu K O                  "
(Include                          numfikr i f relevant)
       te source and any document numobr


Receiver's instructions — urgent actio
                                                                                                                                      Receiver




                                                                                                                                      Indexer
D ocum ent re ^ te re d /in d e x e d as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                                Statem ent Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                                      Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined       fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                     O/M         SIO

                                                                                                          « ;S 8   s

                                                                                                           S—      r
                                                                                                                                (£31
Further action No(s)                                                                                                                  Indexer



When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Number Form
                               WIDNES

                          CHESHIRE

Tele:

19 April 1989
                                                                    a -*- ^
Dear Sir
I am writing to you regarding the events on Saturday 15 April,
at the Liverpool' v Nottingham Forest FA Cup Semi-Final, at
Hillsborough, which resulted in 95 deaths.
I attended the match and was involved in some crushing outside
the ground, eventually taking up my seat in the north stand just
prior to kick-off.   I was very concerned about aspects of the
organisation of this match, primarily crowd control. Hopefully,
a full independent enquiry will find the reasons for this
tragedy, but I am concerned that the views of spectators will not
be taken into account due to the large number involved and the
fact that they are individuals and not from any 'body1, hence my
letter to you.
To blame the fans is totally wrong and I feel that this could
happen unless all points of view are aired. I would stress that
I am not anti-police, but on this day they were the body
responsible for crowd control and safety.    They w^re totally
unprepared and their activities were not co-ordinated.     They
failed in their duty and got it wrong on the day.
The problems arose because a large number of people with tickets
tried to gain admittance at the same time. Impulsive decisions
were made and could have been avoided as the situation was
clearly predictable

        a.   the traffic situation on the motorways was well
             known
        b.   close circuit TV would show the position both in
             and outside the ground

        c.   the computer controlled turnstiles showed the
             number in the ground and the number still to take
             their places
        d.   the problem was evident by merely looking at the
             Leppings Lane end and was clear to all present.




                                     1
  I




With the known shortage of tickets, the whole situation should
have been anticipated and panic avoided. At no time did I see
any disorderly conduct,    everybody was good humoured and
apparently in possession of tickets.
Why:

       a.   Why was there no filtering towards the turnstiles
            - as there was last year - to prevent the crowd
            build up?

       b.   Why was the kick off not delayed as has been done
            several times this season, including the match
            involving only 10,000 spectators at Tranmere.

       c. ' Why having opened the gate were arrangements not
            made to stream fans to the sides and to evacuate
            those already packed in.

       d.   Why were no    announcements   made,   no   use   of
            megaphones.

I have heard it said that an unruly mob was responsible.  This
was not the case, the sheer weight of numbers, created by poor
organisation, created it.

I understand that a decision was made to open the gate to
prevent loss of life outside the ground.   I feel that this was
a real possibility.      However, the decision was made in
isolation, without regard to the serious problem vfchich was
already clearly evident inside.   The problems could not have
been made clear to the police inside the ground by their
superiors as they were deployed in the wrong places and ill-
informed.   This was clearly illustrated by large numbers of
police with dogs guarding the stands (for the wrong type of
situation) when they should have been elsewhere.

There were plenty of police about (I understand in the region of
800) but in the wrong places at the wrong time. The lower ranks
clearly thought violence was taking place, their superiors would
have known that this was not the case, but failed to instruct
them properly. One young constable, frightened, criticised his
superiors in front of us.

There has been a great deal of media attention and whilst I can
be influenced by various debates or my own emotions, I can
clearly recollect three impressions on that day:-

       1.   On reaching the ground there was no filtering -
            merely all persons allowed to make their own way.

       2.   On entering the ground, one section was clearly
            overcrowded and two other areas fairly empty.



                                 2
  f




      3.   A lack of medical facilities and only two
           ambulances were seen in almost one hour of panic.
           Volunteers did nearly all the work.

The police seemed very complacent and the lower ranks harassed,
unco-ordinated and lacking leadership.     There was a complete
absence of planning and direction and I am convinced that this
could have been avoided had a predictable situation been tackled
properly.   The Liverpool police have dealt with large crowds
over many years without incident.

I feel that the planning of such events should take into account
the views of supporters, including various associations which
now represent them.   The recommendations of Liverpool FC were
rejected for this match.

I know a lot of people share my views who attended the match.
Should you feel that I can be of any further assistance, please
do not hesitate to contact me.

I would like to record my admiration for the fans who assisted
the casualties and the attitude of Liverpool FC over the last
few days.

Yours faithfully




P.S. Since starting this letter, I have heard comments emanating
     from the Police Federation alleging that drunken fans
     started this incident. THIS IS UMTRPE.

      There was no evidence of this, the cause was their
      inability to, on a gradual basis, to stream arriving
      supporters, as they had done successfully the previous
      year. For some reason, they failed to do so and this must
      be highlighted.  I am deeply concerned that one isolated,
      inaccurate statement from a recognised body outweighs the
      more accurate reports from so many witnesses.

      Football supporters, unfortunately, are perceived by those
      who do not attend matches as those few seen in newsclips.
      The fans last Saturday came from all walks of life.    For
      example, our party of 4 were 30/40 years of age, married
      with children. We noticed no less than Billy Liddel having
      difficulty - hardly a hooligan!




                                3
