                      ROY GREEN,   Over 21

                      Police Sergeant 993

                      West Bar Police Station, Sheffield.
A-fc y.if5am Saturday 15 April 19$9 ^ commenced duty at West Bar Police Station, Sheffield,

in relation to F.A. Cup Semi Final duties, Liverpool versus Notts Forest, at the

Hillsborough.

I was in serial 9 consisting of PS 795 Bough, PCs 101 Barlow, 1399 Thompson, 3158 Gill,

2632 Hayes, 3329 Segerius, 3068 Sowerby.

At -Sam same date I collected the packed meals from   PS Thomas for my serial together

with lour personal radios from the parade room and liaised with Ps Bough. Phase 1 of

our duty was to supervise the arrival of Notts Forest supporters at the Midland Station,

Sheffield and escort them by PSV from the station to Hillsborough. Myself and PS Bough

organised our serial into twos as follows:- Myself and PC 101 Barlow, PS Bough and

PC 3068 Sowerby, PC 1399 Thompson and Pc 3^58 Gill, PC 2632 Hayes and PC 3329 Segerius,

each pair having one personal radio between them.

We then went to the Gymnasium at WBPS where we had our refreshments prior to briefing

in the gym by Ch. Insp. King and Supt Bates. After briefing at 9am in the gym myself

and PS Bough re-grouped our serial in the paradd roota at WBPS and again briefed our

Serial 9 regardingour duties. We then made our way to the Midland Station in our

respective pairs arriving at about 9.35am«

Myself and PC Barlow escorted our first PSV load of Notts Forest supporters to the

Hil"! sborough ground who were vpr*v well behaved and then returned back to the Midland

Gtation.   I then travelled on our last trip to Hillsborough with Notts Forest fans

on the lower deck. Some of them were obviously under the influence of alcohol and were

shouting and singing obsceneties. On the way up to the ground several of the fans were

asking to get off the PSV in order to urinate and some of them were let off the PSV

During the journey I noticed a stream of liquid from the upper deck which was most

likely urine into the road. The PSV arrived at Hillsborough at about 2.20pm and we

emptied the PSV outside the ground. Together with PC Barlow I then went to the gym at

 Hillsborough to regroup my serial. All my serial was    present therewith the exception

 of PS Bough and PC 3068 Sowerby. I reported to anInspector     whoI believe   to be

 Inspector Sewell and was told to remain on standby at the Gym. I collected my Serial's

 meal tickets and issued them to PCs Thompson and Gill and JSKXSiMXHXSXMKSIx PC Barlow

  and obtained a meal. I then issued a further two tickets to WPC Widdowson from another
serial as PCs Hayes and Segerius   had received their meal and kept the remaining two meal tin!

for PS Bough and PC Sowerby.I had nearly completed my meal     when I was again called to

report to the reception desk. I again reported to Inspector Sewell and informed him that

five of my serial were present. He informed me to go with my serial to *A* gate at Leppings

Lane . I asked him inside or outside the ground and he stated to go round the track as it

would be quicker. As I was talking to him several officers ran out of the gym. Some of these

officers must have been part of my Serial because all I could see at this time of my serial

was PCs Thompson and Gill. I informed PCs Thompson and Gill that we we were to go     to

Leppings Lane 'A1 Gate and we started to make our way there. Also present were Ps $15

Tattershall and PC 269 Broomhead. As we walked along the track I was in front and switched

 my radio to Channel 2JT, the match channel. I could see that the two teams were on the

 pitch warming up. The atmosphere was electric and.the noise was deafening.

 When I reached the Leppings Lane end of the ground I saw that the right hand section had

  ample room left as I could   see parts of the terracing steps. On   reaching the middle

  section of the terracing I   saw that the people were packed like sardines in a can and

  were being crushed up against the primeter fence from the pressure of the people behind

  them. I could see the agony on the faces of people being crushed against the wire mesh.

  I realised peoples' lives were in danger and that somehow the pressure had to be relieved.

  I looked for the gates from the middle section terracing and saw a gate to the left of the

  goal which was closed. I went to this gate and opened^,allowing fans out on to the playing

  area. The fans started scrambling through the gate on to the playing area. The gate was

  very narrow allowing only one person at a time through it. Due to the fans building up

  on the playing area I went to the left hand section terracing gate. I could see that there

  was ample room in this left hand section as again I could see the terraced steps in it.

  I opened this gate and directed fans who were not injured into it. I then returned to the

  centre section gate which I had opened and people were still scrambling through it and

  other people were climbing the fence. I remember assisting one young girl who was

  completely hysterical who stated she had lost her friend. I told her to sit on the

  perimeter fence to await the arrival of her friend. I assisted other people including

  two youths «ka the elder of them stated they were brothers and I informed him to stay

  with his younger brother on the playing area. Other officers were now at the gate I had

  opened and assisting people through it. I radioed Smx to control in order to get medical

  assistance to the scene but could not get any reply. I then saw an Inspector on the
playing area. I ran to him and told him we needed medical teams present. He replied,"It is

ia hand.1' I then returned to the centre section fence and tried to pull the wire mesh away

but it wouldn’t give. I thas climbed on to the perimeter wall and I could see people still

getting crushed against the side railing and I had visions of it collapsing due to the

pressure on it. I shouted at the people in the Left hand to get away from it and saw Insp.

Donnelly doing the same thing* Some of the spectators started to move away from it .

A group of about six Liverpool supporters in the Left hand pen started shouting abuse at

me. I couldn't hear what they were shouting due to the noise but I could see the anger on

their faces.   I assisted people jumping over the fences onto the playing area but couldn't

 reach the others on the terrace due to the wire mesh and spikes pointing inwards.
                                                                    injured
 I then eventually went into the Left hand section and helped carrying persons away that

 were being lifted over the fence from the middle section and handing them to officers

 at the left hand gadk   section gate on to the playing area. I continued doing this with

 n^trerous peot>le. 1 can remember carrying a young girl about 17yrs of age who had been

 lifted from the centre section into the L/H section and carried her out on to the ground

 with another officer. On laying her on the ground I saw that she was unconscious due to

 her having swallowed her tongue. Her tongue was moved forward and I commenced cardiac

 massage on her chest. The girl started coughing and I instructed the officer who had

 assisted me in carrying her out to stop with her. I then returned to the L/H pen and

 further assisted carrying persons handed over the fence from the middle section to the

 L/H section gate and handing them to officers at this gate until the centre section was

 cleared.

 After the centre section was cleared I went back on to the playing area and met up with

 with my Inspector in charge of our serial, Inspector Harper. I can remember DC Bond,

 Scenes of crime Dept, going into the centre section to try and obtain photographs of it.

 As he started to photograph the scene supporters started shouting abuse at him and throwin

 objects at him. He was instructed to get out of thex* section because I heard Ch.Supt

 Nesbitt shout,"Get him out of there". I shouted to Dc Bond, "Get out of there Dennis"

 As Dc Bond came out on to the playing area, a Liverpool supported shouted at him, "You

 bastard," and made towards Dc Bond. I stopped him and said to him,"Calm down, he's a

 police photographer trying to get evidence. The man obviously thought he was a press

 photographer due to DC Bond being in plain clothes and the man immediately calmed down

 on hearing my remark.
At about k . 25pm I was instructed by Insp. Harper to carry out Phase 5 duties which was

to carry out PSV escort duties of Notts Forest supporters from Penistone Rd back to the

Midland Railway Station. I gathered up my depleted serial PCs 101 Barlow, 1399 Thompson,

3158 Gill together with another officer PC 2618 Hoult from another serial and went to

Penistone Rd. I instructed PCs Thompson and Gill to take the second PSV and myself and

PC Barlow got on to another Psv and commenced our journey back to the Midland Station as

soon as our Psv was full. Our journey back to the Midland Station was very slow due to

the volume of traffic. On   our journey back about six or sevenLiverpool supporters came

to door of the PSV   whilst we stood in traffic. They asked if they could get on the PSV

to get to the Midland Station. I replied,"No this is for Notts Forest fans." The Notts

Forest fane on the Psv were well behaved. They shouted to me to let the Liverpool fans on

to the PSV, and promised that there would be no trouble. I let the Liverpool fans on to

 the PSV and one of them who was obvoiusly affected by drink asked if he could smoke. I

 told him not downstairs. He started arguing with a Notts Forest fan. The other Liverpoll

  fans told him to calm down and I told him that he continued in this manner he would have

  to get off the bus. He continued arguing and I asked him to leave the Psv. Shortly after

  the Liverpool fans left the bus. The progress of the Psv was very slow and Notts fans

   kept getting off in dribs and drabs.

   We arrived back   at the Midland Station at about 6pm, whereI rejoined Insp. Harper.

   After dispersal   of the fans on to the station Insp. Harper instructed us toreturn to

   WBpS.

   At about 6.i+5pm I returned to the Gym at WBps.

   At 8pm same date I retired from duty.
