                                                                                      MIR.15
                   #       i Sheffield Archives Ref. p o L ^ |i

OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                      ^   ^       Date and time raised              I I S O - Number
                                                 ri* i

Title faQ X X fl/\i
(Inclu d e   source and any document number i f relevant)                                                 J H e v te
Receiver's instructions — urgent action                             j- @-A - 06T QuedT.
                                                                                                                 Receiver
frTfgrv*                                                                                                       5 7 3 3
                                                                                                                 Indexer
nnRiimnnt-CRaistered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                             Statement Rrader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                 Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                        S£36
Examined - further action to be taken         «f-:
                                                                  ryi 44    €&7o<rt


Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                      GJD/AMS



Herts
CZIZD                                                 21 April 1989




Dear Sir

HE* HILLSBOROOGB - 15 APRIL 1989

I am grateful to you for writing and the infornation that you Included
in your letter will be of great interest to my investigative team.

It stay be that we shall be in touch with you again to take up the points
that you have made.
Thank you very such for writing.


Tours faithfully




Chief Constable
                   Jierts

                       Tel

                                  18.04.1989




Dear Sir,

Hillsborough Inquiry

I was present at Hillsborough last Saturday, 15.04.1989,
sitting in the North stand adjacent to entrance N and
whilst I recognise that this position is some distance
from where the tragedy arose I can comment on the
following matters which may be pertinent to your in­
vestigation:

1.   I arrived at the ground at 2.45 p.m. and am therefore
      aware of the difficulties which the South Yorkshire
      Police, at that time, experienced outside the ground
      close to the entrance of the North stand and there­
      fore not far from the entrance to the Leppings Lane
      end of the ground.
2.    The direction and the conduct of the police
      reinforcements who arrived shortly after fans were
      allowed onto the pitch.
3.    The nature and audibility of the public announce­
      ments.
4.   The reactions of spectators to the police.
5.   The general level of awareness and control of the
      situation.




                                          .2 .
I fully recognise that it is necessary to avoid any emotional
reaction in situations such as this, particularly from those
who were not present and if, therefore, I can contribute to
the evidence your force will need to collect, I am happy to
do so. I can be contacted during the day at
Milton Keynes, of which I am the General Manager. The
telephone number is




Yours faithfully
