POL/17/7/19

POLICE COMPLAINT 19/89

This was a complaint made by a relative of a deceased person. There were three elements:

   •   The deceased was in possession of a document which readily identified them, yet the
       family were not formally informed by South Yorkshire Police and arrived at the
       Stadium searching for their relative.
   •   During the identification procedure, the relatives were asked to examine a number of
       Polaroid photographs of deceased persons prior to formally identifying their relative.
   •   During the formal identification, an officer made what the relative considered an
       insensitive remark i.e. “Its one consolation [deceased] hadn’t been drinking because I
       couldn’t smell it on his breath”

A senior Investigating Officer from West Midlands Police met the complainant in the
presence of a solicitor. The matters were formally recorded and the complainant agreed that
the matter could be dealt with by means of informal resolution (See footnote) and confirmed
this in writing.

OUTCOME

During the investigation by West Midlands Police it was established that errors were made
due to communication failings between the temporary mortuary and the casualty bureau
which led to the relatives not being notified.

The officer who carried out the formal identification accepted making the remark described
by the complainant, but explained that it was intended to console them during distressing
circumstances. The officer apologised for any distress the remark may have caused.

The officer in charge of the identification procedure accepted that had officers considered
the documents in possession of the deceased, it would have negated relatives viewing a
selection of photographs.

In mitigation this officer outlined the difficult circumstances officers were working under and
felt strongly that steps would be taken to prevent similar mistakes in the future by improving
systems between temporary mortuaries and casualty bureaus.




       EXPLANATION OF INFORMAL RESOLUTION
During the mid to late 1980s, informal resolution was used in about one third of all
complaints. The process was introduced under Section 85 of the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act 1984 to provide a flexible and simple procedure for dealing with complaints of
a minor nature, which would otherwise attract the full length, and formality of an
investigation.   The aim of informal resolution was to achieve a position in which
complainants were satisfied that their complaint had been dealt with in an appropriator
manner. It was not a process for apportioning blame. There were many benefits from
dealing with a complaint in this way for both the complainant and for the police because it
offered a quick and cost effective way of handling minor complaints.
Before informally resolving an allegation, the complainant must have agreed to the process.
Essentially, informal resolution involved seeking an explanation from the officer concerned,
outlining the complainant’s perspective and relaying back the officer’s explanation to the
complainant. If the complainant was satisfied with the outcome then the process would have
been concluded and a record kept.

Although no formal disciplinary outcome could result from informal resolution, the officer
concerned could, for example, receive advice from a senior officer on dealing with similar
situations in the future or be required to undergo particular training.

Complainants dissatisfied with the outcome of an informal resolution, could revert to a formal
complaint investigation.
