                INCIDENT AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND
                    SHEFFIELD ON SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989



GERALD SCARFE, INSPECTOR, BARNSLEY ROAD TRAFFIC SECTION
                  TELE:                     , WORK EXT 3257 VIA 'B1'




On this date I was not on duty with the Road Traffic contingent but
was working directly with 'F' Division from the football ground


I came on duty at 07.30 reporting to the Gymnasium and was shown on the
Operational Order as Transportation Officer responsible to the Chief
Superintendent, 'F' Division, in liaison with Inspector Sewell, 'F'
Division, who was co-ordinating various admin operations.


My duties included receiving personnel carriers/vans at the ground as
they arrived from the various divisions, organizing parking for all of those
vehicles including coaches, re-allocating vehicles to the various serialss
following briefing, organizing stand-by serials and meal reliefs etc etc.
It was intended that I operate between the football ground and the Koad
Traffic Garage at Claywheels Lane.


I had carried out this duty the previous year and had been asked if I
was available to do it this year.


A little before 3.00p.m. I was actually supervising the area around the
mobile catering vehicle at the side of the gymnasium when 'Ground Control'
asked for either 2 or 3 serials to be deplyoed from the gymnasium area
onto the 'track' to assist officers there and immediately a number of
officers left the gymnasium in response - although I had a pocket radio
and was monitoring transmissions, this message had not been directed to
me and I had no part in directing those officers, although I had heard the
request acknowledged.


Shortly after that 'Ground Control' asked for all available serials to
attend on the 'track' from the gymnasium and that was acknowledged and
indeed every available serial was despatched.     I remained in control of
the area outside the gymnasium and the entrance from Penistone Road North
to that area.




            4 ^ ’• ■■
During these proceedings I heard various transmissions on my pocket
radio which was obviously busy but I had not noticed any problems with
the radio.. One sequence of transmissions which I cannot with certainty
place into the order of proceedings other than to say that I believe they
were close to the time that all available serials were despatched to the
•track' area.    One message told control that 2 to 3 thousand fans had
appeared outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.    A further message then
said that they were (the crowd) trying to break down the large gate and
that people were being crushed at the front.     Someone asked for permission
to open the gate to relieve the pressure and I believe that this was
refused by control.    Within a short space of time there was a further
frantic message to the effect that people were being killed at the front
of the crush outside the said turnstiles and again permission was asked
to open the large gate.    There was a pause of some seconds before a
message came back from ground control, and I believe Sergeant Goddard
was the voice on the radio, 'Authority has been given to open the gate,
open the gate.' (or words similar).


I am not clear on the sequence of events following this, the radio was
extremely busy, it was apparent that there was some sort of serious
disruption, someone asking for an ambulance, and the St John's Ambulance
travelling from the gymnasium area onto the 'track'.    At no time did I
see the playing area or the terraces but stayed within my area of
responsibility - the gymnasium yard/parking area.


Shortly, injured and dead people were being carried from the playing area
into the gymnasium yard area and I then realised just how serious the
situation was.    I started to direct persons carrying dead to one side to
separate them from the injured but living but within 'seconds' the area
was littered with bodies and injured people.     Someone then decided to
use the gymnasium for placing the bodies and I assisted in directing
'bearers' to the appropriate place.


Ambulances and other emergency vehicles started to arrive and so I
organized control of the entrance to the area so that ambulances could
leave as and when they were loaded and were not blocked in.     I also
organized police motorcycle escorts to the various hospitals as required,
arranged police personnel carriers to convey persons with less serious
injuries, eg. broken arms etc, to hospital, again under escort.
In this frantic period I assisted in moving bodies about in the gymnasium
yard but I could not identify which ones.    I also assisted in loading
critically injured people into ambulances.   Whislt carrying out these
tasks I sustained an accidental back injury/strain
                  although it has not caused me to refrain from duty.


Prior to the incident the stewards in my area had been most co-operative
and I had not experienced any difficulty whatso ever with them.


I had seen football fans coming out of an 'off-licence' at the junction of
Penistone Road North and Vere Road with great amounts of drink and sitting
around on Penistone Road North drinking same.    I do not know which fans
they were but imagine that they would be Notts fans.


The remainder of my duty was taken up with receiving relatives, organizing
transport for them to and from Hammerton Road Police Station etc. etc.




    I




1
Inspector.
                                                                                 |   .   / (" A   (N   I ’” " '.

              INCIDENT AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND

                 SHEFFIELD,       SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989



Gerald S C A R F E , Inspector,        Barnsley Road Traffic -Section.
                                                  WORK - Ext 3257 via                       'Bl'
             Tele:



Further to my account of 28 April 1989:


At a time around 3.00p.m. emergency vehicles started to arrive


and the                    ,    order to afford access to the urgently




on P e n is t o n e R o a d ^ N o r t h c a m e        ‘ ° r mJ ^ r r y i n g eq u ip m e n t
and9* n o ° p « k i n g " cones before the match - this vehicle was
parKed in the yard and I suggested to Sgt £ 9 » « ~ lflht and




 b
 0?2^5 ^ a^ ,,s ^ ,srs^
 and so I had to abandon that idea.
                                                                          -
                                                                          . ^


 “Tsn’tsss^ts                         s ^ i - e S S J i rn ^ / l it« i5 d
 out o n to P e n is t o n e ^ R o a ^ N o r t h t o -   -     ‘ - - "      L    e   e
 c l e a r f o r o t h e r a m b u la n ce s t o       r e a l is e d th a t w ith a l l
 ^ S v lt r in s id e         ?ha? g a t e ^ h e am b ulan ce - u l d           h ave d i i E f i c o l t y
 - t h e w e re p e o p le c a r r y i n g i n j u r e d e t c                        Ld

 j^ u r ^ l^ g aroun^that 2 2     A h t f i s V         1 ^    o r ig in a lly
        =      area
 organised the area inside the   gymnasium      entrance     gate,
                                               crew that they would
 I walked down to Gate  O  ana         j          entered Gate'O'
 better using the other              Rann#» Rover which was parked
 and went to - Ambulance S e r v i c e ^ a n g ^ R o v e r ^ ^

        I haS a r r a n g e d iiih regards to the other gate for access
   m h j_ vehicles          I then returned to the other gate. ^

 ? S a m S u J a „ c T T ^ r t l d ^ S % a r S ^ e ' i n numbers I had to organise
 them into some sort of order - whilst some crews w ®^e pending
 to the injured other ambulances were arriving and blocking
 the first ambulances in, indeed on at least two occasions
 r-r*»w=; had aone off with the ambulance ignition keys and
 Se w i r e u n l w l ?o g e t lo a d e d a m b u la n ce s o u t . A n o th e r am b ulan ce
 wao i^ft on Penistone Road North obstructing the entrance.
  Eventually I had an orderly queue operating with ambulances
  queing on Penistone Road North and in one side of the gate
leaving room for loaded ambulances and police vans to exit
on the other side of the gate.

Sgt Lightfoot had suggested that some 'walking wounded'
might be carried in police personnel carriers and we organised
that together with police motorcycle escorts to hospital.

I also instructed that Penistone Road North should be closed
at its junction with Leppings Lane/Herries Road to assist
emergency vehicles - a motorcyclist did this for me.

I also had the central reservation cleared of police vehicles
so that ambulances could also cross over onto opposite carriageways.



Everything possible was done to assist ambulances arriving
and departing from the early moments to well into the night,
but this had to be via the gymnasium entrance gate - there was
no way that they could have operated via Gate 'O', the area
inside was too restricted and congested.


     r




Inspector.
8.6.89
              INCIDENT AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND

                 SHEFFIELD ON SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989



GERALD SCARFE, INSPECTOR, BARNSLEY ROAD TRAFFIC SECTION.

      TELE:                        W6RK - EXT 3257 via *B1*



In relation to the F.A. Semi-final of Sunday 12 April 198? between
Leeds United and Coventry City, I attended a briefing at 8.15a.m.
and then took up supervisory duties on Sector 13 - the 'triangle'
formed by Penistone Road North, Leppings Lane and Vere Road.

The operation on this day was the same as on other first team games
in relation to that area in that the top and bottom of each road
leading between Leppings Lane and Penistone Road North was closed off
using a number of barriers and these were then manned by constables
and supervisory sergeants. The reason for the barriers was to prevent
football fans from using those particular side streets for parking
cars or passing from one end of the football ground to the other thus
reducing nuisance for the residents. The barriers were manned from
a time immediately after the 8.15a.m. briefing continually' through the
football match and until officers were stood down after dispersal of
the fans at the conclusion of the game.

The officers manning these barriers were not there to vet or check
fans moving towards the football ground but merely to prevent fans
causing nuisance to the residents of the side streets. The only
checking carried out was if a resident or bone fide person wishing
access to premises in a side street approached a barrier either with
a vehicle or on foot and the barriers would then be moved to allow them
in.

I do not remember there being at any time a police cordon with barriers
across Leppings Lane and to the best of ray recollections traffic was
flowing up and down Leppings Lane throughout my period of duty in that
area. My responsibilities did not extend to the area immediately outside
the Leppings Lane turnstiles and so I cannot comment on procedures in
that area but only as far as the junction with Vere Road - some 3 0 - 4 0
yards from the turnstiles area.




Inspector
