                                                                                        MIR.15


OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                          MMd c q o o
                                              Data and time raised'                i3 f(< a /q o       Number


Title   \fljeXMr & pteao exiftxxri                                f W   e~r o ,   Ity y -s   I e'er.
f Includt source and any document numbar if rahvm nt)^


Receiver's instructions —urgent action —
                                                                                                                    Raeeivar



Document regisferad/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Statement reader's instructions                 fYJ t    /g   .    ^     T P      f U~LuX                       Statamant R



        ed as^riaicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                     SIO
                                                                                       hi        r
                                                                                                 9              i*3l
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                  Vincent Hale & Co.
                                        Solicitors
"telephone: ((PH)                       Nasli House           Vincent Hale Solicitor
Office 325842                         140 Upperthorpe         Consultant:
H om e 345214                             Sheffield           Gerard Vincent Hale B.A. (llon.«.)
Fax    325644                             S6 3NF

                                       11th December! 1990

    I feel the need - and I am sure others will do the same - to mention
    in open Court in front of the jury another public comment by a
    supporter (Hr Hicks) which must have come to the attention of the
    jury and which could be prejudicial to the fair conduct of this
    inquest. See last night's Star. The alternative will be to issue
    this statement as a press release.
   I am setting my comments out in writing, and shall stick to them, so
   that even inadvertently they will not cause offence to families of the
   deceased who may not associate themselves with Hr Hicks's statement to
   the press that the South Yorkshire Police Authority should not
   contribute towards the legal costs of senior police officers and that
   the families have not received any financial assistance from any
   source.
   Superintendent Harshall has not received a penny towards his costs so
   far from the South Yorkshire Police Authority and, for reasons it is
   not necessary to discuss publicly, he may never have to ask them for a
   penny, whilst at the same time not being prevented from having the
   representation of his choice at this inquest.
   Hr Hicks will presumably give evidence in due course and will then be
   asked certain questions, as gently as possible - in accordance wih the
   tradition of questions asked at this inquest - which are relevant to
   the necessity for and the issues in this inquest.
   In the meantime, he quite properly exercises his right to pursue
   aspects of the matter which, as the coroner has already pointed out in
   open Court, necessarily make this inquest much lengthier and detailed -
   and therefore expensive - than it would otherwise be.   He is entitled
   to do so but should not criticise the objects of his accusations for
   defending themselves against such serious charges as Hr Hicks, among
   others, seeks to bring.
   Finally, with great reluctance, but Hr Hicks has brought about the
   necessity by claiming that he is receiving no financial compensation
   for his daughters' deaths, it is not true to say that the families
   have received no financial help. Apart from the civil proceedings,
   with which the police dealt honourably and speedily (as civil
   proceedings go) so that the families could receive compensation,
   without argument - although without admission of liability, much
   earlier than they would otherwise have done, there is the
   multi-million pound disaster fund which can make payments in deserving
   cases.
   VINCENT HALE
   Solicitor for Super1***— J — 1 n   u — L -'11
     .
                                                                                                ■




                                                                                   y s ijfiii




                                    L it fita   i« M A tw



            tO' pii k u
                                                     “We
                              know- w h it 4 l i i                          §:$M

Tlif ‘etiniif# of i e t f t



                                "If each officer had III
                              am barrister the bill would



                                                                    msest

                                                            -/ism


                                                                       mm




                              iiii'Noiiiftiii
                                   i art aiw&p m
                                    ..itiiif   mimm



                                                                                                    ■&
                                                                                                     dm
                                                                                                      m
                                                                                                    4-v-SP

                               ifilrtii i l l    wholly
