PC 1333 S Smith



On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I commenced duty at Doncaster DHQ with PC

2878 Fish at 0730 hours.   We travelled together to the Niagara Sports Ground,

Sheffield arriving there for a 0900 hours briefing in relation to the FA Cup

Semi Final to be played at Hillsborough. The briefing was given by Inspector

Phenix who was in command of the Dog Section Serial for the match.     He was

assisted by PC 721 Hill and PS 2227 Dent.



At the briefing I was teamed up with PC Baxter of the West Yorkshire Dog Section

and we were allocated the call sign Oscar Golf 17 and assigned our patrol area

which was Leppings Lane from Penistone Road roundabout to Catch Bar Lane traffic

lights.   This included the turnstiles at the Liverpool end of the ground.



We commenced our patrol at about 1000 hours and I spent the first half hour

or so showing PC Baxter the area around the ground and pointing out the streets

etc that I knew the names of and both of us trying to locate the possible

trouble spots etc.



The first couple of hours of patrol went very quietly, no trouble, other serials

in the area getting themselves organised.     Most of the police officers I saw

around Leppings Lane were from my Division.



About midday there was a steady flow of Liverpool fans, mainly older men with

wives and children who have arrived early by car and well organised coaches,

making their way along Leppings Lane to the turnstiles.    All very pleasant,

chearful and queuing orderly at the turnstiles to get into the ground.     If

they're all like this then we will have an easy day I thought.




                                                                          ?u333.
At about 1300 hours the majority of the Liverpool coaches began to arrive and

were sent into Claywheels Lane for parking and to discharge their passengers.

We parked on the forecourt of Law Bros. Coaches.     As the buses emptied the

number of fans increased greatly and they were the younger fans in large groups

and gangs.     Many of them were drinking or carrying 'four packs' or plastic

2 litre bottles of beer and lager.    Most of them appeared to have been drinking

to some extent and some were so drunk they could hardly walk without help from

their mates.    As they got nearer to the ground they began chanting and singing

etc., some were starting to get abusive and their behaviour slowly became worse.



About 1400 hours we moved from Leppings Lane into Penistone Road to escort

the fans to the ground who had arrived by the special train at Wadsley Bridge.

Generally they were good humoured and well behaved and we got them to the

Leppings Lane turnstiles without any trouble and in good time to get into the

ground before kick off.    By this time, due to the volume of people in Leppings

Lane, it was almost impossible to drive the van safely along the road and it

was closed to all traffic.



We parked in Leppings Lane, in the entrance to the Used Tyre firm, (marked

A on maps) and kept observations on the turnstile area.    At this time the area

in front of the turnstiles was packed with supporters but there appeared to

be no trouble, they were queuing, sort of, and they were getting into the

ground, albeit slowly, without many problems.



There were however large numbers of fans just hanging about, sat on the parapet

walls of the river bridge, sat on the footpaths, stood outside the chip shop

and the other shops in the immediate area and they were making no attempt to

join any of the queues at the turnstiles which were now relatively quiet to




                                                                                fcl333
what they had been.     A lot of these fans were still drinking their stocks of

beer etc.   The flow of fans along Leppings Lane had now almost stopped.       It

was about 1450 hours.     I decided to take a last look along Leppings Lane before

going into Niagara for our meal at 1500 hours.     Just as I was moving off from

the tyre firm the mounted officers began to round up the fans who were hanging

about and direct them towards the turnstiles.     I went along Leppings Lane to

Penistone Road around the roundabout and went back towards the ground.     The

road was virtually empty and traffic officers were again allowing vehicles

along Leppings Lane.    When I got back to the Leppings Lane turnstiles I couldn't

believe my eyes.   There was a mob of fans, perhaps 1500 plus, all jammed in

the area immediately in front of the turnstiles.    They were shouting and pushing

towards the turnstiles attempting to get into the ground.     I parked up in

Leppings Lane facing the turnstiles (marked 'B' on maps).     There appeared to

be very few police officers there and from what I could hear on the radio,

what officers there were in the area were having difficulty controlling these

fans who were now pushing from the back of this crowd and people at the front

were in great difficulty.



A number of mounted officers were trying to force this mob away from the gates

but were having no success.    A police landrover then arrived with a PA system

and an Inspector, I don't know who he was, climbed onto the roof of the vehicle

and began trying to stop these fans pushing by appealing to them through the

PA.   He shouted at them for several minutes and tried to get them around the

ground to another turnstile but they just ignored repeated attempts to get

them to stop pushing.



A Superintendent then began speaking on the radio, I don't know who he was

or where he was in relation to the turnstiles, he informed the control that




                                                                                    Pc.1333,
the situation at the Leppings Lane turnstiles was getting out of control and

there were several hundred supporters still outside the ground who would miss

a good deal of the first half of the match as they would not get through the

turnstiles before the kick off, which was now due any second.



He then suggested that the kick off was delayed until they were all inside

the ground.     Control replied that they would enquire whether this could be

done.   I never heard the reply to his request.    There was then a loud cheer

from inside the ground, possibly the players coming onto the field or even

the kick off itself as my watch was now showing 1501 hours.     The result of

this was that this mob of fans outside the turnstiles became even more frenzied

and began surging and pushing forward even more.     The mounted officers and

any remaining foot officers had withdrawn from the melee for their own safety.

It was obvious that this mob was determined to get into the ground, with or

without a ticket, no matter who or what got in their way.     They had no respect

for theirs or anyone else's life or property and their sole intention no matter

what was to get inside that ground.



To get out of the crush at the front several of them were now scaling the

perimeter walls to get into the ground.     I could see police officers who were

inside the ground reaching over the walls to assist people to get over out

of the crush.



The Superintendent then told Control that he was considering opening one of

the gates to allow these supporters into the ground as in his opinion there

was serious risk of people being injured or even killed if the pressure on

the people at the front of this mob was not released.




                                                                            ?cl3>33.
                                                                              < 4 2..Ci

As I recall, control replied that if he thought the situation needed such action,

then they were in agreement with him.   A few seconds later the Superintendent

ordered anyone near a gate to open it and allow the fans in the ground.     There

was obviously no response to his order as about half a minute later he shouted

over the radio 'Will someone get off their bloody arse and open a gate1.



We remained in position for several minutes, just in case, but it became obvious

to us listening to the radio that everything was not OK and there seemed to be

some sort of problem now developing inside the ground.   From the radio traffic

I thought there was an attempt being made by Liverpool supporters to invade the

pitch.   I thought that the dogs might be requested to assist with clearing fans

off the pitch so I remained in Leppings Lane near the turnstiles rather than

return to Niagara for my meal.



A few minutes later the radio traffic began to get somewhat confusing and after

a short period of furious conversation I heard a voice say, quite calmly and

plainly 'We have some dead bodies'.   There was then a sort of unreal feeling

of disbelief and numbness about and even those officers around me without radios

seemed to sense it because they all started to ask what was going on.     It was

difficult to answer their questions because I didn't really know myself.

This 'feeling' soon gave way to a situation where every senior officer who was

on duty started to try and organise the situation. The situation continued for

several minutes before things started to calm down, slowly people appeared to

be starting to get organised and requesting ambulances, stretchers, and doctors

etc.



It was 1520 hours when we got into the club at Niagara and got our meal.     I didn't

eat much I didn't feel like it.   I went into the TV Room where they were showing




                                                                                (li353.
pictures from inside the ground.   I saw there were some of the police dogs on

the pitch behind the cordon of police officers near the Notts Forest fans.     I

thought we might be needed at the ground so we left the club and returned to

our previous position in Leppings Lane.



It was now about 1535   hours, when we got back to Leppings Lane. The scene   that

we saw was, to put it   mildly, total chaos.   The road was blocked by emergency

vehicles, mainly fire   appliances and ambulances.Opposite the entrance to    Vere

Road we parked up with about ten other dog handlers and about 12 - 14 mounted

officers.   There were about 150-200 other police officers in Leppings Lane from

all over the force area, apparently responding to 'Operation Support'.



The other dog handlers and myself remained in Leppings Lane until about 1600

hours when we were deployed by Inspector Phenix to stand by on the forecourt

of Law Bros (Coaches) ltd., on Leppings Lane near Penistone Road in case of

possible trouble as the Liverpool fans were now leaving the ground.    Whilst at

this location we were subjected to a barrage of verbal abuse and threats etc

from the fans as they passed en route to their coaches, cars, etc.    My feelings

of disbelief and sorrow for the dead and bereaved families was quickly put aside

and replaced by disgust, anger and even hatred towards these drunken fans who

had no feelings whatsoever for the people who had died or their families or for

that matter anyone else.   All they seemed to care about was the fact the match

had been stopped and they had spent a lot of money and travelled a long way for

nothing.



What annoyed me was the fact they were putting the blame on anyone, including

us, for what had happened, when the cause of this disaster rests solely, in my

opinion, with the minority of Liverpool supporters who came to Hillsborough,




                                                                               PctS33
•   many without tickets, with the intention of getting into the match at whatever

    cost to anyone but themselves.



    PC Baxter and myself remained on standby in the area around Hillsborough until

    1920 hours when we were stood down by Inspector Phenix.   I then returned to

    'A' Division with PC Fish and retired from duty at 2015 hours.
