          .    0 V(,.         CZKm   x o   ^

UJUi-G'V VVv              CXMytk3C>J



  vo^v,   ^N Q      ^W _S ^

 C ^ \ ^ ^ A   o   SI^   vn   .
Report by P.C. 9*+7 Roger UTTLEY re incidents at Hillbrough Footballl Ground on


Saturday, 15th April 19 89 at semifinal between Notts. Forest and Liverpool




At 0800 on Saturday, 1 5 th April 19-89 I paraded for duty at Rotherham'L>HQ in


respect of the F.A. semi-final football match at Hillsbrough Football Ground


Sheffield between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool and was deputed to work as


part of serial no. 53 under F.S. 1073 BOWK and under overall control of D / Insp.


CHARLES.   Our serial, together with another under P.S. 9^9 H0DGKIr.S0M were


instructed to carry out duties at Kerries Hoad Bus Garage, .Sheffield and


supervise Nottingham Forest fans and receipt of coaches from Nottingham


and the parking of the sane at the garage.      We left DH(J at approximately 0 8 1 5


and arrived at                       1MMtriryy xliilsbrough Football Ground


appro;:iaately 20 minutes later for the major briefing by senior officers.


There was sone trouble with the loudspeaker system in the North Stand for


the briefing and sone officers resorted to shouting the usual briefing


instructions as to numbers attending, likelyhood 01 trouole, experience in


■oast games, people attending without tickets ana ticket lorgeries.        The


 briefing ended vdth a rec-ust the policing should be firm but fair.       A


 packed meal had. been distributed curing the briefing ana after fins J u n g


 consuming that the tv/o serials left Hillsbrough by the frost gate on


 Penistone Hoad, turned left and walked to the Eerries Soaa bus gar&ge.


 I cannot recollect what time this would be but there were already numerous


 Nottingham Forest fans wandering about the area in general both on foot and


 in private csxs.   On arrival at the garage we were given further detailed


 instructions by both Xnc~. CEARLBS and P.S.BCWJs as to controlling the

 arrival of th< coaches and supervising the movements of the fans fromm


 off those coaches. This entailed a larger goup 01 oiixcerr- r e n a m i n g at
the garage and the remainder being split into two's and three's and patrolling


Kerries Road South outside of the garage together with other serials.     I commenced


patrol with P.C. 953 MUGGL3ST0KE and P.C.                        .   From the very


start of patrolling the was a steady stream of supporters coming down Merries Hoad


under the five arches on foot mainly but some in motor vehicles.     Even at this early


time people were asking the whereabouts of the Five Arches Public House as if it


was some pre-arranged meeting place and in general most people were in a carefree


and friendly mood although one or two were antagonistic towards us for no apparent


reason.   As time progressed and more coaches began arriving some started dropping


thheir passengers at the junction of Herries Road and Herries Road South instead


of bringing them down to the garage, apparently to evade the passengers being


scrutanised by our serials and even when the coaches unloaded where they should have


people were piling out of every exit available and heading directly into the bushes


to relieve themselves.    The steady flow continued upto just after 2pm when the flow


of coaches increased considerably and at approximately 2 .3 Qpm when the last coach


arrived there were very large numbers of fans coming down Herries Road towards


Hillsbrouhg football ground.    When the coaches had appeared to have stiopped


arriving we reform with our serial at the garage and prepared to go to Claywheels


Lane garage for our lunch which we due to take at 3 p.m. after the start of the
                          2.40pm
match.    It v/as at this time that messages could be heard coming over the personal


radios with regard to crowd problems at the Leppings Lane turnstiles        pe 0p]_e


being cushed against a gate and     requestSnad e for the gate to be opened.     By


this time we were stood at the roundabout at the junction of Penistone Road and


Leppings Lane and numbers of people could still be seen coming down the road from


Wadsley Bridge and going along Leppings Lane towards the ground.      Insp CHARLES

directed that we should remain together     as two serials and move further down
                                            fH ti.Z -i J tu « . a | t£ M   L *k    Xocm A*<eej^
                                            ft^e. \e * v r f y *
                                                                        -X     ,-
Leppings Lane and nearer to the turnstilesJ\ This we did, noting the very large aaount


of empty beer cans littering the roadway and footpath and Insp. CHARLES then radioed


to Ground Control as to our situation and could we assist.                          It was apparent from the


radio transmissions that could be heard that there was come from of major disorder


Efcfck   at the Lepping   Lane end of the ground and almost inraediatle we were directed by


Gorund Control to enter the Lepping Lane stand inside the ground and assist with an


evacuation.     On arrival at the Lepping fcane turnsilec there were still a number of


fans standing about but no signs of disorder, some people appeared to be buying


tickets from a tout and what appeared to be a police cordon was formed at the


junction of Leppings Lane and the ground frontage.                  We went through this cordon


with no specific instructions except that received over the radio and entered the back
of the
central section of the stand.


There were two or three ambulances parked outside of the back of the stand, all facing


towards the main stand and Penistone Road and people were stood, sat slumped, bemused


and dazed by these ambulances.          There were also two ar three bodies laid on the floor


and these male persone appear^,at a glance to be dead, others were recivng treatment


from ambulance personnel, police officesr and civilians.                          There was an air of chacs


about the whole area      and   xeee   civilians were verbally abusing m e , blaming me for what


had gone on although      I had no exact idea of what had in fact happened.                       I walked


onto the concourse at the rear of the central section and this area was crovded with


mainly civilians and a few police and St. Johns ambulance.                          As before people were


stood, slumped, dazed, bemused, some were laid down receiving treatment and artificial


resicitation and some bodies, apparently dead,were just laid there with people crying


over then.     People were coming out of the tunnel from the central section of the stand


and these people were in an angry mood verbally abusing ne and blaming the police for

causing all the problems.
I vent into the tunnel which was full of people and as I did so a youth# was beir.g


carried out.   I went with his onto the concourse and carried out artificial


resuscitation to no avail.    I then placed the body on one side of the concourse


with assistance from some civilian^ and by this time there were a number of bodies


laid about, approximately ten, all mixed up with others receining treatment from


all sorts of people.   I then went bacg into the tunnel which was still full of


people and attempted to get peole to clear the passageway but there were abusive


and resisted any physical effort to get then to move.    Another body was carried


from inside the ground by fans and so I followed them onto the concourse and gave


artificial resuscitation , again to no avail and I again laid the body to one side.


It was at this time that a Police Inspector walked into the concourse and I pointed


out to him the number of dead bodies lying about and suggested that they should all


be moved into one area and some kind of organisation take place but he appeared to


take no notice , turned round and walked away.    By this time one of the ambulances


was nearly ready to leave by driving along the back of the main stand and onto


Penistone Road but I saw that the way was blocked by two fire engines parked at      he


top end of the stand behind the police control box.     As I ran towards the fire engines


I was agin verbally abused by fans coming from the side of the stand.       I removed some


metal barriers and asked the engine drivers to move their vehicles.     This they did


and I then went down the whole length at the back of the stand and informed the


police officers there what war- happening as they appeared to be unaware of how serious


events were at the time.     The first ambulnce then left via this route.    I then went


back, to the concourse which was still in a state of didsorder although other officers


appeared to have arrived and were starting some form of crown control and moving the


dead bodies to one side.
       ’
       *                       I   •*
                                                                                 Q q |? 4 C C

    I assisted further by removing bodies which had been placed in the tunnel and


    also moved other people still stood in the tunnel.     It was then that I I heard the


    sounds of a disturbance, the crowd roaring and shouting, and I forced mv way into the


    enclosure area to see the devastation there for the first time with crowds of police


    officers and people on the pitch, police officers at the fencing, bodies ladi on the


    fj-oor, some receiving assistance, some not and some people just stood around dazed.


    People were still climbing out of the enclosure into the upper stand whhrc others


    were tearing hoardings from off the balcony and lowering them down to be used as


    makeshift stretchers.   People in the balconny were swearing and shouting at the Police


^   officers and sone were j q p x apparently spitting although it may have been v/ith the


    force thvy were shouting that this happened.     A large number of fans were running


    onto the pitch from the Leppings Lane end towards the Kop and the Notts Forest


    Supporters and as that seemed to be the most urgent incident at that time and t o


    prevent any further disorder I scrambled onto the pitch through a hole in the fencing


    halted the Liverpool fans together with other officers who had formed a line across


    the pitch under Supt. NE5BIT and walked them back to the halfway line where we held


    them, allowing only rescufi personnel, emergency cases and relatives through.     The


    Nottingham Forest fans were singing f :otball chants at this time and this further


    incensed the Liverpool supporters.    The situation stabalised on the pitch, there was


    still a great amount of activity on and in front of the Leppings Lane stand but other


    personnel had by now attended and we were instructed to remain where we were,


    Pockets of trouble broke out in the main stand and the North stand and a nufcber of


    small groups of fans* mainly Liverpoool fann had to be removed.     After some time a


    public announcement was made over the tannoy theat the game had been abandoned and


    people began slowly to leave the ground.    Gradually the bodies were removed from the

    pitch and the stands emptied without any further problems.
                                                                                        ( 'K T
*       V/jien the ground vms nenrly empty I went into the leppings Lane stand together with
    *




        a younger officer who I hnd r.ever seen before and obtained names and addresses from


        people still stood about, looking for relatives or whatever as'ir.g where they had


        been stood and who they had attended with.    We v/ere then instructed to remove property


        lying about in the central strati area and this was done, leaving certain items which


        had been tied to broken stancions to form makeshift memorials.     The property was placed


        in bin liners and deposited in the Gym/Casualty Bureau together with numerous other


        bags.   We were informed that we could be of no assistance at that time in the gym


        which by this time    kad numerous bodies laid on the floor with a large number of


        people milling about, including club directors who had come to see the full extent


        of the disaster.     I then went back into the North Stand where keIxe stood by, together


        with quite a number of other officers.     Only a handful of our two serials were present,


        I later learned that some were involved in the gymnasium.     Reports of trouble in the


        City Centre and publis houses could be heard over the radio but we were not used as it


        was explained that there vac insufficient transport and the traffic jams omtside


        were too great.    Some time later, although we v/ere still held in reserve we were


        allowed to go to Claywhec-ls Lane for a neal if we wanted one but soon after arrived


        there we were stood down and almost immediately we were transported hack to Rotheraan


        DHQ, met by C/Insp UARiS, briefly debriefed end then released, off duty at 7 p.m.
