                     p6L./^/7/S/35                                          Q m    15' S
                                                                            r? Q v & 0     f r t S ' 0 .<S          O m -v s ,
      Incident       105        280489 0P5014           TYPING SERVICE DOCUMENT

                                                                    OFFICERS REPORT NUMBER                    RES

                                 ....                                                                        Station
                           .   f'SM+S )
      Surname                  — URgfVFOREX

      Fore name s                ROBYN    CHRISTOPHER

      Age                                                   Date of birth

      Address


      Occupation                 POL PC2905                                                            <lA    tr
      T e 1e phone

      Wumber of Pages

      Dated                      270489                                                                        signed


                 Robyn Christopher T-TREAT'OREX           PC 2905   A2 Thorne Uniform

                 Summary of Hillsborough Incident PC 2905 GREATOREX



                 On Saturday 13 April             1989 I commenced duty at 8.15am at Thorne office

                 travelling then by car to Doncaster Police Station,                       On arrival at

                 Doncaster I joined the rest of se r i^l^SO under Police Sergeant
                  WIM.O
                 Ashton, these being as far as I can remember, Police Constable
ft ^        -
                     nim3t                                         hiiM-S.
                 Dawson, Police Constable McFarlane, Police Constable Kitson, Police
($rr
                              NIUU>
                 Constable 174 Welch, the remaining names I am unable to remember.
A'u-'?
   H-la •        As a serial we then went             in a Police Transit to Hillsborough arriving
^ IU* *
                 at the ground at about 9,40am for briefing at 9.5 5 a m .
©tfr &
                 After briefing and meal we assumed our positions on the roundabout at

                 the junctions of Herries Road and Penistone Road North,                          duty to

                 prevent Liverpool             fans going down Penistone Road and Forest fans up
                                                                           WIU-U-
                 Leppings Lane,,              Myself and Police Constable Landers taking up

                 position outside the service station on Penistone Road at the
VQf
                 roundabout,         this being at 11.15am,
0*    .
                 During the period up to approximately 2.55prn I maintained this

                 position with Police Constable Landers,              I was not in possession of a
                                                                                                    PAGE
I                                                                   RES

                       Police radio,, however, Police Constable Landers was.            Whilst

                       positioned on the road there was a constant stream of spectators

          S 6^^:       passing us, the majority of which went down Leppings Lane,            however
              rvr>     several    fans from Liverpool    came up to us and asked for directions

                /      to the Beehive Public H o u s e , I do not know where this pub is

                       however,   and could not tell them.

                       Numerous fans came by us drinking,          these being Liverpool   fans,

                       identified by starves,       shirts and accents,    from cans of beer and

                       carrying full     cans, as well as a lot that had obviously been drinking

                       and it was obvious to me that a large amount were drunk but               it was

                       pointless as far as I could see to try to stop these people going to

    yzZats>r>          the ground as there were just too many of them.           The fans as a whole

                       were very boisterous and a lot were shouting,          but I would not say

                       they were at this point aggressive or threatening,            more highly

                       e mot io na l.( I lost   co'tm.^ of the number of Liverpool    fans that came by

                       asking if anyone had spare t'Tx^kfets, and,/rE did see one man sell two

                       tickets to fans for £25 each.. ^

                       As the time got towards 2.55pm the stream of fans died down and it

                       was around this time I realised from what was being said over the
              J
                       radio that there was a serious problem at the Leppings Lane entrance.

                       At about 2 .55pm myself and the rest of the serial began walking to
         r
        ■j■            the Leppings Lane entrance along Leppings Lane, whilst walking               I

                       could hear messages on the radio,        a lot of which I c a n’t r e mem be r,

,        f             however some have stuck       in my mind,   these were about the opening of
I
j   J                  a gate    and I heard someone say    that    if the gate was not open then

[                      people    would be killed outside    the ground, also    I remember somebody

                     ^ asking for Gate A to be opened       as people were getting crushed outside
              rtf*',   '      '
      £            /   and also calls that the fans were trying to tear the gates down at
    $0K         V/
                       the turns t i 1e s .

                       As a result of the radio message myself and serial 30 went straight
                                                                                        PAGE
                                                                                        RS5

                to the Leppings Lane entrance , where on arrival,      there was hardly any

       ^ / ' t ’ans outside the ground.        Together with other serials we cleared

                people from the area at the entrance and waited,       it was then that I

                heard a call that an ambulance was needed urgently at the Leppings

                 Lane entrance.
                I0>
                 I remained outside the ground until the arrival      of the ambulance

                w n ich went to outside Gate 8.     As I watched the ambulance two

            V   cas
                casualties were    carried out of Gate 8 to the rear of the ambulance
■iO
                it was at this point when I started to realise the gravity of the

                situation.

  j     ^       On seeing these casualties      I entered the ground with the remainder of
 v f-
f tf*           my serial    through Gate B, on gett i ng through the gate there were

                bodies strewn all around which were being attended to by Police

                Officers and fans, all of which were trying to administer first aid.

                On looking at the bodies from their       colour and appearance   it was

                obvious some were dead and as there were enough people seeing to

                these bodies I went through the tunnel and into the area behind the

                goal,   I had at this point no idea of the whereabouts      of the other

                members of rny serial.

        I        On entering the goal enclosure 1 passed through a lot of fans and
"if"    s'^lent to the front,         near to the perimeter fence referring to the map

                point 3,    1 was there faced with what   I can only describe as a pile

                of bodies against the fence with several Police Officers and fans

                trying to pull    people from the pile,    I went and joined these in

                pulling people from this pile and passing the bodies through to other

                officers on the pitch behind the goal this being done through a

                hole in the perimeter fence near to the separating fence between

                areas 3 and 4 on the m a p .    As the pile grew smaller the r e was not

                enough room for all the officers to get to the bodies and I went

                through on to the pitch and helped carry the remaining bodies that
                                                                                    PAGE
                                                                                    RH5

           were passed through and placed them on the pitch.           As soon as I

           placed each body down,, someone be it a Police Officer or member of

           public,, was attempting to administer first aid and I went back for

           another body.

           As all bodies had been removed from behind the goal enclosure           I began

           helping    carry bodies both on stretchers and advertising boards to the

           gymnasium area.

           Throughout all this the re was a lot of hostility from the members of
 S^t
v~~~       the crowd,    both directed at myself and the Nottingham Forest

           supporters.     Whilst several members   of the crowd did assist me in the

       /   things    I was attempting to do,   I lost count of the times      I was called

           a murdering bastard and other such insults.         I cannot remember a lot

           of what was said as I was more interested in trying to help the dead

           and injured.

           When most of the bodies had been carried to the gymnasium I joined

           other members of the Force in forming a cordon across the middle of

           the pitch to ensure the segregation of the two sets of f a n s , I do not

           know who gave the order for this but as I was stood the re I was sure

           there was going to be trouble due to the abuse and attitude of the

           fans at the pitch,    this situation was diffused slightly by an

           announcement by Kenny Dalglish.

           I was still    in the line when the accouncement        came that the match

           had been abandoned and at this,     together with the other members of

           my s e r ia l, who 1 had rejo ined in the line went back out on to the

           roundabout at Penistone Road to ensure fans        left quietly.     We stayed

           on the roundabout until most fans had passed us and then went to

           C laywhee 1s Lane from where we were s t o o d   &UJK



 END OF REPORT
                    Rob.yn Christopher GREATOREX    Pc2905 A2 Thorne Uniform.
  *                 Summary of Hillsborough incident Pc 2905 GREATORSX



On Saturday 15 April 1989 I commenced duty at      8.15am at Thorne office travelling then by
car to Doncaster Police Station.On arrival at Doncaster I joined the rest of serial 30 under
Ps ASHTON,these being as far as I can remember,Pc LANDERS,Pc DAWSON,Pc McFARLANE,Pc KITSON,
Pc17^ WELCH   the remaing names I am unable to remember.

As a seriel we then went in a Police Transit to Hillsborough arriving at the ground at about
9.*+0am for briefing at 9.55am.


After briefing and meal we assumed our positions on the roundabout at the junctions of HEHRIES
Road and PENISTONE Road North duty to prevent Liverpool Fans going down Penistone Road and
Forest Fans up Leppings Lanee.Myself and Pc LANDERS taking up position outside the service
station on Penistone Road at the roundabout,this being at 11.15am.


During the period up to approx 2.55pm I maintained this position with Pc LANDERS,I was not in
possesion of a police radio however PcLANDERS was.Whilst positioned on the road there was a
constant streeam of spectators passing us the majority of which went down Leppings Lane,
however several fans from Liverpool came up to us and asked for direction^ to the BEE HIVE
public house ,1 do not know where this pub is however and could not tell them.


Numerous fans came by us drinking from cans of beer and carrying full cans,as well as a lot
                                A
that had obviously been drinking,it was obvious to me that a large amount were drunk but it
was pointless as far as I could see to try to stop these people going to the ground as there
was just too many of them.The fans as a whole were very boystrous and alot were shouting
but I would not say they were at this point aggressive or threatening more highly emotional.
I lost count of the number of Liver.fans that came by asking if anyone had spare tickets,and
I did see one man sell two tickets to fans for £25 each.
As the time got towards 2.55pm the stream of fans died down and it was around this time I
realised from what was being said over E the radio that there was a serious problem at the
Leppings Lane entrance.


At about 2.55pm myself and the rest of the seriel began walking to the Leppings lane entrance
along Leppings Lane,whilst walking I could hear messages on the radio alot of which I cant
remember,however some have stuck in my mind these were about the opening of a gate and I
heard someone say that    if the gate was not open then people would be killed outside the
ground,also I remember somebady asking for gate A to be opened as people were getting crushed
outside and also calls that the fans were trying to tear the gates down at the turnstiles.


As aresuit of the radio messages myself and seriel 30 went straight to the Leppings Lane
entrance where on arrival there was hardly any fans outside the ground,together with other
& seriels we cleared people from the area at the entrance and waited,it was the that I heard
a call that an ambulance was needed urgently at the Leppings Lane entrance.


I remained outside the ground until the arrival of an ambulance which went to oatside gate
                                -2 -


As I watched the ambulance two casualties were carried out of gate B to the rear of the
ambulance it was at this point when I started to realise the gravity of the situation.


On seeing these casualties I entered the ground with the remainder of my seriel through
gate B,on getting through the gate there were bodies strewn all around which were being
attended to by police officers and fans,all of which were trying to administer first
aid.On looking at the bodies from there colour and appearence it was obvious some were dead
and as there were enough people seeing to these bodies I went throgh the tunnel and into
the area behind the goal I had at this point no idea of the whereabouts of the other
members of my seriel.


On entering the goal enclosure I passed through a lot of fans and went to the front near
to the perimeter fence referinf to the map point 3,1 was there faced with what I can
only describe as a pile of bodies against the fence with several police officers and fans
trying to pull people from the pile,I went and joined these in pulling people from this pile
and passing the bodies throgh to other officers on the pitch behind the goal this being
done through a hole in the perimeter fence near to the seperating fence between areas        °n
the map.As the pile grew smaller there was not enough room for all the officers to get to
the bodies and I went through onto the pitch and helped carry the remaining bodies that
were passed throgh the fence and placed them on the pitch .As soon as I placed each body
                                                                                                  J
down someone be it a police officer or member of public was attempting to administer first
aid and I went back for another body.


As all bodies had been removed from behind the goal enclosure I began helping carry bodies
both on stretchers and advertising boards to the gymnasium area.XXXKe


Throughout all this there was alot of hostility from the members of the crowti both directed
at myself and the Nottingham Forest supporters,whilst several members of the crowd did
assist me in the things I was attempting to do I lost count of the times I was called a
murdering bastard and other such insults,I cannot remember alot of what was said as I was
more interesting in trying to help the dead and injured.


When most of the bodies had been carried to the gymnasium I joined other members of the
force in forming a cordon across the middle of the pitch to ensure the segregation of the
two sets of fans I do not know who gave the order for this but as I was stood there I was
sure there was going to be trouble due to the abuse and atitude of the fans on the pitchj
this situation 'as diffused slightly by an announcement by Kenny Dalglish.
I was stiil in the line when the announcement came that the match had been abandoned and at
this together with the other members of my seriel who I had rejoined in the line went
back out onto the roundabout at Penistone Road to ensure fans left quietly.We stayed on
the roundabout until most fans had passed us and then went to Claywheels lane from where
we were stood down.
                   Pc
FROM:                     Chief   Superintendent     Wain

TO:



                       INCIDENT AT H I L L S B O R O U G H FOOTBALL GR OUND
                          S HE FFIELD ON SATURDAY 16 APRIL 1989

On behalf of the Chief Constable, Mr. Wright, I am gathering information to
enable the Force to present evidence to the forthcoming Committees of Inquiry.
This exercise has no co nnec tio n with the in vestigation into the policing of
the F.A. cup semi-final w h i c h is being conducted by a team headed by M r . Dear,
Chief Constable of West Midlands.

What I require from you is a self -written account of your actions on the 15th
April 1989.  Please note that this is not a C J A statement and it should be
written on plain paper.  It wou ld be helpful if your account could include the
following information.

1.       What   time did you come on duty?

2.       To wh om we re you responsible?

3.       Where were you deployed,      and did    you get deviated to any other
          location?

4.         What did you see   that is in    any w a y relevant    to the incident?

5.         What did you do?

Please begin the account w i t h your full name in block letters, your rank and
number and your sub-di visi on/ depa rtm ent . Please conclude the account with
your signature.

The     officer handing you this document will     inform you how and when to return
it.      Please return it p r o m ptly and provide as accurate an account as you   are
able.

Please contact any of my staff if you have any queries or concerns in
completing the account.  Force Headqua rte rs telephonists will connect you with
someone who can help.

Thank you for your assistance.




Chief Superintendent      warn
                                                                                                                                         Main   Police   Access



 Sheffield Wednesday h. C.                                                                                                     P o ICO
                                                                                                                               H oor n
                                                                                                           R rsl-A iU Room
        Hillsborough Ground
                                                                                                              Gymnashtm
                                                                                                                                                                77-oa
                                                                                                                                                                    ^3-76
                                                                                                                                                                  \\;H 3 -7 2

                                                                                                       N O I i r i l S ] AND


                                                                                                                                                         )^>'\ 'y/'         t /'
                                                                                                                                                           \\         . o <'/ / /


                                                                                                                                                                                      4 3-41
,-w ' cn i
      o /
                                                                                                                                                                   ,<\VN



                                                                                                       I ’l u y u r s

                                                                                                        7in itia l
                                                                                                                                                                                s\\    \ \
A w a y Fans E ntrance
   and E n c l o s u r e s <



             Pol ice C o n t r o l                         19-2.2                                     SOUTH STAND

                                                                                                                                  rn_ia_             37-4 2
                                                       fL i^ C c c 5 U / \ £
                                                                               (Mllclal 2 3-2H\W~                              29-32       33-30
                                               N W a!c^*WC-"-                                                                                      unmmu


          KE Y

          U J I 1 N $ 1 U F.S . , . . EZZZZ1
                                               CN           f
                                                            v
                                                            i
                                                            t.
                                                             T
                                                             ’
                                                             h—                       Ul i ov.tot a C n l r m i c o
                                               c   s   C^^vt-re S^cvltv.

                                               S
vay Fans Entrance
 and Enclosures



       Police Control
