        1
                                                                                        M IR .15



 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised       »•=> N      &=>         Number


Title                  UjA
(Include source and any document number if relevant)


Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Yei/N o




Document registered/indexed as indicated            \                                                            Indexer

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                         /m
Statement reader's instructions                                                                             Statement Reader




Indexed as indicated                                                                                            Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                 SIO




Further action Note)                                                                                            Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                       /V--3"7fc>3\

                              WIDNES
                         CHESHIRE
Tele:

19 April 1989

Dear Sir
I am writing to you regarding the events on Saturday 15 April,
at the Liverpool v Nottingham Forest FA Cup Semi-Final, at
Hillsborough, which resulted in 95 deaths.
I attended the match and was involved in some crushing outside
the groundeventually taking up my seat in the north stand just
prior to kick-off. I was very concerned about aspects of the
organisation of this match, primarily crowd control. Hopefully,
a full independent enquiry will find the reasons for this
tragedy, but I am concerned that the views of spectators will not
be taken into account due to the large number involved and the
fact that they are individuals and not from any 'body', hence my
letter to you.
To blame the fans is totally wrong and I feel that this could
happen unless all points of view are aired. I would stress that
I am not anti-police, but on this day they were the body
responsible for crowd control and safety.    They were totally
unprepared and their activities were not co-ordinated.     They
failed in their duty and got it wrong on the day.
The problems arose because a large number of people with tickets
tried to gain admittance at the same time. Impulsive decisions
were made and could have been avoided as the situation was
clearly predictable
     a.    the traffic situation on the motorways was well
           known
     b.    close circuit TV would show the position both in
           and outside the ground
     c.    the computer controlled turnstiles showed the
           number in the ground and the number still to take
           their places
     d.    the problem was evident by merely looking at the
           Leppings Lane end and was clear to all present.




                                1
With the known shortage of tickets, the whole situation should
have been anticipated and panic avoided. At no time did I see
any disorderly conduct, everybody was good humoured and
apparently in possession of tickets.
Why:

        a.    Why was there no filtering towards the turnstiles
              - as there was last year - to prevent the crowd
              build up?

              Why was the kick off not delayed as has been done
              several times this season/ including the match
              involving only 10,000 spectators at Tranmere.
       c.     Why having opened the gate were arrangements not
              made to stream fans to the sides and to evacuate
              those already packed in.
       d.    Why were no     announcements   made,   no   use of
             megaphones.

I have heard it said that an unruly mob was responsible. This
was net the case, the sheer weight of numbers, created bv tjoor
organisation, created it.

Xunderstand that a decision was made to open       the gate to
prevent loss of life outside the ground. I feel thatthis was
a    real possibility.    However, the decision was made in
isolation, without^ regard to the serious problem which was
already clearly— evident inside.   The problems could not have
been made clear to the police inside the ground by their
superiors as they were deployed in the wrong places and ill-
informed    This was clearly illustrated by large numbers of
police with dogs guarding the stands (for the wrong type of
situation) when they should have been elsewhere.
There were plenty of police about (I understand in the region of
800) but in the wrong places at the wrong time. The lower ranks
clearly thought violence was taking place, their superiors would
have known that this was not the case, but failed to instruct
them properly. One young constable, frightened, criticised his
superiors in front of us.

There has been a great deal of media attention and whilst I can
be influenced by various debates or my own emotions, I can
clearly recollect three impressions on that day:-
       1.    On reaching the ground there was ho filtering -
             merely all persons allowed to make their own way.
       2.    On entering the ground, one section was clearly
             overcrowded and two other areas fairly empty.


                                  2
          3.    a  lack of medical facilities and only two
                ambulances were seen in almost one hour of panic.
                Volunteers did nearly all the work.
The police seemed very complacent and the lower ranks harassed
unco ordinated and lacking leadership.     There was a complete
absence of planning and direction and I am convinced that this
      ^ Ve      aXolded had a predictable situation been tackled
properly.   The Liverpool police have dealt with large crowds
over many years without incident.                      g crowas

I feel that the planning of such events should take into account
the views of supporters, including various associations which
now represent them. The recommendations of Liverpool FC were
rejected for this match.                                    were

I know a lot of people share my views who attended the match
do not £°U •
       hesitate ^    V " 1 be
                to contact me.°f any further assistance, ^
                                                         p?easi
                                                              e

I would like to record my admiration for the fans who assisted
few days   ^   ^   *** attitude of Liverpool FC over the last

Yours faithfully




P ‘S *              rtr>in-
                   •?0l.
                          ,thi%1^etteJr-' 1 haVe heard comments
                          g-
                       1Ce.^:Federatlon alleging that drunken fans
                                                                  emanating
         started this incident. THIS xs Un t r p e .

                ZaS ^n° evidence of          the cause was their
         inability to, on a gradual basis, to stream arriving
         supporters, as they had done successfully the previous
         ZTZ'            reason' they failed to do so and this must
         be highlighted. I am deeply concerned that one isolated
         inaccurate statement from a recognised body outweighs the
         more accurate reports from so many witnesses.

                  =ueP°rt®rs' unfortunately, are perceived by those
         who do not attend matches as those few seen in newsclips.
         The fans last Saturday came from all walks of life     For
         example our party of 4 were 30/40 years of age, m'arried
         with children. We noticed no less than Billy Liddel having
         difficulty - hardly a hooligan!



                                      3
