                                                        f» i/lo /7 /4f a ~ /     ~ ' ' r‘


                                                                               //£/

KEVIN ANTHONY SMALLMAN




Police Constable 136




9am Saturday 15 April 1989, paraded at B1 DHQ for FA Cup Semi-Final -

Liverpool v Notts Forest.

In transit to Hillsborough for 9 .30am and paraded for briefing in North

Stand - after briefing had first meal.

11am in Leppings Lane terracing with rest of serial 14 for specific duty

briefing by Inspector White.

About 11.15am took up position with rest of serial just inside of Gate C

at turnstiles A - G.     PS 13^1 Crawford was serial sergeant.       At this

time only turnstiles A and B were open.     There was hardly anybody using

the turnstiles at this stage.     Our serial duty was to search Liverpool

fans entering through these turnstiles prior to going into Leppings Lane

terraces or to the seats of the West Stand.     From about 11.15am up to

2pm/2.30pm the flow of supporters using these turnstiles, which had

opened up sporadically, was slow to steady and most if not all were able

to be searched.   All the supporters at this stage were of a pleasant and

co-operative nature despite having been searched previously outside the

ground.   From about 2.15pm to 2.30pm the build up of supporters outside

of turnstiles A - G at Leppings Lane began to grow.     I could see through

the gap of the turnstiles that there was a large amount of people who

had massed outside rather than forming orderly queues.       Initially I did

see foot officers immediately outside of these turnstiles but by now I
can only recall seeing   one or two mounted officers. By now Liverpool

supporters were coming   through the turnstiles thick and fast.   All

possibility of searching people had to be abandoned as people were

jumping the turnstiles without tickets or coming through with tickets

for the wrong end of the ground.   These were dealt with by either

ejecting them through a large metal concertina type gate next to

turnstile G or redirecting them to the correct part    of the ground.

Several fans were seen   to climb over the wall above the turnstiles    to

gain access this way and they were subsequently ejected where possible.

The concertina gates were opened on several occasions as officers had

cause to eject numerous people.    Searching fans by now was

impracticable.

On looking through the turnstiles out on to Leppings Lane I could see a

crush occurring - the small entrance gaps to the turnstiles were

'bottlenecking' with people as they shoved from the rear.      I saw two

young children being passed along the crowds above peoples heads.       Once

the supporters had entered the ground I along with almost every other

officer on our serial were inundated by gangs of people shouting and

complaining about the situation outside.    They said that people were

being crushed and injured and people would die.    Several fans did come

in with obvious rib injuries.

I've seen a lot of angry people in my 10 years Police service but non as

angry as these people.   The situation was totally out of Police control.

The atmosphere had changed from being pleasant to tense and that of

anger.   There was also a stench of beer in the air.   I had to leave the
turnstile area on several occasions after being summoned by stewards to

try and sort our disorderly queues at the gate entrance of the steps to

the seated part of the West Stand.     The procedure here was to tear off a

corner of the ticket once they have entered and on two occasions people

tried to enter with torn tickets which had obviously been thrown from

the seats down to the floor.     The only officers present in the whole

area from Gate C was our serial of a sergeant at 10 PCs.

About 2.40pm I recall the concertina gate being opened again - I believe

in order to eject someone but at this point a large amount of fans

surged through.    We struggled to close them again.    By now it was

organised chaos.     Hundreds of fans were milling around not knowing where

to go.   A lot headed for the central tunnel to the Leppings Lane

terraces.   A lot of these fans were alcohol effected.     There was nothing

I could do without causing a violent public disorder situation.         I was

still being bombarded with complaints about the outside situation.         By

this time I had lost track of time.     There was one man who came in with

a group of people.    He had a can of beer in his hand.    It was open and

he was shaking it causing the contents to spray about.      I took it off

him and binned it.    He then started to insult and abuse me and relate

circumstances to the miners strike.     I remonstrated with him and he was

taken away by his fellow supporters.

The next thing I knew - I can only guess that it was about 3pm - the

concertina gates opened again.     I don't know why.   A whole mass of

supporters in their hundreds or thousands just ran past us.      The

majority headed for the central tunnel.     We were powerless to stop them.
I had no radio communication but from past experience a radio would have

been useless due to the amount of noise and general atmosphere.

After the gate had been opened on this occasion it seemed to clear the

fans from outside.     I was left stood with my serial.   It seemed eerie

and I was left a bit bewildered.     The situation went from one extreme to

the other in a matter of seconds.     I noticed about 30 Police Officers

run through the area where our serial w a s .   There were things mentioned

through the grape vine that there had been a pitch invasion.      Our serial

tagged on and we made our way on to the pitch via the rear of the South

section of the terracing and a small seated section of the South stand.

Once on the pitch I saw a large amount of people on the pitch.      They

were obviously shocked, numb and dazed.     Some were injured and others

were just wandering about.     It was obvious that it wasn't a pitch

invasion.     I saw a lot of activity at the riot fencing behind the goal

of the West Stand side.     Fans were climbing up the fencing and being

helped over by Police Officers.     With the general noise and atmosphere

around the ground at this stage I still couldn't see or comprehend what

was happening as the front of this section of crowd was masked by other

bodies.     I noticed a lot of fans scrambling their way up from the

terracing on to the West Stand.     I made my way further forward to the

fencing and at this I saw that the central terracing pen between gates 3

and 4 in the fencing was jammed packed with spectators.      The front of

the crowd were pressed up against the riot fencing and the back end

seemed to be pushed forward.     The pen was so full of people it looked

impossible to get anything else in.
Police continued to pull persons over the riot fencing as fans made

their way up.    But this was slow and sporadic.   When not helping people

over the officers seemed to be trying to tell the back section of the

crowd to get back.    Scores of other fans continued to climb up the

hoardings into the West Stand.    As people battled to get free from the

crush at the front I could see that some others were not moving.       Their

eyes were shut and their faces seemed pale.    Bodies were so intermingled

that it was impossible to me at this stage to determine their sex, age

or appearance.   I then saw an arm pressed up against the fence and as I

followed it down there didn't seem to be a body attached to it - in that

the rest of it appeared on the floor under other people but obscured by

advertising boards.

I remember looking at either gate 3 or 4 in the fencing.     It was open

and other Police were trying to pull people through the gateway but this

was just 'bottlenecking.'

After appreciating the severity of the incident I then made my way along

the track and entered the crowd via gate 1.    I made my way through the

crowd towards the centre south section of the terracing.    As I did so I

was jostled, harrassed, insulted and abused by some fans.     The south

section towards the South Stand end didn't seem to realise what was

happening but fans became more hostile as I reached the dividing metal

fence between the south and centre south section.     From here I could see

a heap of bodies on top of each other in the well of the terraces I

think near to gate 3-   Initially, I helped fans over the metal dividing

fence from the centre stand into the less crowded south section.       At one
                                 -   6   -




point I noticed a crash barrier that had collapsed.          It was twisted and

buckled.     A long section of this was then hurled towards the front riot

fencing.     It hit the top and landed pitch side.       I can't say if this was

done in anger or whether or not it was thrown out of the way.          Once

there was sufficient room in the centre south section after fans had

been removed I climbed over the fence and started to pull bodies away

from the mass who had fallen and ended up in a heap at the front.             The

first one I pulled away was a heavy/fat youth in his twenties.           I don't

recall what he was wearing but his face was purple.          He wasn't moving or

breathing.     He was apparently dead.       I laid him on the terracing a few

feet back and tried mouth to mouth resuscitation but this failed to

revive him.     I was being encored by certain fans towards the front of

the terracing who    were wanting    to help in any way they could.    But a

large section at     the rear and theone in the West Stand seat were

hurling a barrage of abuse and hostilities.          Some fans at the front were

trying to calm them down.     I then pulled another body off the pile.

This was a teenage male but again I don't recall the clothing.          His face

was purple and he seemed dead.           I tried mouth to mouth resuscitation on

him too.     I do n’t know whether   or not it was just a reaction of blowing

air into him or whether or not he was still alive but there seemed to be

a faint cough response to this.

                                               Thinking he may be alive I looked

up for a way to get him out of the pen.          By now Police and fans were

managing to rip a section of the riot fencing away and people dead and

injured were being passed through there and also exit gates to Police,
fans and medical staff.     At this I carried this second youth with the

help of a fan to the fencing and then just passed him through.       By now

it was just a matter of pulling bodies off the heap and getting them

pitch side to ambulance and St Johns members for medical attention.

Other Police and fans were just pulling dead body after dead body away

from the pile and getting them out.       It was like trying to dig a hole in

dry sand.     It seemed endless.    Advertising hoardings were being ripped

down and passed to the front so that they could be used as make shift

stretchers.    I don't know how long it took but once everyone had been

cleared from the terraces the injured or dead I felt exhausted.       I

didn't know what do to next.       I noticed the fans near to the front along

with Police Officers looked shocked and numb.       Others were openly crying

or just wandering about.     Other fans near the back were angry.    Items of

clothing and other property was collected that was strewn across the

terracing and placed in a pile.       I then made my way out of the terracing

and on to the pitch again and relocated colleagues from my serial.        By

now it was all over.

Announcements were made over the tannoy and eventually the ground was

cleared.    For a long time we were just on standby but eventually

released and finished duty at 8pm.
