                                                                 Q.o^ SSr'9/
I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police and a member
                                                              iber of

the Accident Investigation Branch, a part of Traffic Division.

On Saturday 15 April 1989 I was on duty engaged in traffic control in

relation to the Semi Pinal Football match at Hillsborough. I was a van

driver responsible for taking out and collecting officers engaged on

static traffic points around the City. At 2.45 p.m. that date I had just

completed collecting officers and had returned to the Driving School at

Brightside Lane, for meal.


At approximately 3»10 p.m. together with all other officers engaged on

similar duties I was directed to attend the Sheffield Wednesday Stadium

immediately to assist officers at the ground. About 4 minutes later on

arrival at the ground I drove to the entrance next to the Gymnasium at

the rear of the North Stand. Members of my serial were then deployed towards

the pitch. Due to the number of vans in the confined area behind the

Gymnasium I was told to park on Penistone Road to allow axcess.At this

time I was unaware of the nature of the incident inside the ground.


At approximately 3.20 p.m. I re entered the ground and was told by Insp.

Scarfe to remain available behind the North Stand in case transport was needed

urgently. I then became aware of dead and injured being carried from the

pitch towards the Gymnasium by other officers and fans, using some

stretchers and advertising boards.


Due to the large number of injured in the area I rendered what assistance

I could with regard to first aid and also assisted Ambulance personnel

in the loading of injured and movement of vehicles.


At about 4 .4O p.m. the majority of my serial arrived back from the pitch

area and we were requested to immediately take Mr. P. Rich a civilian

scenes of crime photographer to H.Q. by Chief Superintendent Nesbitt.


After completing this task we carried out a general patrol in the City

centre as large numbers of fans from both Nottingham and Liverpool were

congregating in the City and localised trouble was likely.
                                                                  ^       2?
At   5»20 p.m. we transported on male to the charge office at Bridge Street

who had been arrested by a dog man. At 6.30 p.m.   we resumed to the

Driving School at Brightside Lane, where we stayed to await further

instructions via Operations Room.


At 7.50 p.m. I returned the vehicle I had been driving to Main Street,

Rotherham, and at 8.15 p.m. I completed my tour of duty.
