                                                    ;                  .......... | |                Mill.15
                                   *        Sheffield Archives Ref;                     (M il? "        [
                                                                                                                              \ 11^
OTHER D OCUMENT FORM                           Date and tim e raised                         |   ^             Number
                          ' il.   ,■   i
                             4-
T itle
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)

                                                                                                                   9—
Receiver's instructions — urgent action —
                                                                                                                            Receiver




                                                                                                                            Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                        Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                            Indexer
Indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                          i-&Xi
No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                                   SIO
Examined     further action to be taken




                                                                                                                            Indexer
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
                                      Suffolk.
PFS/Jt:c/14                           25 April, 1989



Dear Graham,
                   Hillsborough   - 15th. April, 1989

            I refer to your letter of 21st. instant, asking
for reports fror, Counci] Merters v.’ho attended this ill-fated
game.
            The game commenced at a very fast pace, and each
side mounted attackes quickly, one after the other. During
a Liverpool attack, a shot struck the cross-bar, and almost
immediately after, I noticed what I thought to be a not
unusual surge amongst supporters at the other end of the ground
immediately behind the fbf^t&P&gvvgoal. Within a very short
space of time, spectators were coming over the perimeter fence
at that point of the ground.     One individual ran from that
end to the other, stopping in front of the supporters at the
Nottingham end gesticulating and calling out, before returning
to the Liverpool end.
             This ga»e me the first impression that we were
witnessing a pitch invasion, and it did seem, at that time,
police in front of the standing enclosure concerned, were trying
to resist the attempts of spectators to climb over on to the
pitch area.     This feeling was reinforced at the time, by the
placing of a line of police agross the pitch as if to form a barrier
to separate any would be invaders.         It did seem strange that any
invasion should take place so early in a match, but it soon became
evident that an unusual happening was with us, when spectators from
      seated area above were seen to be assisting and encouragxng
 standing spectators to be lifted and pulled from the ground area
 into the seating.                             ,
             The players had by this time been taken off, and i
 went down onto the pitch area to try to discover from the match
 officials what was actually happening.      It was soon evident that
 nobody was certain of the events which had then passed, but young
 men who ran from the end of the incident were shouting very
 forcefully concerning the fact that Liverpool had been given the
 wrong end.      I stayed on the pitch for a few minutes, when stories
 began to indicate that there had at least been very serious injuries;
 I spoke to a few individuals who were distressed, and the reactions
 were that the PA had been responsible for the tickets, and accepting
  there was good reason for their agitation, I felt i$ best to leave
  the pitch and go into the dressing room area, where an enormous
  amount of work was being done by many youthful members of the local
  ground staff, carrying drinks, water etc., and tending to those not
  well.
             I than joined the directors of both clubs in the boardroom,
  and was later informed of the abandonment, and of the sad tale of
  deaths.
                               Yours sincerely


 16, Lancaster Sate,
 London W2 3W
                            T
