p      -% .


     Other Document Form                        Date and time raised _ L L _     — :— __—
                                                                                                            I loU
     Title _
                                        ~ cilrrJr^iiSt4,ne-«*4 4 - , . ,                             <~c
     (Include source and any document number if relevant)


     Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/No
                                                                                                              Receiver




     Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                     Indexer

     No(s) of actions raised

     Statement readers instructions



     Indexed as indicated

     No(s) of actions raised

    ^ a m in e d - further action to be taken                                                              0 /M             SIO




                                                                                                                  Indexer
     Further action no(s)


     When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form

      MIR 15
                                                                                               DCC/[
                                                                                               30 May 1990



NOTE FOR PILE:


HILLSBOROUGH - CONTRIBUTION ACTION


Ha(j meeting this date with Peter Metcalf {Hammond Suddards) with reference
to the letter attached dated 25 May 1990 on the subject above.

We, the South Yorkshire Police, are suing certain other parties including
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,     Eastwoods Consulting Engineers and,
possibly Sheffield City Council and the television companies, for their
part of the compensation already paid and to be paid by ourselves.

The following action is required:-


1. Action Team

The Action Team will be re-activated, probably on a smaller basis than
previously and possibly in the early stages organised on a part-time basis.

The Team will prepare a report for my signature addressed to Superintendents
Murray, Greenwood and Marshall together with all officers of inspector rank
t t t w u t i l « lw   'M " £ 9 N * p r ii i 4 f # i   t » 4 -itfe s fM M M M J M M fc fl# *                 «...
of the ground from the pitch, through the concourse including the turnstiles
and also the outer perimeter area where management of the crowd approaching
the ground was a responsibility.

The purpose of the report will be to inform them that the contribution action
is scheduled to commence on Saturday 2 October 1990 and will outline in
broad terms the intention of the proceedings, namely, to determine degrees
of liability between the parties involved.                          . _    ....

Further that whilst at this stage it is impossible to say who in terms of
police witnesses will be called it may be that a number of officers will
be required to give evidence in support of the police case.       It is also
possible that the other parties may call police witnesses on their behalf.

Once more precise information is available all concerned will be notified
so that those both attending and not attending will be aware of the position.
Officers should avoid taking     annual leave   during the month commencing
1 October and if any leave is already booked then we need to know in order
to inform our solicitors.


 2. Taylor Report

 The Taylor Report will be used at the Trial and its findings accepted as
 evidence except where the various parties have indicated they do not wish
 this to occur.   Attached is an abstract from the Interim Report which has
                                                               -   2   -




                    been marked as to the areas where we do not agree judicial notice o f the
                    contents. This decision has been arrived at after long consultation between
                    Mr Woodward and Peter Metcalf.

                    We are asked to consider the same document to see if there are other parts
                    which we would advise be not" admitted in evidence.     The lawyers make the
                    point that this is in no way a brain-storming exercise.       The purpose of
                    the contribution action is to apportion liability between the parties and
                    it is therefore very different from a normaT civil action.

                    The Action Team will consider the abstract and if they can identify any
                    area where additional judicial notice should not be agreed then they will
                    indicate that area with reasoned argument as to their decision.

                        Peter Metcalf is sending a copy to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
                        Superintendents Murray, Greenwood and Marshall for them to make comment
                        before the final version is served.  The service date is 22 June and our


                        Once a consolidated abstract is available which identifies those parts
                        thereof with which we do not agree together with those other parts which
                        the other parties also disagree, then it will be sensible to circulate these
                        to the police witnesses we will call and to hold a meeting to discuss the
                        logic of our disagreement' so that in evidence they can take this into
                        account.                                                       *-e> *■’r

                        Additional tasks for the Action Team are:-

                           a.   To decide   if it is sensible      for     us   to agree with the HSE
                                                  'u m rm rm i              e»a          *


                                second opening.
                                                                                                        /
                           b.-- itSS- tunnel closure      ex-sergeant , Ilf fin*   f
" f t
                                statement to West Midlands Police saying in essence in 1988                 Nd'i.., S
                                just before the kick-off he "received orders to close the                          ■-
        1^ 1- «9-jmi:           tunnel because the pens were full*.

                                Other officers have said they remember the same instruction
                                being given but none of them by whom.
          p^>°n                                           ■"
                                It is believed that none of the            above   was   actually   given
                                in evidence at the public Inquiry.

                                Two Liverpool fans - Peter Metcalf to supply names - have
                                given statements that they saw stewards and police sealing
                                the gate and in fact there were more stewards than police
                                officers.

                                The above needs to be pursued.         Who was on duty at that
                                end of the ground in 1 9 8 8 ? What do any of these officers
                                remember of the tunnel closure and alleged verbal order
                                to do that?       It may be that the instruction to close the
   ft                           gate came from the Club.         If it can be shown that many
                                stewards were involved then the Club through their agents
                                (stewards) should have known of this and their arrangements
                                subsequently, ie 1 9 8 9 , seemed to have failed to take account
                                of the 1 9 8 8 experience which increases their liability.
              3. Press Cuttings

              These need to be recovered,   particularly the comments made by Mr Bert McGee
              on his retirement.


              4. Body Plan

^-'4 I         Peter Metcalf has been informed by West Midlands Police that they do not
         •     have such a plan.    We need to collate the evidence given to the recent
               Inquest and to prepare a plan, possibly colour coded for ease of reference,
             - showin9 the location of the 95 deceased before the crushing and afterwards
               highlighting movements through the crowd whenever appropriate.


              5. Summer 1985
 'M ow

              concerning new fences and of the police asking for an additional gate in
              the radial fences. Copies of any correspondence on this issue by all parties
              to be recovered and highlighted together with any information we have as
    M©?       to why the police made this request.




                    7
              Deputy Chief Constable
