    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club




         GENERAL SAFETY
           CERTIFICATE




                 C       I       T       Y
                 C   O       U   N   C       I   L




I
I
          S H E F F I EL D    C I T Y   C O U N C I L




         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 (AS AMENDED)




                   GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE




               SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB,
               HILLSBOROUGH SPORTS GROUND,
               HILLSBOROUGH,
               SHEFFIELD,
               S6 1SW




                                         ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL
                                         DEPARTMENT,
                                         TOWN HALL,
                                         SHEFFIELD,
                                         SI 2HH.




2AAA/I
                                 PREFACE TO THE SAFETY CERTIFICATE

         1.0    The standards of safety to be achieved as laid down in this certificate
               are based on recommendations contained in the Guide to Safety at Sports
               Grounds (new edition 1990 published by H.M. Stationery Office)
               applicable to designated sports grounds and the final recommendations
               of Lord Justice Taylor in his final report on the Hillsborough Stadium
               Disaster.

         2.0   OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

         2*1   It is an offence for the Holder or any responsible person tor-

               (a)   Contravene any term or condition of this certificate,

               (b)   Admit spectators to the sports ground at any time when a Safety
                     Certificate is not in force;

               (c)   Admit spectators to the sports ground in contravention of a Court
                     Order.

               The penalty is, on summary conviction, a fine not exceeding the
               statutory maximum (£2,000) or, on conviction and indictment, a fine or
               imprisonment not exceeding 2 years or both.

         2.2   It is an offence to:-

               Fail to give notice of an alteration orextension tothe sports     ground
               or obstruct an  authorised officer carrying out hisduties under   the
               act.                                                     ~

               The penalty is, on summary conviction, a fine not exceeding the
               statutory maximum.

         3.0   POWERS OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION

               In accordance with Section 11 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
               (As Amended) a person authorised by

               (a)   the local authority;

               (b)   the Chief   Officer of Police;

               (c)   The Secretary of State

               may, on production if so required of his authority, enter a sports
               ground at any reasonable time, and make such inspection of it and such
               enquiries relating to it as he considers necessary for the purposes of
               this act, and in particular may examine records of attendance at the
               ground and records relating to the maintenance of safety at the ground,
               and take copies of such records.

         4.0   ALTERATIONS AND EXTENSIONS

         4.1   In accordance with Section 8 of the 1975 Act, if while a General Safety
               Certificate is in operation with respect to a sports ground, it is
               proposed to alter or extend that sports ground or any of its
               installations and the alteration or extension is likely to affect the


2AAA/2
               safety of persons at the sports ground, the Holder of the certificate
               shall, before the carrying out of the proposals is begun, give notice
               of the proposals to the local authority.

         4.2   Sub-Section 1    above in   particular requires notice when it is proposed
                to alter the   entrances   to or exists from a sports ground or any part of
                it including   any means   of escape in case of fire or other emergency or
                the means of   access to   any such entrances or exits.

         5.0   RIGHT OF APPEAL

               The act makes provision for appeal against decisions of the local
               authority or against the inclusion of any terms and conditions imposed
               by the certificate.  The time limit within which appeals must be lodged
               and the procedures to be followed are set out in the Safety of Sports
               Grounds Regulations 1987 (SI. 1987 No. 1947).




2AAA/3
                             S H EFF IB LD        CITY      COUNCIL

                           SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 CAS AMENDED)

                                      GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

         Address of premises for                  Sheffield Wednesday Sports Ground,
         which this certificate is issued         Hillsborough,
                                                   Sheffield S6 1SW

         Occupier of the premises and             Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Pic
         holder of the certificate

         Use of the premises in respect           Football Matches; Rugby Matches
         of which this certificate is             (Union and League); Hockey; Marching
         issued.                                  Band Displays; Religious Conventions
                                                  where spectators are restricted to the
                                                  seated and terraced areas; and
                                                  entertainment ancillary to any of the
                                                  above.

                                                   (N.B. All Pop Concerts; Religious
                                                   Conventions (where spectators are
                                                   permitted onto the pitch area are
                                                   specifically excluded.  A special
                                                   Safety Certificate is required for
                                                   these events.)

         1.     This certificate is issued by Sheffield City Council in respect of the
                premises described above, being a Sports Ground designated by Order
                under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (As Amended) as
                a ground requiring a Safety Certificate.

         2*     The terms and conditions set out in the Schedules attached hereto are
                hereby imposed.

         3.     The terms and conditions hereby imposed are those which the Sheffield
                City Council consider necessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety
                at the sports ground when it is in use for an activity in respect of
                which this certificate is issued.

         4.     The words used in the certificate and the schedules attached hereto have
                the meaning assigned to them by Schedule 1 to this certificate and
                Section 17 of the Act.

         5.     The schedules and plan attached hereto all form part of the certificate.

         6.     The certificates commences on      day of         one thousand nine
                hundred and ninty-one and will remain in force until amended, replaced
                or transferred by the Sheffield City Council (The Certification
                Authority).


         Date
                    IL.   ft ^
                           “ .I...........         Signed .
                                              Asssi-w-A/ct" City Solicitor and Head of
                                                            Administration on behalf and
                                                            duly authorised by the
                                                            Sheffield City Council.


2AAA/4
                                          S C H E D O L   E   1

                             S H E F FI   E L D    C I T Y        C O U N C I L

         Interpretation of General Safety Certificates issued by the Council

         Word/Phrase                 Meaning

         The Act                     The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 including
                                     any modification or re-enactment thereof and any
                                     subordinate legislation made thereunder.

         Authorised Officer          Any Police Officer, any Officer of the South
                                     Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority, any
                                     Officer of the Sheffield City Council who is
                                     authorised in writing.

         The Certificate             The written General Safety Certificate issued by
                                     the Council under the Act to the holder of which
                                     this interpretation document forms part.

         The Council                 The Sheffield City Council.

         The Guide                   The current edition of the "Guide to Safety at
                                     Sports Grounds" published by H.M.  Government or
                                     any succeeding code or guidance produced by H.M.
                                     Government.

         The Holder                  The person to whom the General Safety Certificate
                                     has been issued.

         Specified Activity          Football matches; Rugby Matches (Union and
                                     League); Hockey; Marching Band Displays and
                                     entertainment ancillary to any of the abo'O’e.

                                     (N.B.  Pop Concerts, Religious Conventions, are
                                     specifically excluded. A special Safety
                                     Certificate is required for these events.)

         Spectator                   Has the meaning assigned to it by the Act.

         The Sports Ground           The Sheffield Wednesday Sports Ground,
                                     Hillsborough, Sheffield.

         Safety Stewards             A safety steward is a steward who has the
                                     responsibility specified in clause 5.3 of Schedule
                                     2 to the Safety Certificate.

         Void                        A space beneath a stand, an access or an egress
                                     route not open to the general public where
                                     combustible materials could accumulate.

         Safety Officer              A person who has the responsibilities specified in
                                     1.1 and 1.2 of the Safety Certificate and
                                     Paragraphs 31 to 33 inclusive of the Guide to
                                     Safety at Sports Grounds.

         Chief Safety Steward        A person appointed by the Holder and responsible
                                     to the Safety Officer whose duties specifically
                                     include the management and supervision of all
                                     appointed Safety Stewards.


2AAA/5
I
                                       SC H E D PL   E   2

                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

         1.0   GENERAL SAFETY

         1.1   The Holder shall appoint, in writing, at least one Safety Officer who
               has full authority tos-

               (a)   take responsibility for safety at the ground, and

               (b)   implement and supervise safety measures.

               A Safety Officer or his approved nominee shall

               (a)   be in charge of the sports ground and   the Holder’s employees; and

               (b)   be in attendance at the sports ground and in direct personal
                     communication with a central control point during a specified
                     activity.

               (c)   inform the Police Commander or his deputy of his name and contact
                     point prior to members of the public being allowed into the
                     premises for a specified activity.

         1.2   The Holder (and the Safety Officer(s)) shall take all necessary
               precautions to ensure the reasonable safety of spectators admitted to
               the sports ground and shall ensure that all responsible persons (as
               defined in Section 12(2) of the Act) are completely familiar with their
               duties under that Act and this certificate.

         1.3   The Holder shall provide and maintain such signs or notices of'such
               type, size and design as the Council may from time to time reasonably
               require for reasons of public safety.

         1.4   The Holder shall ensure that the signs or notices so required are
               clearly legible so that they can easily be read at all times;

         1.5   The Holder shall take all possible steps to ensure that no materials
               that are capable of being used as missiles are accessible to
               spectators.

         1.6   The Holder shall identify and periodically inspect (periodically shall
               mean a minimum of 2 times per year) any void beneath a stand or an
               access or egress route.  The Holder shall ensure that there is no
               accumulation of debris, rubbish etc.  in these "void" areas.  The
               Holder shall keep a written record detailing all "void" areas within
               the Sports Ground and the date, time, result and action taken in
               respect of each inspection.




2AAA/6
            SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

MEDICAL SERVICES

(a)   The Holder shall provide and maintain at the sports ground to the
      satisfaction of the Council a suitably equiped First Aid Room and
      shall arrange for the attendance of such number of qualified First
      Aid Attendants as the Council may require, but in any event there
      shall be in attendance at least one First Aid Attendant for every
      1,000 (or part thereof) spectators.     TheAttendants duties shall
      only relate to the administering of first aid.

(b)   The First Aid Room shall be capable of being lit by both the
       general lighting and the emergency lighting and shall be easily
       identified by means of signs.

(c)   The First Aid Room shall be designated a ’No Smoking      A r e a ’and   at
      all times be kept clean and tidy.

(d)   The First Aid Room shall be clearly identified as a first aid
       room, its location publicised and made known to staff and
       stewards.

(e)   The Holder shall ensure that the equipment and medical supplies
       specified in Schedule 6 are available for use at all times during
       a specified activity.

(f)   The Holder shall employ at least one medical practitioner (in
       addition to any medical practitioner employed to treat players) to
       be present at each specified activity and available to deal with
       any medical exigency at the sports ground.  He/she shall be
       trained and competent in advance first aid.  He/she shall*be
       present at the sports ground at least one hour before kick-off and
      must remain until half-an-hour after the end of the specified
       activity.  The medical practitioner must be immediately
       contactable and his/her whereabouts known to the Police Control
      Room.

(g)   (i)     The Holder shall arrange with South Yorkshire Metropolitan
              Ambulance Service for the attendance of at least one fully
              equipped ambulance at a specified activity where between
              5,000 and 15,000 spectators are expected to attend.

      (ii)    Where more than 15,000 spectators are expected to attend the
              specified activity, the Holder shall arrange with the South
              Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service for a second fully
              equipped Ambulance and where appropriate at the instigation
              of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service the
              provision of a major incident equipment vehicle.

      (iii) The holder shall after consulting with the South Yorkshire
            Metropolitan Ambulance Service; the South Yorkshire Police
            and the South Yorkshire Fire Service designate a specific
            parking place for Ambulance(s) at the ground during a
            specified activity.  This area shall be marked out and
            signposted accordingly and the area and access to it shall
            at all times remain unobstructed.
         2.2. In the event of a spectator being injured in the sports ground, the
              Holder shall submit to the Council a full written report in accordance
              with the Reporting of Injuries; Diseases and Dangerous Occurrence
              Regulations, 1986 detailing in the circumstances of the injury.   The
              Holder shall supply such additional information as the Council may
              require.                                                   ~ *

         2.3   In the event of a fatality occurring at the ground the Holder shall as
               soon as possible and in any event within 48 hours inform the Council
               and provide a written report in accordance with the Reporting of
               Injuries; Diseases and Dangerous Occurrence Regulations, 1986
               regulations.




2AAA/8
                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

          3 .0   ALTERATIONS

          3. 1   (a)   Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act, the
                       Holder shall not cause or permit the sports ground or any of its
                       installations to be altered (which term shall exclude minor
                       remedial works which do not in any way affect the safety of the
                       sports ground) in any manner whatsoever without the prior written
                       consent of the Council,

                 (b)   The Holder shall supply the Council with copies of such plans,
                       specifications and calculations as the Council may reasonably ..
                       require to enable any application for such consent to be
                       considered and shall comply with any conditions attached to that
                       consent.

                 (c)   Where an application to alter any part of the sports ground may
                       result in the amendment of the certificate the Holder shall submit
                       with such an application a formal application for certificate
                       amendment in accordance with the provisions of the 1975 Act (as
                       amended) and any Regulations made thereunder.




S2AAA/9
                                SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

          4.0   PLANS

                (a)     The Holder shall provide to the Council when so requested, such
                        plans and technical details as the Council may require, as
                        detailed by the Council and drawn up in accordance with the plans
                        regulations detailed in Schedule 8 of this Certificate.

                (b)     Where the Holder is required to submit a plan/s to the Council
                        under the terms of the Certificate, those plans must be drawn up
                        and submitted in accordance with the plans regulations detailed in
                        Schedule 8 attached.

                (c)     Where approved alterations have been made to the Stadium the
                        Holder shall arrange to supply a new set of plans of the Stadium
                        (in accordance with the plans regulations) incorporating the
                        details of the alterations.  Such plans must be submitted to the
                        Council in line with the requirements specified in the plans
                        regulations detailed in Schedule 8 attached and be accompanied
                        with an application to amend the Certificate (unless an
                        application for certificate amendment was submitted with the
                        original application for alteration).  Plans must be submitted to
                        the Council's within 14 days (or such time as the Council pehnits)
                        of the approved completion of the alterations.




2AAA/10
                              SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

          5,0   SAFETY STEWARDS

          5*1   The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every specified activity
                of a Chief Safety Steward and such number of Safety Stewards as are
                specified in Schedule 3.

          5.2   The Holder shall ensure that the Chief Safety Steward and other Safety
                Stewards are:-

                (a)   fit and capable to carry out their duties;

                (b)   properly trained and instructed;

                (c)   readily identifiable by dress;

                (d)   provided with written instructions as   to their tasks/duties;

                (e)   aged between 18 and 55 years or such age  as is considered
                       appropriate by the Council in individual circumstances.

          5.3   Stewards must be informed in writing of all that they are expected to
                know and do.  The Holder shall make it clear to all stewards that they
                are deployed to assist in the safe operation of the ground.

          5.4   The written instructions given to the Chief Safety Steward and other
                Safety Stewards must take account, where appropriate, of the tasks and
                duties, detailed in Section 3 of Annexe E to the Guide to Safety of
                Sports Grounds.

          5.5   Notwithstanding Condition 5.4 above, the written instructions given to
                the Chief Safety Steward and other Safety Stewards must include the
                following tasks and duties:*

                (a)   Under the direction of the Safety Officer or the Chief
                      Safety Steward prevent overcrowding by ensuring that the crowd
                      limits in various parts of the sports ground are complied with.

                (b)   Prevent spectators, as far as possible, from climbing fences and
                      other structures (e.g. flood light pylons) and from standing on
                      seats. Where by virtue of the scale of the incident Stewards are
                      unable to prevent this, they must immediately report the matter to
                      the nearest Police Officer or the Chief Safety Steward or the
                      Safety Officer.   (In the event of no Police Officers being present
                      for a specified Activity the matter should be reported to an
                      authorised officer of the Council or in his absence the Chief
                      Safety Steward or the Safety Officer.)

                (c)   Ensure that gangways and exits are kept clear.

                (d)   Identify and investigate any incident or occurrence among the
                       spectators which may affect spectator safety, reporting their
                       findings to the Police Officer, Chief Safety Steward or the Safety
                       Officer.  (In the event of no Police Officers being present for a
                       specified activity the matter should be reported to an authorised
                       officer of the Council or in his absence the Chief Safety Steward
                       or the Safety Officer.)




2AAA/11
.(e). Know the location of and be able to operate effectively the fire
      fighting equipment at the sports ground.

(f)   Know the location of the First Aid Room and any first aid
      equipment kept elsewhere.

(g)   Be fully conversant with any methods or signals used to alert
      staff that an emergency has arisen.

(h)   Be capable of recognising potential fire hazards and suspect
      packages, reporting such findings immediately to the nearest
      Police Officer, or the Chief Safety Steward or the Safety Officer.
      In the event of no Police Officers being present for a specicified
      activity the matter should be reported to an authorised officer of
      the Council or in his absence the Chief Safety Steward or the
      Safety Officer.)

(i)   Comply promptly with any instruction given in an emergency by a
      Police Officer, the Chief Safety Steward or the Safety Officer.
      (In the event of no Police Officers being present for a specified
      activity the matter should be reported to an authorised officer of
      the Council or in his absence the Chief Safety Steward or the
      Safety Officer.)

(j)   Remain at their allocated locations as instructed unless
      Authorised or instructed to do otherwise by a Police Officer, the
      Chief Safety Steward or the Safety Officer.   (In the event of no
      Police Officers being present for a specified activity the matter
       should be reported to an authorised officer of the Council or in
      his absence the Chief Safety Steward or the Safety Officer.)

(k)   Report to the Safety Officer any damage or defect which is' likely
      to pose a threat to. spectator safety e.g. a damaged crush barrier.

(1)   Open the exit doors/gates and secure them in the open position on
      the initiation of the emergency procedure or when instructed to do
      so by the Safety Officer, the Chief Safety Steward or a Police
      Officer.  (In the event of no Police Officers being present for a
      specified activity the matter should be reported to an authorised
      officer of the Council or in his absence the Chief Safety Steward
      or the Safety Officer.)

A copy of the written instructions shall be retained by the
Safety Steward at all times whilst he/she is on duty.  The
Safety Stewards shall produce the instructions if requested to do so by
an Officer of the Police; Fire Service; or an Authorised Officer of the
Council.  Copies of the written instructions shall be forwarded to the
Council on receipt of a written request.

Training exercises organised by the Safety Officer relating to the
duties of Stewards shall be held at least once every three months.    A
written record of the exercises shall be kept.

All exit doors and gates for use by spectators in both ordinary
evacuation and emergency evacuation situations shall be manned by
Stewards in accordance with Schedule 4. The other duties detailed in
Schedule 4 shall be carried out by Safety Stewards.
                         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

          6.0   POLICE

          6.1   The Holder shall make arrangements with the Chief Constable of the
                South Yorkshire Police for the provision of special police services on
                the occasion of a specified activity at the sports ground for the
                purposes of maintaining lawful and orderly behaviour amongst
                spectators, and the services provided (if any) shall be determined by
                the Chief Constable and he and his Officers shall beallowed  full
                access to all parts of the sports ground.

          6.2   The Holder shall, where possible, notify in writing, the Chief
                Constable of South Yorkshire Police at least 28 days before any
                specified activity takes place. Where this is not possible, the Holder
                shall notify the Chief Constable as soon as practicable.

          6.3   The Holder shall be responsible for limiting the number of spectators
                entering each self-contained pen or area in accordance with the
                capacity figures detailed in Schedule 5.

          6.4   The Holder shall arrange for a computerised system to   record the number
                of persons passing through each turnstile.

          6.5   The Holder shall arrange to inform the Police Control Room when a
                particular pen or area is approaching capacity.  The Holder will be
                responsible for closing off further access to a pen or area when its
                maximum capacity is about to be reached.

          6.6   Before each specified activity the Holder shall arrange to liaise with
                the South Yorkshire Police on the following matters;

                (a)   The anticipated number of spectators expected;

                (b)   The method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;

                (c)   Provision of information in relation to potential crowd control
                      problems.

                (d)   The number and location of turnstiles to be made available to each
                      crowd group.

                (e)   An estimation of the time it will take each crowd group to pass
                      through the turnstiles.

                (f)   To ensure .that where tickets are to be used, the information on
                      those tickets corresponds with the planned arrangements for
                      admitting spectators to the ground.

                (g)   To consider whether the specified Activity is to be open only to
                      spectators having purchased tickets in advance of the Specified
                      Activity and to specify the date and time of commencement of the
                      Specified Activity.

          6.7   The Holder shall comply with any request from the Police Ground
                Commander to postpone the commencement of the specified activity.




2AAA/13
       6.8   The Holder shall enter into a written agreement with the Chief
             Constable of the South Yorkshire Police setting out the respective
             responsibilities of the Club and the Police for crowd safety and
             control.  The agreement shall specify responsibilities for the filling
             of all terraced areas of the sports ground and the monitoring of
             spectators in such areas to avoid overcrowding. A copy of the
             agreement shall be lodged with the Council; any alteration or variation
             of the agreement shall be agreed in writing in advance and the Council
             notified in writing of the alteration/variation.

       6.9   The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the
             Council

             (a)    a Police Control Room; and

             (b)    a Police Detention Room.

       6.10 The Holder shall at all times provide and maintain to the reasonable
            satisfaction of the Council, a system of closed circuit television at
            the Sports Ground.

       6.11 The Holder shall at all times provide and maintain to the reasonable
            satisfaction of the Council, a system of emergency landline telephones
            at the Sports Ground.

       6.12 The Holder shall at all times provide and maintain to the reasonable
            satisfaction of the Council, a public address system at the Sports
            Ground.

       6.13 The Council shall consult with the South Yorkshire-Police in respect of
            the provision of:-

             (i)    a Police Control Room;

             (ii)   a Police Detention Room;

             (iii) a system of closed circuit television;

             (iv)   a system of emergency landline telephones;

             (v)    a public address system.




C2AAA/14
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

          7.0   FIRE SAFETY

          7.1   The Holder shall provide and maintain a public address system which
                shall be audible in all parts of the sports ground to the satisfaction
                of the Council.

          7.2   The Holder shall institute and maintain a fire warning system to the
                satisfaction of the Council.

          7.3   The Holder shall provide and maintain at least such fire fighting
                equipment in such locations as the Council may from time to time
                specify.

          7.4   The Holder shall not permit the storage in the sports ground of any
                flamable, explosive, toxic or corrosive liquid or compressed substance
                (except fire extinguishing and drinks dispensing apparatus) without
                first obtaining a relevant licence.  Before applying for any licence
                the holder shall apply to the Council (Sports Ground Licensing) for
                permission to permit the stoarage of such sustances on the premises.

          7.5   The Holder shall at all times maintain the sports ground in a clean
                condition and shall not permit any accumulations of rubbish or any
                other materials whether combustible or not.




2AAA/15
                     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS


       8.0   LIGHTING AND ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS (FIRE SAFETY!

       8.1   The Holder shall ensure that all parts of the sports ground to which
             spectators are admitted are illuminated to a sufficient standard to
             enable such persons to enter or leave the sports ground safely.

       8.2   The Holder shall provide to the satisfaction of the Council a system of
             emergency lighting which shall, in the event of a failure of the
             general lighting be sufficient to enable spectators to leave the
             stadium safely.

             The emergency lighting shall

             (a)   be powered by a source independent of the mains electricity
                   supply, and

             (b)   come into operation immediately on the failure of the mains
                   lighting, and

             (c)   remain in operation for at least three consecutive hours when
                   activated.

       8.3   The electrical installation for the sports ground shall be constructed
             and maintained in a safe and satisfactory condition.  No alteration
             without the prior written consent of the Council which significantly
             affects the installation shall take place.

       8.4   Throughout each specified activity the electrical installation shall be
             supervised by a competent electrician who shall investigate, rectify
             (if possible) and report to the Safety Officer any defects which arise
             in the installation.




C2AAA/16
              SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

9.0   PRESS AND TELEVISION

9.1   All press and television personnel shall be capable of immediate
      identification.  Those members of the press and television personnel
      who have access to the public and playing areas shall be identifiable
      by means of distinctive dress (coloured tabards) with the word PRESS in
      bold letters written on the back of^the tabard.

9.2   The Holder shall ensure that the equipment brought into and used by
      photographers, television and sound personnel shall not cause an
      obstruction or hazard or interfere with the public address and closed
      circuit television systems in operation at the Sports Ground.

9.3   The Holder shall ensure that only those structures and locations which
      have been approved by the Council are used for photographic, television
      and sound equipment, except where it is a hand held camera or
      microphone not connected to any cables.

9.4   The Holder shall ensure that all persons associated with such equipment
      undertake to comply with any instruction given to them, in the interest
      of safety and good order, by a Safety Steward the Safety Officer or a
      Police Officer.  (In the event that no Police Officer’s being present
      for a Specified Activity Police Officer shall be substituted by
      Authorised Officer of the Council).
                       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

          10.0 ENTRANCES EXITS AND GANGWAYS

          10.1 The Holder shall ensure that all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout
               the sports ground are maintained in good working order at all times.
               Particular attention shall be paid to doors, gates and turnstiles in
               spectator ingress and egress routes and also to any pitch perimeter
               gates. The Holder shall not cause or permit any exit doors or gates to
               be altered, in type, design or method of operation without the prior
               written consent of the Council.

          10.2 The means of ingress and egress and the gangways in the sports ground
               shall at all times be kept unobstructed whilst spectators are within
               the Stadium for a Specified Activity.

          10.3 All floor   surfaces and steps throughout the sports ground which are
               available   for use by spectators shall have even and non-slip surfaces
               and shall   be kept unobstructed, unrestricted and free from trip
               hazards.    Adequate drainage shall also be provided where necessary.

          10.4 The entrances to and exits from the sports ground and the means of
               access to those entrances and exits shall be as specified in the plan
               which forms part of the certificate.

          10.5 The Holder shall ensure that all gangways on standing terraces are
               painted in a conspicuous colour whether they are sunk or not; nosing
               to gangway steps in seated areas are to be painted in a conspicuous
               colour.

          10.6 The Holder shall ensure that during the performance of a specified
               activity, spectators are not permitted to stand in a gangway for the
               purpose of viewing the specified activity.




2AAA/18
                SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

11.0 BARRIERS

11.1 The Holder shall maintain to the reasonable satisfaction of the Council
     such number of crowd control barriers as are thought necessary to
     ensure the safety of spectators on standing terraces within the sports
     ground.

     (N.B.  In accordance with Final Reconanendation 23 of the Final
     Taylor Report into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster:

     "The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed
     immediately (if this has not already been done following the Interim
     Report) to ensure that it complies with the criteria contained in
     Chapter 9 of the Green Guide.  If it does not, the assessment of the
     maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance
     with Recommendation 8 above, should reflect the fact".

     If the barrier layout does not comply with the Green Guide criteria the
     capacity figure for that standing area will be amended appropriately
     taking full account of the Final Recommendations of Lord Justice
     Taylor).

11.2 The Holder shall provide crowd control barriers in accordance with the
     plans attached (Schedule 9) all barriers shall be constructed and
     maintained to the satisfaction of the Council.

11.3 All barriers shall be constructed and maintained to the satisfaction of
     the Council. Reference should be made to Chapter 10 of the Guide to
     Safety of Sports Grounds when designing and constructing barriers.

11.4 All   barriers shall be painted in a distinctive colour.

11.5 All  barriers shall be numbered and shall prominently bear the
     appropriate barrier number.
I
1         12.0 CAPACITY
                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS




I         12.1 The maximum number of spectators that may be admitted to each part of
               the stadium at any one time shall not exceed the number specified in
               Schedule 5 .
I

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

I
2AAA/20
              SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

13.0 INSPECTIONS AND TESTS

13.1 Where any condition in this certificate requires written records to be
     kept such records shall be produced on demand to an Authorised
     Officer.

13.2 The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for reasons of public
     safety, require the Holder to carry out such works and inspections or
     provide proposals for work within a prescribed timetable as may be
     specified in the notice.  The Holder shall comply with any reasonable
     requirement or condition specified in such a notice.

13.3 If a significant defect is suspected or discovered pursuant to the
     normal use of the sports ground or any inspection or test carried out
     under the terms of this certificate, the Holder shall immediately
     notify the Council and take steps to correct the defect.

13.4 The Holder shall arrange for the test and inspections listed in
     Schedule 7 to be carried out and for records to be kept or reports to
     be supplied to the Council in accordance with the terms of the
     Schedule. Where reports are required to be supplied to the Council,
     they shall be supplied as soon as possible on completion of the
     inspection/tests and in any case within 14 days of the due date
     detailed in Schedule 7 or such time as the Council may permit.

13.5 Without prejudice to Section 6 of the Act or any regulations made
     thereunder, the Holder shall maintain written records showing

     (a)   The number of spectators admitted to each part of the sports
            ground for each specified activity; and

     (b)   The names and addresses of all the Safety Stewards employed by the
           Holder;

     (c)   The names of all the Safety Stewards on duty at each specified
           activity and details of their duties; and

     (d)   The details of the training exercises organised by the Holder for
           Safety Stewards in accordance with Condition 5.4.  The records
           shall show which Stewards attended each exercise and the content
           of those exercises.
                            SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

          14;0 EMERGENCY PROCEDURE

          14.1 The Safety Officer or his approved nominee shall be responsible for the
               evacuation of the ground or any part thereof at any time during a
               specified activity.  Nevertheless, he shall comply with any
               requirements of the Police and Fire Service or an authorised Officer in
               the event of Police Officers not being present for the Specified
               Activity to evacuate all or any part of the ground promptly.

          14.2 In the event of a fire or any suspicion of a fire, the emergency
               services shall be summoned.

          14.3 The Holder shall ensure that   all Safety Stewards are fully aware of the
               action they must take in the   event of an emergency.

          14.4 The Holder shall prepare in accordance with Chapter 2 Paragraph 3 of
               the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (The Green Guide) a written
               contingency plan detailing the action to be taken in the event of
               various emergency situations (e,g. fire, bomb scare, structural defect,
               possible crowd trouble; coping with exceptionally large numbers of
               spectators arriving at the Ground etc.). A copy of this plan/s shall
               be lodged with the South Yorkshire Police, South Yorkshire Fire and
               Civil Defence Authority, and the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
               Service.




2AAA/22
                               SAFETY OF SPORTS G R O U N D S - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

          15>0 MISCELLANEOUS

          15.1 The Council reserves the right to exclude from the ground any
               vehicle and/or trailer.

          15.2 The Council may from time to time issue written guidance to
               Holders on safety matters.  The Holder must pay due regard to any
               such guidance.




2AAA/23
                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS


          16.0 WEST TERRACE NORTH WEST TERRACE UPPER SECTION

          16.1 That part of the   Sports Ground known as the North West Terrace Upper
               Section may only   be used by spectators on the express permission of the
               Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire Police, his nominated deputy or his
               nominated Sports   Ground Commander.

          16.2 That part of the Sports Ground known as the North West Terrace Lower
               Section is a sterile area.  It may not be used to house spectators.




2AAA/24
                                    GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

                               S C H E D U L E   3   (CONDITION 5.1)

           1.   The number of safety stewards (excluding the Chief Safety Steward) on
                duty at each specified activity shall not be less than:- 119




IC2AAB/1
                 S CHE PUL E      4   (CONDITION 5.5)   .

The safety stewards shall carry out the duties set out below*-

Number of Safety Stewards                Duties

                                         Manning Final Exit Gates

17                                      All final exit gates

Relief safety stewards   must beprovided. At no time, whilst spectators
are within the Ground*   must afinal  exit gate be left unattended.

                                         Control and direction
                                         of spectators

 6                                       Spion Kop - one per exit
                                         Except Exit W where 2 are
                                         required.

 7                                       Spion Kop - gangways - to
                                         ensure gangways are kept
                                         clear.

 1                                       Spion Kop stairway to Penistone
                                         Road

12                                       South Stand - one per vomitory

 3                                       South Stand (concourse) - one
                                         per stairway

11                                      South Stand  (lower seated   area)
                                         one per vomitory plus one   for
                                         emergency exit at Kop end   and
                                         one for emergency exit at   West
                                         Stand end

10                                      West Stand - upper section -
                                         one per vomitory plus one at
                                         each forward exit gate or
                                         stairway

2                                       West Stand - upper section -
                                         concourse - one per stairway
             &
8                                       West Stand - lower section -
                                         two at head and one at base of
                                         tunnel.
                                         One at north and south exit
                                         way.
                                         Three at the front of stand.

                                        North Stand - one per vomitory

3                                       North Stand (upper concourse) -
                                        one each end plus one central
               3                                      North Stand (lower concourse) -
                                                      one each end plus one central

               2                                      North Stand (disabled section)
                                                      - one at ramp and one at gate

               3                                     Upper North West Terrace    - one
                                                      each exit (when in use)

                                                      Patrolling Sports Grounds and
                                                      Dealing with Emergencies, etc.

               2                                     South Stand

               2                                     North Stand

               1                                      West Stand - upper

               1                                      West Stand - lower including
                                                      external concourse

                                                      Manning Internal Gates

               1                                      Spion Kop/South Stand Corner

               1                                      South Stand/West Terrace Corner

               1                                      West Stand/North Stand Corner

               2                                      West lower exit gates base of
                                                      stairway - one each side.

                                                      Monitoring standing terrace to
                                                      deal with emergencies

               1                                       Sited in front of Spion K o p
                                                      viewing terrace

               1                      -               Sited in front of North West
                                                      Terrace Upper (if in use)


         (N.B. This Schedule in the opinion of the Council details the minimum
         number of Safety Stewards required at the Stadium for a specified activity
         to achieve a standard of reasonable safety.  The Holder may, given his
         specialist knowledge of the Stadium, add to this number at any time (see
         Schedule 9 Paragraph 6.0)).




2AAB/3
                                 S C H E D U L   E   5 (CONDITION 12.1)

         1.   The number of spectators admitted to a specified activity shall       not
               exceed 41,237.

         2.   The number of spectators admitted to each part of the sports ground
               listed below shall not exceed the maximum numbers shown:-

              SPION KOP TERRACE                         - 16,367

              NORTH WEST UPPER TERRACE                  - 1,400

              WEST STAND UPPER                          - 4,183      .

              WEST STAND LOWER                          - 2,603

              NORTH STAND                               -   9,199

              DISABLED ENCLOSURE, (NORTH STAND)         -     120 (30 Wheelchairs,      )
                                                                  (30 Helpers,          )
                                                                  (60 Ambulant Disabled)

              SOUTH STAND (UNCOVERED SEATS)                 2,699

              SOUTH STAND - (COVERED SEATS)                  4,666


              TOTAL GROUND CAPACITY                         41.237




2AAB/4
                                        ADDENDUM TO SCHEDULE 5

               CAPACITY

         1.0   The capacity of the sports ground has been calculated with due
               reference to the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (The Green Guide)
               published 1990.




2AAB/5
                                 S C H E D U L E    6   (CONDITION 2.1)

         1.    The minimum provision of first aid equipment to be available for use at
               the sports stadium and contained within the First Aid Room (where
               appropriate) shall be:-

         1 *1 * FIRST AID ROOM (EQUIPMENT MATERIALS)

               (1)     3 x standard examination couches with steps
               (2)     12 x green sheets
               (3)     3 x sets of stretcher poles
               (4)    1 x scoop stretcher with carrying straps
               (5)    2 x carrying chairs
               (6)    2 x trolley stretchers
               (7)    6 x cellular blankets
               (8)    4 x pillows with plastic covers
               (9)     Disposable paper sheets
               (10)    3 x buckets with lids
               (11)    3 x washing-up type bowls
               (12)    1 x size F trolley mounted oxygen cylinder with variable delivery
                       and key.   (To be provided at the holders expense by the St. John
                      Ambulance Brigade)
               (13)      1x E.C.G. Monitor
               (14)      1x Sphygmomanometer and stethascope
               (15)      1x lockable cabinet with contents as specified in 1.2 below
               (16)      6x snatchbags with contents as specified in 1.3below
               (17)    1 x infusion/intubation case with contents as specified in 1.14.
                       below
               (18)      1x mobile ’dressing* trolley

         1.2   CONTENTS OF FIRST AID ROOM LOCKABLE CABINET

               (1)  Triangular bandages - short life             10
               (2)   Sterile dressings: B.P.C.
                           extra large                            5
                           large                                10
                           medium                               10
                           small                                10
               (3) Eye pads                                      5
               (4) Adhesive tape                                 2    rolls
               (5) Lint (500g)                                   2    packets
               (6) Gauze                                         2    packets
               (7) Cotton wool                                   2    packets
               (8) Mezolin squares (cartons of 100)
                           5cm *x 5 cm                           1 carton
                          10cm x 10cm                            1 carton
               (9) Bandages: B.P.C.
                           1"                                   20
                           2"                                   20
                           3"                                   20
               (10) First Aid Dressings (Adhesive Plasters)     20 of each
                    Various sizes
               (11) Medi-wipes                                   1 drum
                                                                (contents 100)

               (12) Disposable Sterile Containers                2




2AAB/6
         1.3   CONTENTS OF SNATCHBAG

               (1)    No. 1 Dressings                          6
               (2)    No. 2 Dressings                          6
               (3)    No. 3 Dressings                          6
               (4)    20 x 10cm Waterproof Adhesive Dressing   4
               (5)    Large b u m s dressings                  4
               (6)    Large scissors                           1
               (7)    Pairs of disposable gloves               6
               (8)    Petzel type caving lamp                  1
               (9)    Brook type airway (Professional Model)   1

         1.4   CONTENTS OF INFUSION/INTUBATION CASE

                1)    Carrying case
                2)    Laedal Resuscitation
                3)    Laedal Adult Mask
                4)    Laedal Child Mask
                5)    Airway Size 1
                6)    Airway Size 2
                7)    Airway Size 3
                8)    Laryngoscope + 4 H.P. Batteries
                       (Batteries to be replaced every
                       3 months)
                9)    Laryngscope Blade Size 3
                10)   Laryngscope Blade Size 43
                11)   Laryngscope Spate Bulb
                12)    Endotracheal Tube (Cuffed) 6mm
                13)    Endotrachael Tube (Cuffed) 7mm
                14)    Endotrachael Tube (Cuffed) 8mm
                15)    Endotrachael Tube (Cuffed) 9mm
                16)    Catheter Mount (antistatic)
                17)    Catheter Swivel Connector
                18)   Adaptor or Female
                19)    Lubricating Jelly
                20)    Syringes 10ml
                21)    Stethoscope
                22)    Sphygmomanometer
                23)   Needle Box
                24)    Scissors/Shears
                25)   Magill Forceps
                26)    Spencer Wells Forcepts
                27)   Aspirator
                28)     Catheter (Suction) 14fg                 2
                29)     Catheter (Suction) 12fg                 2
                30)     Yankaner Sucker                         2
                31)     Tourniquet                              1
                32)     Catheter Mount Connector                1
                33)     Syringe Needles (19g)                   2
                34)     Syringe Needles (21g)                   6
                35)     Cannulae 16g                            5
                36)     Cannulae 18g                            5
                37)     Cannulae 20g                            4
                39)     Administration Set                      2
                39)     Hartmanns Fluid IVI 500mls              1
                40)     Haemaccel Fluid IVI 500mls              1
                41)     Pre-injection swabs                    10
                42)     Tape Adhesive/Hospital 20 metres        1
                43)     Tape Sleek 2.5cm                        1
                44)     Tape Sleek 5.0cm                        1

2AAB/7
(45) Vecafix                                    5
(46) Arm splint 18"-4"                          1
(47) Cotton Wool                                1
(48) Gauze metre                                1
(49) Trinagular bandages                        2
(50) 5.0cm Bandages - 5 metres                  2
(51) 7.5cm Bandages - 5 metres                  2
(52) Gauze Swabs                                2
(53) Mucas Extractor (Infant)                   1
(54) Oxygen Mask                                1
(55) Oxygen Tubing 3 metres                     1
(56) Gloves - Disposable                        2
(57) Antiseptic Solution                        2
C58) Waterproof Sheet                           1
(59) Micropore Tape 2.5cm                       1
(60) Patient Repeat Form Pad                    1
(61) Headlamp and Battery (Battery
     replaced every 3 months)                    1
(62) Surgical Cloth                              1
(63) Security Stamp (and 2 keys)                 1

Hypochlorite Disinfectant should also be provided effective against
HIV, Hepatitis B etc., for cleaning of blood and body fluids.
Recommended concentrations for use ares-

       10,000 p.p.m. to deal with spillages;
        1,000 p.p.m. for general washing purposes.
                                5 C H E   P U L E    7   (CONDITION 13.4)

                                  INSPECTIONS AND TESTS REQUIRED

                                                                              WRITTEN
                                                                   WRITTEN    REPORT
    GENERAL                          INCIDENCE                     RECORD     R E Q ’D TO BE
    REQUIREMENTS                                                   REQUIRED   SUPPLIED TO
                                                                              COUNCIL

0   A competent person shall         At least once every 12         YES       YES
    Inspect the structures           months beginning                         If works
    which form part of the           1.1.92.                                  other than
    sports ground                                                             general
                                                                              maintenance
                                                                              works are
                                                                              identified.

0    A competent person shall
    carry out the following
    inspections:

1    West Stand reinforced        Every 12 months                   NO        YES
    concrete columns. Affix       beginning 31st May,
    and maintain tell-tales over 1992.
    cracks in the corners of the
    cantilever landings to both
    stairway entrances to the West
    Stand. Provide results of any
    movement - survey columns and
    Stand for cracks.

2    Inspect the turnstiles          At least once every            NO        YES
    (General Condition,              12 months beginning
    condition of surrounds,          31.5.92.
    mechanism etc.)

0    A competent person shall        Before and after each
    carry out a general              specified activity.           YES        NO
    inspection of the Sports
    Ground to ensure
    compliance with the
    relevant Safety Certificate
    Conditions.

0   A competent person shall         At least once every
    examine the electrical           three years or such           NO         YES
    installation of the sports       lesser time if specified
    ground and provide a written     in the Inspection
    report in accordance with        Certificate beginning
    the current I.E.E.                              W l .
    Regulations.

0   A competent person shall         At least once every 12
    test and inspect all fire        months beginning              NO         YES
    appliances (including            31st May, 1992.
    extinguishers, hydrants
    and water supplies).




2AAB/9
                                                                          WRITTEN
                                                               WRITTEN    REPORT
      GENERAL                       INCIDENCE                  RECORD     R E Q ’D TO BE
      REQUIREMENTS                                             REQUIRED   SUPPLIED TO
                                                                          COUNCIL

 0    The emergency lighting        In accordance with the     NO         YES
      and fire warning (including   appropriate British
      the public address systems)   Standard and in any case
      shall be tested/inspected     at least once every 12
      by a competent person.        months beginning
                                    31st May, 1992.

      The emergency lighting        Not less than 3 hours      YES        NO
      system shall be tested by     and not more than 6
      a competent person.           hours prior to a
                                    specified activity
                                    taking place.

 0    All fire warning detection    Not less than 3 hours      YES        NO
      public address and other      and not more than 6
      communication systems         hours prior to a
      shall be tested by a          specified activity
      competent person.             taking place.

 0    All exit and entry doors,     Not more than 24 hours     YES        NO
      gates,turnstiles throughout   prior to a specified
      the stadium shall be tested   activity taking place.
      by a competent person.

 .0 25Z of the crush barriers       25Z of barriers each       NO         YES -
    and hand rails in the           12 months.  Once a                    Report to
    stadium shall be tested         barrier or hand rail is               include
    by a competent person in        tested it shall not be                details and
    accordance with the Guide.      tested again (unless                  results
    The Council shall be            specifically required
    notified in advance of the      by the Council) within
    dates for testing.              3% years after first
                                    testing, but shall be
                                    tested again within 4£
                                    years of that date.

  0 A competent person shall        At least once every        YES        NO

1'  conduct a survey of all
    spectator information
    signs within the Stadium
                                    12 months (Initial)
                                    Survey to be prepared
                                    for 31st May, 1992).

l   with a view to maintenance
    and improvement of signing
    at the Sports Ground.


1f additional signs are thought necessary an application under Condition 3.1 will be
 quired)

IB.    Copies of any records that you are required to keep under the provisions of
       this section shall be forwarded to the Council on receipt of a written

l      request.




 2AAB/10
                                      SCHEDULE 8 (CONDITION 4.1)

          1.0         PLANS REGULATIONS

          1.1         Plans shall be drawn up by appropriately qualified persons
                      acceptable to the Council.

          1.2         Plans shall be executed or reproduced in a clear and intelligible
                      manner with suitable and durable materials.

          1.3         Plans, sections, elevations and details shall be to scale.   The
                      scale(s) shall be indicated in all drawings.

          1.4         All plans shall bear a number and date; Any revisions to the
                      Plans shall be stated in sequence on the Plan and the date of each
                      revision shall be stated.

          1.5         Plans shall include:-

                      (a)   Drawings;
                      (b)   Schedules;
                      (c)    Specifications;
                      (d)   Calculations;
                      (e)   Reports.

          1.6         The number o f copies of Plans submitted to the Council shall be
                      three in respect of structural calculations and nine in any other
                      c as e.

          1.7         Plans must have where appropriate a key; the symbols adopted for
                      the key should be as specifried in British Standard 1635.

          1 .8 ,.1    The Club shall provide such number and type of photographs as may
                      from time to time be reasonably required by the Council

          1.8.2      When a proposal is submitted to the Council in respect of a
                      proposed alteration to the stadium the Certificate holder shall
                      provide such number (sets) of photographs as may be required by
                      the Council to aid consideration of the proposal.

          2.0        APPROPRIATE SCALES

          2.1        Identification Plans - not less than 1:1250.

          2.2        General Arrangement Plans - not less than 1:500.

          2.3        Detail Plans:-

          2.3. 1     Layout Plans of terraces - not less than 1:200

          2.3. 2     Local areas of terraces/seated areas - not less than 1:100.

          2.3. 3     General Arrangement of buildings/structures - not less than 1:100.

          2.3. 4     Details of new structures - not less than 1;25.

          2.3. 5     Details of new structural connections - not less than 1:5.

                     (The Council reserve the right to require additional plans at a
                     scale to be determined should they consider it appropriate to do so.
2AAB/11
          3.0      PLANS TO BE ATTACHED TO SAFETY CERTIFICATE

          3.1      Identification Plan - a general identification plan of the
                   location of the ground in relation to the surrounding area must be
                   provided.

          3.2      General Arrangement Plan - this must indicate:-

          3.2.1    Full extent of the Sports Ground.

          3.2.2    Positions of all buildings.

          3.2.3    Positions of all means of ingress and egress.

          3.2.4    Names and positions of all adjacent roads and footpaths.

          3.2.5    Access routes for emergency vehicles.

          3.3      Detail Plans - these must be prepared to include the following
                   information on invidivual plans or a combination of information
                   may be incorporated in a single plan provided that the detail is
                   clear and relevant.

          3.3.1    Full extent of individual terraces areas/viewing slopes.

          3.3.2    Positions of crush barriers and supports.

          3.3.3    Numbering of crush barriers and sections of crush barriers

          3.3.4    Full extent of individual seated areas.

          3.3.5    Referencing of all seat rows and numbering of all seats.

          3.3.6    Referencing of all gangways.

          3.3.7    Referencing of all vomitories.

          3.3.8    Referencing of all stairways.

          3.3.9    Referencing or naming of all rooms.

          3.3.10 Referencing of all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout the
                  Sports Ground (turnstiles must be numbered).

          3.3.11   Full extent and use of all rooms and void spaces.

          3.3.12   Position of all steps.

          3.3.13    Positions of all balustrades, handrails and fences.

          3.3.14   Positions of all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout     the Sports
                   Ground.

          3.3.15    The swing or direction of travel of all doors and gates.

          3.3.16    Statement of the clear opening measurement of each door    and gate.

          3.3.17   Positions where headroom is less than 2.4. metres in any part of
                   the ground to which spectators have access.


2AAB/12
          3.3.18   Positions of First Aid Rooms and other first aid and emergency
                   equipment.

          3.3.19   Positions and descriptions of all exit and other route
                   identification signs.

          3*3.20   Positions of emergency lighting points.

          3.3.21   Positions of fire alarm sounders and call points.

          3.3.22   Postions and descriptions of all fire extinguishers and other fire
                   fighting appliances.

          3.3.23   Positions of safety stewards.

          3.3.24   Gradient of all ramps, viewing slopes and terraces areas;

          3.3.25   Positions of Police Control Room and Police Detention Room.

          3.3.26   Position and referencing of all catering, merchandising    and
                   franchised outlets within the Sports Ground.

          3.3.27   Any other details which are specifically required    by theCouncil.

          4.0      PLANS FOR PROPOSALS

          4.1      Identification Plans - these should indicate the position,       level
                   and extent of the proposal in relation to other existing
                   identifiable features of the Sports Ground.

          4.2      DETAILED PLANS

          4.2.1    Sufficiently detailed plans to satisfy appropriate statutory
                   legislative requirements; provisions of appropriate British/CEN
                   Standards, and appropriate statutory guidance documents. Where
                   it is proposed that any such matter is not to be complied with, a
                   sepcific reference must be made including a statement of the
                   extent of such proposed non compliance.

          4.2.2    Plans must have where appropriate a key; the symbols adopted for
                    the key should be by reference to British Standard 1635.

          4.2.3    Plans must indicate that the proposal has been designed to be
                    suitable for its intended purpose.

          4.2.4    Plans must include any proposal to change any information included
                    in the plans for the purposes of anything in Schedule 2, paragraph
                    ..
                   1 2

          4.2.5    Where conditions of usage or loading may vary, designs must be
                    carried out to suit maximum anticipated use and/or loading.

          4.2.6    Where any proposal has, or is likely to effect the spectator
                    capacity of the Sports Ground or part thereof, the estimated
                    spectator capacity (subsequent to the implementation of the
                   proposal) shall be stated.

          4.2.7    Such additional detail as the Council may require.




2AAB/13
             5.0   AMENDMENTS

                   Consequential upon the carrying out of any works which affect the
                   details shown on any plans attached to the Safety Certificate, the
                   holder shall prepare and submit to the Council such number of
                   revised plans as the Council reasonably require.

                   Amendments to plans for the purpose of 1.1 above must be produced
                   within a reasonable period but not more than three months after” '
                   the relevant works have been carried out.




I
I
I 2AAB/I 4
                                            S C H E D O L   E   9


                             Safety Guidance to the Holder of the Certificate


            This guidance is not binding on the Certificate Holder but the Council
            strongly recommend that the Club pay detailed attention to it.   The
            paragraphs detailed below are not conditions of the Certificate.

            Paragraph 1 below sets out the provisions in the Green Guide concerning
            Emergency Planning Procedures and Management responsibilities.

  1.0       Emergency Plan/Procedure

  1.1       Paragraphs 34 and 4 2 (vi) of the Guide to Safety of Sports Grounds states-

            "Emergency Plan
            34.  Plans should be made to deal with emergencies.  Consultation between
            Management, Police, Fire and Ambulance Services should take place in order
            to produce an agreed plan of action, including access for emergency
            vehicles, for all foreseeable incidents (see also paragraph 42(vi)".

            Summary of Management Responsibilities

            *42.   A summary of management responsibilities is contained below:- ...

            (vi) Prepare in conjunction with the Police, Fire and Ambulance Services,
            contingency plans, including arrangements for stopping or delaying an event,
            for:-

            (a)    various emergency situations including fire;

            (b)    possible crowd disturbance;

            (c)    coping with an exceptionally large number of spectators arriving at
                   the ground; and

            (d)    the failure of any detection, warning, lighting or communications
                   system or other equipment...".

  1*2       The Council take the view that it is for the management of the Stadium, who
            have special and individual knowledge of their own Stadium, to liaise with
            the Emergency Services (Police, Fire, Ambulance) to produce an effective and
            manageable Emergency Plan.
                                 *
  1.3   The Holder must be aware that should the Emergency Services or an individual
        Authority feel that the Emergency Plan does not meet their   standards, or is
        not being adhered to then they or the individual Authority may approach the
        Council as Certifying Authority and ask the Council to consider prohibiting
        the Stadium to the public.

  2.0   Safety Policy/Safety         Management

 2.1    Paragraphs 29 and 30         of the Guide to Safety of Sports Grounds state:-

            "Safety Policy

            29. As part of the drive for success of the club, team or individual event,
            senior management, directors and board members, must devote time, effort and

l’ZAAB/15
           resources to safety management at the ground, both in its day to day use or
I:         for any special event;  There should be a written policy of safety fo r
           spectators and employees covering the safety objectives and the means of
        -v achieving them.  This should be, known to and understood by all staff and
f          voluntary workers who may be involved in ground operations.    This policy
           should be kept under review by management and revised as necessary.
           Annexe A summarises issues which should be addressed by the Policy.

 I3.0    The management should require regular, periodic reports on safety measures
         taken and on progress on those in hand.   They should ensure that they are

 I       made aware of details of any minor incidents (which might suggest underlying
         problems) and the action taken to rectify them.   Such details should be kept
          in written form and, together with the policy statement on safety, should be
         available for inspection.
I 4.0      The Council take the view that it is for the management of the Stadium, who
           have a specialist individual knowledge of their Stadium, to devise effective

I          safety management and maintenance policy for their Stadium. A safety
           management policy properly adhered to would it is felt help to ensure
           spectator safety at the ground and maintain the Stadium to the required

I 5.0
           standard.,

         The Holder must be aware that should members of the Council's Safety of
         Sports Grounds Advisory Group feel that spectator safety is being put at
1         serious risk through lack of proper safety procedures or maintenance they
         may approach the Council and ask the Council to consider issuing a
          Prohibition Notice prohibiting part or all of the Stadium to spectators.

I 6.0      The Holder should consider for special matches or where estimated attendace
           may approach or reach capacity for the whole o f ^ q section of the,Stadium

I          increasing the level of stewarding for the whole or individual sections of
           the Ground. When considering this, the Holder should pay particular
           attention to the comments and advice of the Chief Constable or his nominated
           Ground Commanders.  The Holder should remember that the Safety Stewarding
I          Schedule that forms part of this Certificate details the minimum number of
           Safety Stewards the Council thinks are required to achieve a standard of
           reasonable safety.

i
I
I
I
I
I
I
 2AAA/16
                         S C H E D U L E     10




plans   )   LOCATION     PLAN

        )   GROUND     LAYOUT

        )   BARRIER     LAYOUT   NORTH WEST UPPER TERRACE

        )   BARRIER     LAYOUT   SPION KOP
         /




                                                                                     A
          ESK <
               \
             dale
         sCLOSf
                                                     ©




               p a r k     s iV.




              I HIf-LSBORpUGH^

Jiw 7 t
      J i
             L ^ - m r a c v
        f^tzbqr,
         W z / / r ^ A nough
                        ,; 'o » ,         V
                                                                orcuan
a!>t £                                                   Leisure CoiT.Diex


                                    ' ■ \ % 5^   ^   a V _ - - T 1n r a - 1|l 'f’
                                                                                /'eyhourd)’




                                                          15 M16 1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NOTES




                                                                                                                                    u   ■■




                                  w




                                                  H O R - r

                                                                  S T A ^         P   m   ID   Hl/Ct           4I


     VE HI C U L AR
     acc ess                                                  n         j   : E           ^4
                      O^::2 - /                                                                J l:




]
                                      MESSAGE
                                       BO A R D




                                                                                                                                                                                                 3.       !W        VlotiK    /4ooed.                                  4*         q.s.qt
                                                                                                                                                                                                  fh\    l£ .P P   riuc s    l_#4>j   £ :ria.e ^^ci«iE>u vs a -r* oaJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  /Ziff. /6.S.9/

:j                                                                                                                                                                                               REV j                       beSCRIPTlON                           |   s ig   |   oate



                                                                                                                                                                 5t •\ .
                                                                                                                                                                                                   SHEFF(ELD WEDNESDAY FC. PLC.
                                                                                                                                                                    49: K    ■• -■:'.•\ . .- V
                                                                                                                                                                   \ • >■■■,-■..        V ' \


]                                                                                                                                                         gbts                                     GROUND LAYOUT
]                                                                                                                                                                                                  A U G U S T 1991.
                                                                                                                          m m
                                                                                               IB
]                                                                                 IP #                 39   ^ 2 ; 6EHTS         k
                                                                                                                                                                                                   SAFETY CERTIFICATE WORK 1990
]                                                                  p^teG     '

]                                                                                                                                       CAR   PAR KING.                                                 EAS1 WOOD & PARTNERS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     > N S U L T IN G E N G I N E E R S )
j                                                                                                                                                                                                                           STANDREWS H O U SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2 3 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SHEFFIELD S11 9 A S                            1 t
                                                                                                                                                                                                        TEL: <07 42) 5 5 4 5 5 4                 FAX: (0 7 4 2 ) 5 5 4 3 3 0
j                                                                                                                                                                                                DRAWN                       KP       '      ‘              SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                 CHECKED                                                    : •• 5 0 0

                                                                                                                                                                                                 APPROVED                                              DRAWING No

                                                                                                                                                                                                 DATE          >       131 2- 90                       13298/1 B
1.15 AUG 1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NOTES




                                                                                                                                                             04

                                                                                                                                                             '<
                                                                                                                                                             3=
                                                                                                                                                             CD
                        M E S S A G E SO AR0                                                                                                                 as.
                        OVER


]                                                                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                                                                                                                 vr                                                                  L£

]                                                                                                                                              f c                                                                            vrr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ==£3:-:j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ±ZZ3'.x:'I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ‘••>l




]
                                                                                                                                                 3-V                                                                                                                                 3;r.:.;

]                                                                                                                                                "I..-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3---V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3--"-


~7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |        y;




]
]                                                                                                                                                                           v :; ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I M l WORK A 0 0 € 0                           KP9 8 ' 91




]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r y -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ..V v.    '
                                                                                                                                                                                                           *'                                                                                 .:                                                                                                v   '* J*.;
                                                                        ^       -V
                                                                                                                                                               • i *.
                                                                                                                                                                             .•W,H
                                                                                                                                                                                                '-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              . l‘ *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ■* '■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ’•*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              :       , .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              * | .«

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '.*/•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        V*' "V - '  *’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *• >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  K* •

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  v •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '{*                          ; *',
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              «•*** *' •.        */■ •

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ' *    **•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 * *• *"«1 •’*•!'

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '.****         •’**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LOWER CORNER IERRA.CE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *:>y .'*•                        s*\’. *




]                                                                *“ *
                                                                                     . ' * - * •                   ?. . •/       «
                                                                                                                             ... J \ ,          t: .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                V v .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              •\ '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            * i.* *      '*’*!

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !■ •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,.***. V




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                •••'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l-.‘. .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        • *.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       v1       V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .: 1 '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ■*   *'•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              * •'•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *'x **   '*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *'••*. 1 *; *; ’ *-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *>*" ;'*■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1***

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             V.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ' \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          STERILE AREA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      •‘ 1         •*                ^                 •                           L ••




]
                                                                                                                                                             * •/       '                                                              , V.                                                                                                                                 * V ;-
                                                            •t              ■   .                                                                      ~ ■          .                                                                 V   •*                                                                                                                                                                      ’•v* ’ “ H • •*                *'•'•**               j
                                               A-'’."                                       :      * •>                                                                                                                                                                           r •*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     V.
                                               t i, ;   •                                                     t   -i s •     . •' *, - - — _                                         *.** .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I'":.      :;'v                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                 *. 1 '•                             . X*. ’       ’**    '*                              V*.:-                                                                                                                                                                                   .( .

                                                                                                                                     >•
                                                                                                                                                                                              ..i * ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                    vV




]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rV - "               ;                                •                                        /...*•
                                                                                                                     •* ••                                                                                                           ;■        •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                y   ’: :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     :v V ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          'r 4 V« , .                                                                                           ■    . '* *■ '- 'i.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ■ **-           ;        :

                                                                                                          I                                                                          ■>                                 ...                                                                                                                                         ?*• y y '.                                                                                      v 1’




]     •t

      IS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SAFETY CERTIFICATE WORK 1990
]
         ifc
]    ij.y
         y^i.v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EASTWOOD & PARTNERS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (CONSULTING ENGINEERS)
]    ftr&v'-
     \ - v . ' :V , :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S T ANDREWS H O U SE


]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SHEFFIELD S i t 9A S



]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  O R /\v y N >                                    ;    , SC A LE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   G rtECK EP;                                      W i :;
]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,A P f* f^ E O ;                                      ORAVVING ^    - -■
      >,Vi,,5S'
      ^Y-J                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .;P A T ty ;;:. y ; y :': • 2 6 > ; i l * 9 0 ,   feftgag;! a
.15 M 3 1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NOTES

                                   X:
                                                   A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ^:5-V




                                                   »----- -- ---- ------ - H —
                                                   \    •—                  2
                                                                                                ----- 1
                                                                                                  ■ -2 :
                                                                                                             ■-?■

                                                                                                                    . '■ ■■. ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6 UNMS

                                                   1                    \             10                             -    -.     |
                                                   I   " :.                 z                    r     4

                                                   l----------------- -------f—
                                                                                      17             ' I - 1' ■—                 :




                                        EXIT. w
                                        9 UNITS                                                                                                                                                                50                                                                                                                                               a?:          HcPiFic4r<t>tJ5 To £>JT V                    ^oDfio    f       &       fi?lv -

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pWC/-

                                                                                                                                                                                                               ■*S9?:*v:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ::VF"


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ft       RtV’iS - 0 TOR PLANS REGULATIONS                               KP 20 n 9 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Bcurciec;; IX*3>' AUbftr^J-
                                                                                      ¥—
                                                                                      \.-\-
                                                                                                            r —;
                                                                                                     • X ' ; :■ ,
                                                                                                                     .i   '•     . .'..i.-
                                                                                                                               V.;;f:! V     '. - .
                                                                                                                                                            t - . .-■■•I:
                                                                                                                                                      ; - . s ; .' ••■-•;..- c ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D           •Cio'.'ijs’osv*' y± .h     .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c           A p rc \rtQ & m e /j/’ o f b a r r ie r s . n 6 .s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ua, /2.^ ■;)%$,r W pijQ £->Siit                               N P q~8-<)a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     00
                                                                                       i- - -                                                          . . 5 :..


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B           B A R R IE R NOTES ADDED                                      K P ? t '7 * 9 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OPENINGS M PERIMETER
                                                                                       U —      — " V — •                                             — i —        -—     ^4                                                                                                                                                                                     A           W ALL A 0 0 E 0    :.■■                                       KF5'7'30

            89.                                                                                                            99        :                                                 ;?.                     ;i0 0 . ,              ,:■-■-■■■■■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ^- „                                                           88                                               REV                            DESCRIPTION                                 SIG I DATE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .:V-'- ‘S

 Exn.v                                                                                                                                                                                       :•'V1-:; .V.3             f*VV :               t ;{;• VT-    ft;                                             96                                                                                                                       ELPIC
 9 UNITS
                                             120                                                                          121                                                                             , 122              ,
                                                                                       i ; ;•.. ••■ \ :SL           v.:?3 ;'>;                        ; :■$ . v ! : ' v £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i : , - v . s , - v. ,• ••-.ffr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ■>        ®:1:32©;

» > v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t .:•.'-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PLANGNSpiONKOP
           Xl%^   126.   - . 127
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                7 'UNITS
   cy
                                                                                                                                                           . <■•                                                                                                  v, ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ;"-'4'        H
                                                                                                                                                          -+r
                                                                                                                                                                                             -■■■■r;,-,v-.•%   ••••v      ■vj> -:■■w ~ -l




                                                                                  w                                                               :                v Dr 1650 *                                                                       JM              ■

                                                                                  ^                                                                                                3                                              ,                      2-                                                                                                                                          4: -,.vv

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EASTWOOD & PARTNERS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       'v .i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (CONSULTING                        ENGINEERS)                      ' ’•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               v ; - : “ c_'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            STANDREWS HOUSE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     h'M                                 ^                                                         V7^ -            ■■:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -..'•pi. V. •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TEL. 0742/583871
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .■; ;v:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ^         SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SHecRed                                                1:200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ^APPRPVED;                                         ; : DRAWING N .              o

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10/8/90.                   1 2 2 6 7 /3 1 «
i ! 5 AUG 1991




      1
