 OTHER D O C U M E N T F O R M                         Date and time raised
   ?                                                                                            Number

 Title                                   &
 (Include source and any document number i f relevant)
                                                                                                         fTchU-
 Receiver's instructions - urgent action - ^ s / N o                S    t    Lm I   I   *to    -

 _______________________________________ fi age??                              1                               Receiver




 Document registered/indexed as indicated
                                                                                                               indexer

 No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                               y f / t f
Statement reader's instructions
                                                                                                          Statem ent Reader



Indexed as indicated
                                                                                                              indexer

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No(s)
                                                                                                             Indexer

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                of                                   , Liverpool
t£Lll say

                       «h
               year old Solicitor practising as a Partner in the firm of

          of                             Liverpool

I hold a Season Ticket with Liverpool Football Club which entitles me to

watch each home match from the spiral Kop which is a standing terrace behind

one of the goals.     I have been following Liverpool Football Club on a regular

basis since I was about 15 years old.        During that time I have attended

most of the country's first division football grounds.

On the 15th April 1989 I travelled to Sheffield with some friends including

two other Solicitors and we all intended to attend the F.A. Cup Semi-Final

taking place at Hillsborough that day.

We left Liverpool at 10.30 a.m. approximately and expected to be in Sheffield

in good time to meet some friends who were travelling from Nottingham.

Unfortunately due to builds up of traffic from Stockport near to the start

of the "Snake Pass" we did not arrive in Sheffield until about 2 p.m.

We only had time to meet our friends, have one drink a bite to eat and then

leave for the ground.

We left for the ground by car and after finding somewhere to park arrived

at the ground 10 minutes prior to kick-off.       I had in my possession both

a stand ticket and a terrace ticket.       I decided to give the stand ticket

to a friend and watch the match from the terraces with 3 friends.

I expected that there would be a queue outside the ground and I expected

at that time that I would not get into the ground until after kick-off.

There were certainly a lot of people pushing and josstling to get into the

ground.     I did not feel the amount of pushing remarkable as I have on many

occasions seen such scenes outside big matches and outside Anfield and

Goodison.      A number of people were anxious to get into the ground and it

was obvious that it would be necessary for the Police to control the crowd.

There was in my view rather less Police than one would normally find outside

a big game and in comparrison to what I am used to, with the Merseyside
Police Officers on horseback were attempting to control the crowd by shouting

t» them to keep back but at no stage did I ever hear an address by megaphone

or other amplifier.
The crowd did not appear to be particularly aggressive, and they did not

give the impression of being predominantly intoxicated.

After a short wait I was surprised when the Police horses blocking our way

parted to allow us nearer the ground and I was even more surprised when

I was ushered towards an entrance which did not appear to have many people

going through it.
I and my friends went through the gate and we were surprised to discover

that we were at the wrong side of the turnstiles and that it was not

therefore necessary for us to present our tickets (a photocopy of my complete

ticket is attached).
After visiting the gentlemen’s toilets we entered the ground by what we

perceived to be the only entrance from that vantage point.             This was by

way of a tunnel which went under the stand into the central park terraces.

The crowd in the tunnel was quite dense and I was actually at that point

quite anxious about it but at that stage I dismissed my thoughts as being

irrational.
On reaching the terrace the force of the crowd behind us became more intense

and we were alsmost immediatey pushed to the front of the crowd within yards

of the perimeter fence.
The crush from behind us was at this time quite severe but it was perhaps

equal to that which I had experienced in the past and it was possible to

    t one's arms from one side and to move slightly both forward and back

 to the side.   Within minutes the crush had become so severe that one couldn’t

move one?s arms and there was extreme pressure on one's ribs.

 It was necessary to make an effort to breathe and I was becoming hot.           The

 crowd was still being pushed slightly forward with nowhere for it to go

 so the crush became more intense.     The man next to me was complaining about
                                             i
 the crush at first but quickly   becam e   ;,desparate and started to ask for help.

 I indicated that I could not assist him because I could not move.
I initially thought that I would eventually be able to get out at the small

Jate in the perimeter fencing onto the pitch but my view soon changed when

I saw the Policemen, were having difficulty in pulling the people out of

that gate because of the weight of the people behind.

I saw that those who did not reach the gate itself but the area either side

were being crushed against the wall.     The Police were shouting to people

to get back but by that time the crush had reached such intensity that nobody

„as able to move in any direction and we were all totally helpless and our

fate was totally in the hands of outside parties.

I remained crushed for what seemed to be an incredibly long period and the

man next to me went red and then blue in the face and his cries became

steadily fainter.   I did not look at him again as I was at that stage trying

to use all my resolve to stay calm as I knew that to panic would lead me

to hyper ventilating and it was difficult enough to breathe as it was.

To my right there was a crush barrier.     There were people crushed against

 that barrier crying out in pain.    There was a girl level with me but her

 leg was clearly behind the barrier and was breaking as a result of the

 pressure of the crowd.
 I was quite close to the front but it was obvious to me that if any room

 did appear I ought to attempt to get back as people were being crushed to

 the front and I could easily be crushed as get out.       At this stage only

 my toes were on the ground and my body was leaning forward about 45 degrees

 to the ground.     Suddenly there was a movement in front of me and I felt

 myself falling and I managed to get my legs in front of me to prevent me

  going under the crowd to what would have been almost certain suffocation.

  At that time when I was falling foward I saw that there were bodies on the

  floor.
  I prevented myself falling forward and pushed myself back using my legs,

  placing them on another person who was on the ground.       This   sickened me

  but I had no choice.
  Suddenly and almost immediately after, the pressure behind me stopped for

  , ^onr? and T was able to get myself''some 5 yards back to safety.
After a while I was able to push W       way back to the e'ntrance tunnel whioh

wa's virtually empty apart fro. a couple of   Police   Officers.

I then went back int<J the courtyard area by the turnstiles.

in the courtyard area I sat on a wall talking to other people who were also

shocked and dazed.
There was a general feeling, and my feeling at the time that the disaster

was caused by the Police control of the crowd and       the   opening   of the gate

which allowed a lot of people into a small area.
At that time many people were upset and were shouting at individual Police

Officers to the effect that they were responsible for the disaster which

occurred.
 This, at that time and in those circumstances in my view was a justifiable

 and reasonable response.     I only saw one person attempt to physically grapple

 with a Police Officer, and even then his actions could be put down to the

 shock of the situation which he had found himself in.

 There were no full scile attacks on Police Officers from what I could see.

 At this stage the injured were beginning to trickle out brought out by Police

 Officers and those who felt able to help.
 I could not at that stage assist and in a shocked state I left the ground

 to wait for my friends who were, as far as I knew still in the ground.

  I would like to say that I was not impressed by the Police operation of

  controlling the crowd outside the ground or their initial corporate response

  when the disaster struck.
  The efforts of some individual officers were heroic but the action lacked

  coherence or leadership.
  Police incompetence is in my view not unusual at such events and I have

  always taken the view that apart from the Merseyside and Greater Manchester

  Forces who in my view appear to understand how to deal with large crowds

   (presumably from experience), few Police Forces have any proper idea.
I   would also like to comment on the paucity of the   public   address system.

At no stage were any coherent orders given over the public address system

to either the emergency services or the crowd.         If those orders were given

they would have been at the height of the panic and the public address system

was not in my view loud enough to be audible in such situations.

It is quite clear in my view that the accident was caused by the decision

of the Police to open the doors to all and sundry waiting at the Lappings

Lane end so as to enable everybody to enter only one portion of the ground.

Quite clearly, the vast majority of people went through the open gate rather

than through the turnstiles and they were left in the situation where the

only obvious way to go into the ground was through the tunnel into the

central area.
If the Officer who took the decision to open that gate was aware of the

layout of the ground and still took that decision knowing that there were

be a crush, then those actions would be criminal in my view.

    If he did not know the layout of the ground and was not thereforeable         to

    make provisions to prevent people going into the centre part only and

    provisions to ensure that the people also went into the side areas, it is

    in my view negligent policing and the person who was in the position to make

    such a decision   should have had the experience and the information to make

    an informed decision knowing all the factors involved.
         .Wffge
150489
         •feSygSv




         PtPII|
         SCSS^;
         MpM
6 .0 0   'Mprara
