FOR COURT USE ONLY
R egina - v - .

Exhibit No...................................
Signed .........................................
Justice of the Peace/Clerk to

(Magistrate’s Court)
D a te ..............................
 FOR POLICE USE ONLY
 Police Force.. WWX...                7?.**.*?£
 D ivision.............4?...................................
 Description of Item                     _
 G o £ m o4. y& te* ...^.P9??THQyWr
               ^/ j s j ^ q i i o n ......
 lr2>££jLj.porvJt... -. fp.pc^geo......
 Identifying Mark

  LAB. REF.                    _        %   ^ m
                   (o)
          C.J.Aet 1967, s 9;
        M.C. Act 1980, s 102;
       M.C. Rules 1981, r 70.
   I identify the exhibit described
  overleaf as that referred lo in the
  statement made and signed by me.
                                Date




Dd 2079234 11/3 B 7714
                            i
lliiiii
Mr Peter Jackson
Football Supporters Association                   Liverpool
c/o Merseysport
Mount Vernon
Hall Lane
Liverpool
L7 8TF                                            28 April 1989


Dear Sir

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

I write following the request in the Liverpool Echo on 21 April 1989 for
those of us involved to let you have a written account of our experiences
before and during the tragedy.

I am 26 years old, married, employed as an                            and a
Kop season ticket holder. I have probably been to 95% of Liverpool home
games since 1974. I have never been in trouble with the Police and, in fact,
deal with Officers on a daily basis. You will, therefore, appreciate that I
am in no way anti-Police etc.

My friends and I have visited Hillsborough on only one previous occasion, the
semi-final of 1988, on which occasion we all had North Stand tickets. I did
not notice on that occasion that the Leppings Lane terrace was segregated.

On Saturday 15 April 1989, my friends
and myself left Liverpool at around 10.30 a.m.      had a North Stand ticket
whilst the rest of us had £6 Leppings Lane tickets.

In view of delays on the A57 "Snake-Pass" the previous year we opted for a
route which took us along the A625 into Sheffield City Centre. We arrived in
South-West Sheffield at around 1.15 p.m. We stopped at a pub/restaurant and
had a bar meal and one pint of beer. We left the establishment at 1.45 p.m.
and drove to Hillsborough via the city centre. We were within one mile of
Hillsborough fifteen minutes later. In view of our approach, we were amongst
mainly Forest traffic, making slow progress toward the ground. We intended
to approach the ground and make a left turn shortly before it to bring us
into the area most Liverpool supporters had parked, on the opposite side of
the ground. When we were around half a mile from the ground we passed a
public house, outside of which was a group of around 50 Forest fans, chanting
and appearing, in the most part, fairly boisterous. It is not for me to say
whether they were drunk. The minibus immediately in front of us had an 051
telephone prefix and there were obscenities thrown in either direction before
the Forest fans started throwing bottles at the minibus, one of which
 narrowly missed our vehicle and beer from which in fact came through the
 sunroof onto our driver,              The minibus made a hasty escape along the
         J
 f.Ty/N« o
 wrong side of the road a nJ d T ] d e c1 i d e d to do likewise.
             ^   «   a   £   >   J      »   i   ■»   .   ■   . a




 On our approach to the ground we unfortunatley missed one left turn and then
 found ourselves in a restricted area, with Police motorcyclists controlling
 traffic and junctions signposted "No U-Turns". It took us fully fifteen
 minutes to eventually reach the area where we wished to park.

We eventually parked half a mile from the ground, at around 2.20 p.m. We
walked with the throng toward the stadium and we saw no trouble, there was
also a slightly less boisterous atmosphere than when we had been approaching
amongst Forest fans.

 When we arrived at Leppings Lane, nothing appeared untoward. A few fans were
 singing, vendors were selling scarves etc., and people were going to and fro,
jmaking their way to their particular part of the ground. We bade farewell to
     and slowly walked towards the Leppings Lane turnstile around fifty yards
 away. The time would be approximately 2.30 p.m. We had only walked twelve
 yards when we encountered the "queue". This was a large group of people
 Soing through what appeared to be two large blue gates situated around thirty
yards before the turnstiles. Fans were well behaved, moving forward very
slowly. At this stage there was one mounted Policeman just inside the gates.
He was inanimate. People continued to move forward a little more slowly and
it became quite cramped, though humour was good. Calls of "Moo, Moo" and
"Baa, Baa" were plentiful. The overall impression was of livestock being
herded to slaughter. We were not to know how true that was.

Gradually, very slowly, the progress came almost to a standstill. The time
was now around 2.40 p.m. There was no movement forward, but an omnipotent
feeling of ever growing pressure from behind. Those behind were, of course,
just shuffling forward as we had done moments earlier. "Get them into
queues came the call to one of the two mounted Policemen who spanned the
sixteen to eighteen yards between us and the turnstiles. The Policeman was
shouting something but his voice was lost amongst the clamour. A realisation
— if we were getting fairly squashed, then what was happening a few yards
ahead? Tighter and tighter became the squeeze. An eccentric looking chap
carrying an old fashioned wooden rattle shouted in pain. Then it was my turn
as the rattle handle became pressed tight against the small of my back. The
situation was becoming alarming. In the past two minutes I had moved two
feet forward, four feet to the left and then three feet to the right. We
were still around twelve yards from the turnstiles. The wall to our left was
only ten feet away and I decided that if the momentum continued I would end
UP scrushed against that wall, so I endeavoured to keep leaning right where
possible.

There were two announcements over the loudspeakers above the turnstiles,
barely audible, saying would supporters take their time, there was plenty of
room for everybody. The crush was becoming more and more compact. I heard
      shout out - he was only three feet away but  I barely made out his
southern accent - something about his foot.   I looked around, I could only
move my head, and could not see        in the sea of people.

The crush was now the worst I had ever encountered (until I got into the
stadium) and I feared for our safety. Suddenly there were more screams as
the one mounted Policeman left between us and the turnstiles backed his horse
ferociously through the mass of people and away behind me out of sight. I
now realised we were on our own. We (well me anyway, for I had lost sight of
the others) were roughly parallel to the now infamous blue exit gate. People
were screaming and those around me were trying to push back to relieve the
pressure. I recall cursing the Police for not organising fans into queues.
At this point I would mention there was no smell of alcohol etc., in the air.

A girl of around 20 was hysterical. Two very large men with shaven heads
shouted "Let the girl through, come on love." and a group of us barely
managed to part the ocean, making a small channel for her to get through the
mass to the turnstile. The iourney of around four yards took her at least
forty seconds.

The pain, the feeling of fighting for space to breathe, was becoming
unbearable. The next obstacle was obvious. People who were crushed against
the wall between the turnstiles were having great difficulty in getting from
that position into the turnstile. I jostled a few inches to my right until I
was satisfied the forward momentum would carry me into the chasm. I was
lucky and soon the torment was over, X ,was in the turnstile. X reached for
my ticket from my jeans pocket and the operator shouted "Have your tickets
ready." X was astonished. "You can't breathe out there, never mind be able
to reach your pocket." X snarled. When X came out of the turnstile there was
a Constable on the inside of each. I said to one "You’ve got to do something
out there, people are going to get killed, can you organise something?" The
Officer looked at me with no emotion or recognistion. My immediate thought^
was "Well, I'm a football supporter so it's obvious X am talking nonesense."

              and myself, having become separated in the ocean of people, all
entered via separate turnstiles. We regrouped, all discussed how terrible
the crush outside was and how we would never 6ome back again, then visited
the gents. We then saw people slowly walking into a tunnel, which was
obviously the entrance to the terrace, and followed.

I would like to stress it was not apparent that there were side entrances to
the wing sections of the terrace (we did not know the terrace was segregated
in any event) and there was not a Steward or Police Officer directing fans to
the sides.

When we reached the end of the tunnel it was obvious the immediate vicinity
was very crowded, as one would expect, and as is often encountered when
entering football grounds.




                          /
        *as in the lead and I said "Let's go to the left.", the reason being I
knew the North Stand contained Liverpool supporters and there would be no
possibility of rival fans throwing coins, etc., from the stand. It was our
intention to make our way substantially to the left, to where we would be
roughly in line with the touchline, away from the "boisterous area beind the
goal.

As we got clear of the tunnel I looked at the official clock, which read
"14.53". We slowly jostled to the left and probably got around fifteen feet
in two minutes. The terracing was overcrowded, but not alarmingly so. It
occurred to me that unless it was a lot less crowded further over I would not
be able to enjoy the game at all. Indeed even at this stage I regretted
coming. At this stage we were, as I have said, fifteen feet to the left of
the tunnel, but also ten steps or so lower.         fell twice but we were
able to help him up.

At 2.55 p.m., the time presumably the exit gate was opened, the situation
began to deteriorate rapidly. We were now going further to the left and
downwards whether we wanted to or not. The pressure of bodies forcing us
gradually to the segregation fence, but also downward against the crash
barrier which was the first one behind the perimeter fence.

There was panic people were shouting and screaming as the crushing became
unbearable. Everyone was shouting to the Police on the other side of the
perimeter fence, but at this stage there was no reaction. I began to fear
for my life as I became bent double over a chap who, in turn, was hideously
bent double over the crush barrier. There was no way he could move back off
the barrier. He appeared to stop struggling after a further period of time
I cannot stipulate how long for it seemed hours but was of course minutes
and although I could not see his face he must have been dead or was dying.
The crushing from behind was intense and I screamed on more than °^e
occasion. I could not move off the inanimate body in front. The fellow
immediately behind me was crushed, bent over me. He was shorter than I an
his chin and throat were wedged against my right shoulder, his head PUshed
grotesquely back. Obviously, there was also intense pressure on the back of-
his neck and he screamed twice "My neck!" and shortly after I m dying mate,
help, help." I could not help him. I could not lower my shoulder the inch
or so required to take the pressure from his throat.

Panic sticken, I could see the segregation fence a r o u n d four feet away,
although there were numerous people between it and myself. I hear            y
"My arm" as it was trapped between the rails. I closed       myeyes andgrimmaced
as another surge increased the pressure. I looked back to my left w^ e
      was, and saw him being hauled over the fence by the two large shaven
headed men who had earlier helped the young lady to the turnstile.

 I could see the terracing on' the other side of the segregation         , T
 sparsely populated and I wished I was there. The pressure was intense and I
 found it hard to take in air. My chest and back were giving severe pain but
I briefly managed to regain my faculties.   I saw I was at the left hand end
of the crush barrier and managed to get my left foot on a support stanchion.
I then leaned as far to the left as I could and just reached over two peoples
shoulders to grasp the rail with my left hand. I pulled with my hand and
pushed with my foot until I   was just clear    of the chap in    front. I archedmy
right leg over his shoulder   and managed to    get my foot on    the right angled
corner of the crash barrier. This gave me the necessary "leverage to get my
right hand onto the segregation fence, above the left, and yank myself up.
As my backside cleared the position I had been standing in, I felt the chap
who had been behind me slump into the position I had vacated.

Two men on the other side of the fence say my manoeuvre and came over and
helped push me up. I breathed a sigh of relief as I was perched on top of
the fence, but as they pulled me clear my right leg became trapped between
two spokes on the top of the fence and I cried out in pain. They continued
to pull, not realising my leg was trapped, but eventually one saw the problem
and got under me and pushed   the leg clear. I fell "head first" to the ground
but managed to break my fall by putting my      hands out, but    landed awkwardlyon
my right wrist. My spectacles came off in the descent but luckily did not
smash.

      was already now over the adjacent fence and he helped me over. I
collapsed and laid down on the terrace for a minute or so, regaining my
breath. I stood up, took in some air and thanked God I was alive.

We had become separated from        befpre the crush reached its height and a
search of the wing terrace proved fruitless. It was fully forty minutes
before I spotted him, walking in front of the goalmouth, where fans had been
having their faces covered with pullovers, whilst others received heart
massage from services and fans alike. I saw four fans frantically tearing at
the perimeter fence in an effort to free those trapped behind it. A few
minutes later a couple of Police Officers joined in, but by this time it was
too late.

The extent of fatalities became evident. I only saw five bodies but
said on looking for us he had seen fifteen to eighteen. By the time we left
the ground, twenty was the favourable number.

We left the ground after rejoining      and were in such shock that we
couldn't find the car, even though we knew where it was. I was totally
inconsolable, never having shed so many tears, and a super Sheffield family
took us in, offered us tea and sandwiches and let us use their telephone.
This was very comforting and enabled me for one, to regain an element of
composure. I did not sleep for the next two nights, all I could see when I
closed my eyes was a grown man in his late thirties, probably someone's
father, screaming uncontrolably "Help me. I'm dying." on my shoulder. I'll
never forget him or that terrible day.
I apologise for the length of this report, but I feel I cannot explain what
happened without including everything.

My own conclusions are:-

1.   The Police should have organised fans into queues outside the turnstiles
     (of which there should have been more).

2.   When, at around 2.50 p.m., there was an announcement over the
     loudspeakers at the turnstiles saying "Do not panic, there is plenty of
     room for everybody" there should have been a request to enter the
     terracing by side entrances.

3.   Stewards or Police should have directed fans to the side entrances at an
      early stage, particularly as I understand the centre section was very
      full as early as 2.15 p.m.

4.   The Police reaction was unacceptably slow, and there seemed to be no
      co-ordination between Officers inside and outside the ground.

5.   As has been widely stated, perimeter fences must come down.   There
      should also be more gates in segregation fences.


Yours faithfully
