                                                                                                AA hbfSCc
                                                                                      MIR.15

                                                                                                             DI%cjQ
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and time raised   n   A                       Number


Title                                                    yHJ
(Include
      'de source and any document
                         dobument number i f relevant)
                                             relevant    (]
                                                                                                     N ^ o . O
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No ( j j
                                                                                                                 Receiver
                                                                               to-

                                                                                                            7 * 8
                                                                                                                 Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised                                   ■A 17S 3
                                                                                                            Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                 Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                 Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form                S Si’
                                                                           w \&
                                                       OFFICE          1
                                                             p   &tf   '



                                                                                    Merseyside,


^om«.TeL:                                        3±EJ                             17 April 19B9.


     Dear J U a . | J < W (   .

          Rs                                    MaLcnooLitan Borough Council and
     supporter of Liverpool h.L. tor over 3U years, I consider that i am competent
     to comment on the tragic events which my wife and I witnessed at          the
     Hillsborough disaster.

          In my professional capacity I am required to observe,   assess, analyse
     and produce intelligent informed opinion based on logic and f a c t s . Together
     with my long standing association with Liverpool Football Club as a
     supporter, in excess of 20 years as a season,ticket holder, I may be able to
     contribute to the inevitable inquiry.

          I have prepared a report of observation, questions and comment which I
     trust may be of assistance to any such inquiry.        In the main I have
     restricted the report to those issues immediately relevant to the matter.

           There are two other issues in a broader sense, however,                 that are of
      concern. Firstly,         I, am not convinced that identity cards would have
     ^prevented this dreadful             tragedy; -inrippH t   .cpor»      gpunri Inn-ir.  that
     matters coutd arguably have been worse. The other matter is that                  "informed
     personnel ’ are bu'yyeb111iu that Wembley be used for semi-finals as well as
      finals. May I suggest that these people try and gain easy access to UfgmhI
     Stadium from 2.00 onwards on Cud Final day.               It is one o f , if not the mo s t ,
      danqerous and friqhteninq grounds to gain access to because of the method of
     entTV.   h o r ' y e ^ S I hcWfet UytJII U^pyLliliy sume form of fatal tragedy to^ happen
      wHTch,  in my opinion, has not happened by virtue of good Luck and not goad
     management.

          Please accept    mv report in the context of one   who wishes to offer
     runstructivp criticism with positive recommendations. Needless to ssv I   am
     extremely sad and still slightly shocked not only about this tragedy but to
     have actually witnessed it as a bystander unable to heln. Hopefully,
     however, if my report can assist in any manner it will be worthwhile from mv
     point of view.

          On a note of optimism may I suggest that this tragedy can be used as a
     cataLyst to provide a modern purpose-built stadium for Liverpool and Everton
     in a strateqic position relataAto motorway connections; there are several
     sites on the periphery which would suffice.    This new stadium could be a
     powerful  influence on the attempt to bring the Olympic Games to the North
     West, in conjunction with Manchester. Such a stadium could be the model and
     flagship for others and would be a lasting tribute to the memory of those
     unfortunate   "scousers* who needlessly perished.

          Should further comment, views or assistance be required I am                only    too
     pleased to assist in any form or manner required.

                                          Yours sincerely,
1.    Observations

1.1   Rt 2.10 pm it was clear that there were many people outside the ground
       without  tickets (evidenced by requests for spare tickets and audible
      comments to the effect that access would be gained with or without
       tickets}.

1.2   We gained access reasonably easily and were in seats by 2.20 pm. Rt
       that time it was evident that the centre position of the Lepping Lane
       standing area was over capacity by virtue of the swaying and violent
      movements caused by pressure from the rear. We were almost on the half­
      way line 30 rows back in the North stand - similar in line and height to
      the TV cameras and commentary boxes, therefore the problem was clear to
       those people and presumably the professional observers, police/stewards
      etc.

1.3   It was also clear that the two wings of the Leppings Lane terrace were
      well under capacity to the extent that at least half of the terracing
      could be seen to be empty.   There appeared to be no means of access to
      these areas from the central portion (other than climbing over the iron
      railings, which some peopLe resorted to3.

1.4   Whilst not an expert in crowd control, in over 30 years of spectating I
      was of the opinion that a serious incident was developing unless
      positive action was taken; firstLy to relocate some of those people in
      the centre;   and preventing further people gaining access there and
      directing fans to the wings (comment: crowd crush and disporportionate
      dispersal of crowds is not uncommon but is usually of prime concern in
      qrounds used to large crowds and monitored by police and authorities,
      even to the extent to allow temporary access to the perimeter track to
      enable re-distribution).

1.5   When the tragedy occurred it appeared that there was confusion in police
      ranks as to whether to extract people or move them back. Some people
      were collapsinq onto the pitch in obvious distress with police trying to
       'throw* them off as though they were invading the pitch! Ptthouqh there
      was confusion there appeared to be Little cohesive guidance           or
       leadership by the police.

1.B   Matters were not improved by repeated Public Address announcements for
      spectators to leave the pitch when it was clear that there as an
      incident    of enormous and tragic consequences.      This enraged    the
      Liverpool fans and Cin ignorance of the situation) encouraged the Notts
      Forest   fans to taunt and jeer, thus further enraging the Liverpool
      suporters.   The consequence of this action was for Liverpool fans on the
      pitch to advance towards the Forest "end*, many of who were trying to
      inform the Forest fans of the enormity and scale of the problem.     5ome
      even broke down in tears in the attempt.

 1.7 The “army* of police that appeared across the pitch to "divide" the fans
     further angered people in view of the obvious mayhem and need for help
     with the dying and injured.      This was further exacerbated by the
     introduction of police with dogs which were barking and leaping around
     at the confusion.    I witnessed two people bitten by one very excited
     dog.  This occurred at a time when people clearly knew that            a
     catastrophe had taken place.
1.0   Again during this time the P.O. was still "requesting" people to leave
      the pitch.    In fact those people on the pitch (spectators) were either
      clearly injured,    dead, in shock and dazed or were actually acting as
      emergency service personnel in carrying people on makeshift stretchers
      to the clearing area on the pitch.    The P.O. should have informed the
      public at an early stage of the enormity of the incident,    thus taking
      the levity out of the situation.    The Forest fans were still under the
      impression that it was Little more than spillage onto the pitch with
      possibly some minor injuries.   I believe their attitude would have been
      different with further information relating to the degree and facts of
      the situation.

1.9   There appeared to be difficulties getting the ambulances to the area of
      most confusion.   The  'goal*  and especially the net proved to be a
      problem to the extent that police and helpers eventually   'pulled'  the
      net off the posts and supports to enable better access to the area.


2.    Questions

2.1   Why was it not possible to move easily to the extreme wings    Cfrom   the
      centre) of the terracinq?

2.2   Why were spectators not channeled to the wings?

2.3   Before the opening of the outside gate by the police (admitted to and
      much publicised) why was the centre portion not sealed physically by
      means of a gate or police to prevent the inevitable stampede?

2.4   Why were police not apparently aware of the numbers of ticketless people
      and provide better vetting before access to the stadium grounds?   (There
      were certainly enouqh police available^   witness the TV pictures)

2.5   Whv did the P.R. announcer not give the correct information instead    of
      inane comments that added inordinate insult to tragic injury?


3.    Comment

3.1   Should fencing in of fans be continued there must be means of some or
      all of the following: removing them quickly in similar situations;
      adequately opening gates provided (not 1 metre wide); enable them to
      fold down to provide a method of quick access over them.   Ideally they
      should be removed and alternative means employed if still necessary (the
      much mentioned 'moat' approach or similar).

3.2   Better vetting of tickets outside the stadium grounds.

3.3   More equitable distribution of tickets (especially at semi and final
      stages).  The majority of the supporters without tickets are likely to
      be genuine fans (derived from fanatic) who support their clubs home and
      away season after season and genuinely deserve the right to see their
      clubs at the prestige games.    It is a well known fact that there are
      many privileged people who only attend these games,      especially the
      final, as a social event. Ticket distribution should relate to average
      gates of the participating teams where practicable.
3.4   Easily demountable goal-posts and netting to enable unrestricted access
      in emergency and better means of access and egress for emergency
      vehicles.

3.5   It would seem from informed comment that there is no standard or policy
      relating to the availability or provision of essential emergency medical
      equipment or facilities. From observation it would appear to be a
      standard provided by voluntary emergency services e.g. St.          John
      Ambulance Brigade and therefore to a large extent on charity.        The
      clubs,  especially the more affluent therefore the more popular,  should
      provide reasonable facilities and equipment for their patrons       Cwho
      indirectly employ/fund them).

3.6   I am of the opinion that this tragedy would not have Cand virtually
      could not) have occurred at Anfield, Goodison, the Manchester clubs and
      similar stadia where the police and stewards are more accustomed to
      handling and controlling such crowds on a regular basis.      One would
      assume that the views and methods employed by those people at those
      grounds are souqht bv those not so experienced in such matters; however,
      sadly it would not seem to be the case - perhaps puerile professional
      .jealousy! This is literally a matter of life and death and tragically
      now deaths to an inconceivable and unbelievable level.

3.7   The method and content of how announcements over P.R.       systems are
      presented should be considered by a p £ u £-hologist as an expert in
      likely consequences of misinformation in a hysteria crowd situation.

3.8   Rpart from the obvious safety advantages of 'all seater' stadia it also
      provides a better method of crowd dispersal, control and comfort.   This,
      therefore,  has to be the inevitable consequence to ideally build new,
      modern,  comfortable multi-purpose all-seated stadia Cperhaps        with
      Government aid) for famiLv use Cto replace the ageing structures that
      provide cold comfort ana little else).  Rdequate car parking facilities
      with good quality means of access and egress and facilities commensurate
      with the safety, health and comfort of its patrons and supporters.      R
      very much poor second is to at least convert all stadia to all-seating
      especially those clubs who regularly have large capacity attendances.

3.9   R major contributory factor in this disaster is the number of people
      outside the ground immediately prior to kick-off and the consequent and
      inevitable crowd hysteria to gain access.     Consideration should,   in
      similar circumstances, be given to delay the start of the game until the
      situation has been resolved - and further to inform those outside to
      relieve pressure and panic.

3.10 "We" (especially politicians) keep saying that "we must ensure that this
     cannot,  must not, happen again".        Unfortunately it would appear that
     little or no changes take d a c e , o r lessons learned^are not implemented,
     taken on board or are even ignored.       Let those words mean something this
     time and let us hope that these innocent people have not perished in
     vain and new standards/legislation should be as a memorial to them.
