p»C


      OV^.
STUART DAVIES    POLICE CONSTABLE 583     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE   DEEPCAR   SHEFFIELD




I am a Ptolice Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, at present stationed
at Deepcar Police Station.
On Saturday 15 April 1989* I was on duty in connection with the F.A. Cup
Semi Final game between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest which was being held
at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, Hillsborough, Sheffield*
My duties were on a mobile patrol serial in a personnel carrier, with PS 68l
Hill in charge of the serial, other officers were PC's 300 Hays, 2378 Webster
8Mf Rees and 2628 Churns, I was the driver of the vehicle. Our designated
area of patrol was the Deepcar/Oughtibridge area of the city, paying paricuiar
attention to licensed premises and generally maintaining publice order.
After briefing at the ground about 11am we took up our patrol area. At this
time I noticed that there were numerous people waiting about outside licensed
premises many of then wearing Liverpool colours, throughout the dajr anti*
before 3pn> frequent checks were made of licensed premises and several mini
buses and vans were stopped and checked.
Checks at public houses showed that some had only a few customers but others
in particular the Silver Fox, Manchester Road, Stocksbridge and the Blue Ball
Main Road, Wharncliffe Side were full of Liverpool supporters, these pubs
were full from about midday on-wards and it was obvious that a great deal of

alcohol was being consumed.
From the area where these two public houses are located it is a good 20 to 30
minutes to the area around the Sheffield Wednesday Ground, that being on a
normal day without the addition of the heavy traffic on that particular day.
I personally advised numerous people to begin making there way to the ground
and was still doing so at half past two, but supporters were still remaining
in the public houses consuming alcohol.
About 2.50pm we had made our way towards the ground and were travelling along
Middlewood Road when we began to pick up broken radio messages on Sergeant
Hills radio it sounded as if there was crowd ooatrd problems at the Leppingc-
Lane turnstiles; we received instructions from ground control to remain on
patrol around the area of the ground.
                                 -   2-




Shortly after 3pm we were in the Penistone Road North area, further radio
messages had been transmitted and it appeared that there was a serious crowd
problem at the Leppings Lane End inside the ground, a further message was passed
from ground control instructing all available officers to go to the ground.
I drove our vehicle to the ground via Penistone Road North and Penistone Road
when close to the main North Stand entrance gates Sergeant Hill instructed m®
to stay with the vehicle and he together with the other officers alighted from
the vehicle and ran towards the ground.
I found a place to park the vehicle close to the an trance to ths ground between
the North Stand and the Spion Kop, after parking the vehicle I got out and saw
that the gates at Entrance 'O' were open and a number of supporters were crowded
round the gate as if attempting to gain entry to the ground,    I went to the gate
and saw that they were being refused entry to the ground by club stewards.
I ascertained from the supporters that they were in fact from Liverpool and had
been refused entry at the Leppings Lane End of the ground, the majority of these
people were the worse for drink and when told that they could not gain entry to
the ground, they became very irrate and abusive towards the police and stewards.
Together with other officers I began to move these supporters away from the
entrance to the ground, a short time after this    a. number of ambulances began
arriving at the ground I assisted in getting these ambulances into the ground
through entrance '01 At this time I was not aware of the really serious nature
of the incident as I was not in possession of a personal radio.
It soon became apparent how serious the incident was as a large number of ambulances
continued to arrive at the ground, I assisted     in stacking these ambulances
on Penistone Road outside the ground until thers was roora for them to enter
the ground.
At this time a number of Liverpool supporters began to icav* the ground and
congregate around the entrance, the majority of these supporters were drunk or
the worse for drink and were being very abuseive using oscene language towards
the police officers present.
I remained outside the ground assisting ambulances to get in and out of the
ground until approximatley 1f.30pm when I was rejoined ny Sergeant Hill and
other members of our serial and we began a mobile patrol around the area of
the ground.




Police Constable 583-      3*7.89*
