                                                                                                                                     M IR .15


                                                                                                        ^ . \o           • ^   O    1 0 0 0
  OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                           Date and time raised                                                                    Number

                                                       tu
  Title                       4>o n r\ C C ^ 5 hgax.i^>         Pc              r-i~

  (Include source and any document number i f relevant)
                                                                                                                               -r> ^
  Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Ya^?No fD                                  ->fc                                                     n A     CdJk> .
V-fefcfcau-/3> -n ^                                    6    ^
                                                                                t/T                                                 \s
                                                                                                           r w c A -o ^ fc x -V ' < Z o \ p ^    v->-
                                                                                                                                                                      Receiver

                                                                                                                                                                    I^ s > )
C U r g J kK- y   "rn
                  v u P
                      j   O    y|P* »
                                    *   - »t- ¥^ X
                                                 > K
                                                   r   I        it v y -8   ^ i o < a /^      *   tH e = fc fc t2 -« 3         d J L 'O C j <

                                                                                                                                                                      Indexer
      nent reaisy^ed/ii^exipi^
  Document                   as indicated

  No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                                                                  Statement Reader
  Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                                                                      Indexer
  Indexectas indicated

  No(s) of actions raised

  Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                                                                     SIO




  Further action No(s)                                                                                                                                                Indexer


  When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
     CC/BMT




Captain E N Taylor
Police Complaints Authority
10 Great George Street
LONDON
SW1P 3AE

                                                                3 September 199&




Dear Captain Taylor

HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

Further to my letter of 30 August 1990 which concerns certain objections
made by HM Coroner, I have now received a letter from the Coroner and I
enclose a copy for your information. He makes the following points

1.   The Inquests have been commenced     and   stand   adjourned   and   are   sub-
     judice until they are concluded.

2.   No date is available, as yet, for the reconvened Inquests and although
     it is hoped that they will recommence in the near future,          the
     intervention of Christmas and winter will present problems for the
     Coroner.  This seems to indicate the Coroner anticipates the Inquests
     will run into 1991.

3.   Whilst it is acknowledged that the Inquests are not adversarial in the
     sense that there are no parties to them, the Coroner feels that
     certain persons have various rights under the C o r o n e r ’s Rules. The
     Coroner believes that individual police officers and probably the
     South Yorkshire Police as an entity, fall within the terms of those
     rules.  This seems to include the South Yorkshire Police Authority.

4.The Coroner objects, therefore, to the disclosure of the          Investigating
      O f f i c e r ’s reports and supporting evidence, to the Chief Constable of
      South Yorkshire Police, and presumably to the South Yorkshire Police
      Authority.          He bases his objection on the principle that those
      documents would form the basis of the evidence for the Coroners
      Inquests and to release them to "one party" (?) would give that party
      a potential advantage; does not appear to be fair; and appears to be
      against the rules of Natural Justice.

5.   The Coroner is in possession of all statements and documentary
     evidence,  including video-tapes,    which were   gathered during the
     Hillsborough   investigation.     He   acknowledges   that   there are
     restrictions  on   his  powers to    release  police   statements, and
     presumably the associated documents, which have not been given in
     evidence, but he feels he would have to agree to the West Midlands
       Police Hillsborough Investigation Team releasing the documents to
       interested parties if they were already in the possession of South
     - Yorkshire Police. He seems to be saying that he accepts that the
       matter is not one for him to decide.

6.    The Coroner makes the point that the Inquest jury verdict may be such
      that both criminal matters and disciplinary issues would have to be
      examined afresh by the DPP and the PCA.  For that reason he feels that
      the South Yorkshire Police, and presumably the South Yorkshire Police
      Authority,  to  examine  any  disciplinary  questions  now,  would be
      premature and perhaps unfair to the individual officers concerned

The Coroner is quite correct in his assertion that any decisions in respect
of the Hillsborugh disaster are made in a highly charged and tense
atmosphere, but I am of the view that is not a valid reason to withhold my
reports, statements and documentary evidence from South Yorkshire Police or
from the South Yorkshire Police Authority.      The Coroner makes passing
reference to the outstanding civil actions but the point he is making is
not clear and from my telephone conversation with him, it remains unclear.
He seems to confuse the passing of the reports and evidence to South
Yorkshire Police, with the decision as to disciplinary action.

The current position is that the South Yorkshire Police Authority is in
possession of my report which concerns the complaints made against Mr
Walter JACKSON, the Assistant Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police,
and the statements, documents and videos to which I have made specific
reference in my report.   I have informed the Clerk to the Police Authority
as to the objection raised by the Coroner.

In so far as the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police is concerned, he
is aware that I am withholding from him all reports, statements, documents
and video recordings until     I have consulted Captain    Noel Taylor, my
supervising member of the Police Complaints Authority.    That consultation
cannot take place before week commencing 10 September 1990.

Whilst I am aware of the difficulties which are being       faced, and will
continue to be faced, by the South Yorkshire Police, its Police Authority,
and by   HM Coroner, because   of the   intense Merseyside  interest in the
criminal matters, disciplinary considerations and civil actions, I can find
no legal reasons for my reports and supporting evidence to be withheld any
longer from South Yorkshire Police.

The complainants have recorded their complaints and have co-operated fully
in the investigation of those complaints.   Although there are civil actions
running in parallel to those complaints there   has been no reason thus far
for the normal procedures not to be followed, including    submission to DPP
and PCA.    Both DPP and PCA     are aware of the existence of    the civil
proceedings, including the adjourned inquests, and, of course, so are the
South Yorkshire Police Authority and the Chief Constable.

It seems to me that the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has to
decide whether any disciplinary action that seems appropriate should be
delayed until proceedings in    the civil courts, including the C o r o n e r ’s
Inquests, have been concluded.      It is my advice that any disciplinary
action should be    so delayed,   certainly in respect of the Co r o n e r ’s
Inquests, but it is perhaps pertinent that in respect of the civil actions,
or at least some of them, South Yorkshire Police have made some admissions
of liability for compensation.    In making his decision as to whether, or
not, to defer disciplinary action, the Chief Constable, and his Police
Authority, will wish to have regard to the effect of deferment on the
maintenance of the force discipline, the morale     of the force, and the-
welfare and other interests of the officers - concerned.  One officer has
been suspended from duty for well over one year.

I am of the view that all reports,       statements,  documents,      and video
recordings, should n ow be passed to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
Police and-I would advise the Chief Constable, and his Police Authority to
give very careful consideration as to the deferment of any decisions about
disciplinary action until after the completion of the C o r o n e r ’s Inquests.
Although points 4, 5 and 6 made by the Coroner and set out above in my
letter, do not seem to support the case for delay, the objections as a
whole do call for very careful consideration.

I shall telephone Captain Noel Taylor, my supervising member,     at about 9 am
on Monday 10 September 1990 to discuss the matter further.

Yours sincerely




Chief Constable
Investigating Officer
