                                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                    REF:           ‘— f   1   '> w
        FROM:   .S* 2737 Hallett        'U '^
                                                                    STATION/DEPT: OPS/UNDERWATER SEARCH
        TO:
                                                                    DATE:                 UNIT


                  SUBJECT:   SEMI FINAL, LIVERPOOL V. NOTTS FOREST.
                 Comi.enced duty at 9 a<>m. and attended briefing at Hillsborough#
                 Assigned to duties as mobile transit patrol, serial 6k Tango 10, to patrol
                             P
                 Neepsend,       enistone Road, Rutland Road, on southern approach to the ground#
                 Vehicle was driven by P.C. 718 Pont and also contained P.C.s Dearden, Frith
                 and Gillot. Mobiles in this area were under the overall supervision of
                 Inspector Wallace0
                 Patrol was maintained in this area until 3 p«m0 with no incidents of any
                 significance occurring.
                 When Operation Support was broadcast on VHF radio my vehicle was stationary
                 in Penistone Road at its junction with Bradfield Road. We immediately attended
                 at the ground and assembled with Inspector Wallace between the North stand
                 and Kop0
                 We were then directed by Inspector Wallace to form a cordon on the pitch in
                 front of the North stand. We maintained this position for several minutes but
                 together with other officers I left to give whatever assisstance I could to
                 the injured on the pitch. I then helped to carry injured persons to the
                 rear of the North stand, using broken advertising boards as stretchers.
                 When all persons who were injured had been removed I formed part of a cordon which
                 had been positioned accross the half way line, before being instructed to leave
                 the ground by the players tunnel and go to the Leppings lane area.
                 In the road way at the rear of the Leppings Lane end were the bodies of several
                 persons lying by the fence adjacent to the river. I was instructed with
                 other officers, by Inspector Sykes to form a cordon around these bodies.
                 I remained in this location for about 30 minuted until the bodies v/ere being
                 removed and was then instructed to return to mobile patrol by Inspector Wallace.
                 I returned to.mobile patrol with Mr Wallace and other officers (part of my
                 original serial and members of others) and remained on these duties until
                 8 pm v/hen we were dirested to Claywheels ^ane for refreshments. Whilst mobile
                 we attended at the Northern General Hospital where there were reports of
                 disturbances. There were no serious problems at the hospital and we returned to
                 mobile patrol after approximately 30 minutes.

                 I was ordered to stand down at 8.30 p.m0



                                    ’...P.s. 2737


GEN/2
