KAY ELISABETH SUTCLIFFE
Police Constable 3289
Woodseats Police Station, Sheffield
T/N 500200
D group.




At 8.45a® on Saturday 15 April 19&9 I commenced duty in full uniform for the match
at Hillsborough Football ground regarding the semi final between Liverpool and
Nottingham Forrest.
I was with Serial 9 which was supervised by Inspector Booth and Sergeant Jessop
Together with other officers I attended the main briefing in the North Stand
which was conducted by senior officers at approximately            After this
briefing we took our meal in the North stand and at 11am approximately our serial
went to the Spion Kop where we had a further briefing by Superintendent Greenwood
Another briefing was then held by Inspector Booth and we were appraised of the
duties we were to perform during the dayt these being:
Phase 1 - Prior to the match, Fenistone Road, turnstiles outside the ground.
Phase 2 - Dueing the match we were to police entrance Z on the Spion Kop
Phase 3 - After the match, to Penistone Road to assifet with Nottingham Forest fans
             boarding buses to the city centre.
At 11.15am I began the Phase 1 duties in company with Pc 1^78 Capes at turnstile
48/49 in Pensstone Road.     The turnstiles were due to open at 12 midday and there were
already a number of Nottingham Forest fans arriving at the ground. When the
turnstiles were opened fans began entering in small numbers gradually increasing
around 2pm and towards 3pm queues were forming. The atmosphere at his time was
lighthearted and people were orderly. Quite a number of fans approached and asked
if 'touts' had been selling tickets. I had seen about two at his time. Fans were
searched entering the turnstiles and a number of items including empty milk crates,
sticks from flags,pop and beer cans were confiscated. I saw a man selling
programmes from an open gate near to where I was standing. He was told by supervisory
 officers to close the gate.    Whilst fans were entering the gates in large numbers I
could smell intoxicants in the air. Some time prior to the kick off two men
approached me with tickets, wanting to enter the ground. One of these men was under
the influence of alcohol, with glazed eyes, he was unsteady on his feet and his
speech was slurred. The man accompanying him had been drinking but to a much lesser
degree. Both men were refused entry to the ground and they became argumentative.
They were furnished with my collar number and that of Pc Capes after they stated
that they wished to make a formal complaint against us. They then stood at the side
of us for a short time and then left the area walking towards the city centre as a
large number of fans began queuing to gain entry to the ground.
At 3pm there was a loud rear from the crowd and the game had obviously started.
Pc Capes and myself, together with the rest of our serial remained at the turnstiles
which were still open. Ps tfessop v;as stood near to me and I could hear from
his personal radio a lot of traffic regrrding the gates and I h^ard Leppings Lane
mentioned but other than that I could not make out very much more. A matter of
minutes later Fs Jessop informed us to close our turnstiles and to go immediatley
to the pitch. I shouted to the turnstile operator to close the turnstile and ran thr
through the gate and onto the ground. Once on the pitch I ran towards the Leppings
Lane stand, I could see people spilling out onto the pitch and a number of fans
being lifted up towards the upper level. My first impression was that of a pitch
invasion but as I got closer I could see ihat the fans were completely squashed
together in the pen and Police officers were leaning over ihe fence and assisting
fans out. There were many people wandering over the pitch and lying on the ground.
I approached and saw one youthlying cn his back, he appeared to be about 2k years
of age and was wearing a red jumper. He didn't appear to be breathing, I gave him
mouth to mouth resuccitation and he jsegan to stir. I saw a St Johns ambulance cade$
I got him to the youth and he began to deal with him, he mentioned he had fractured
ribs. X then went ± d another youth nearby, his face was bright red, he was on his
hands and knees gasping for breath but appeared to be recovering. At this point I
still had not realised the extreme severness of the situation although I realised it
was pretty grave, but at some point around this time a fan wandering around was
shouting that there were people dead at the fence.I moved onto another largte man- /
who was unconcious and placed him in the recovery position, I loosened his clothing
he began to come round after what seemed like a few minutes. He couldn't speak but
gave me an okay sign. I moved on, showing fans carrying the hoardings which people
needed emergency assistance as they were coming for some people who were reasonably
well. Then I went to the perimeter fence and helped Pc Brown with an oxygen tank.
I could not tell if it was full or not although it was-bery large and extremely heaby
a male Pc then assisted her with it and I went further back onto the pitch as there
didn't seem room to help at the fence at this time.
At one point here a large number of fans ran from the terraced end towards the
Nottingham Forest fans, tis appeared to be due to the fact that the Notts Forest far.s
were still shouting and clapping, even goading. I was informed by an Inspector to
help form a line across the middle of the pitch to stop fans gaining access to
opposite sides. I was told to remain in position for an unknown length of time,
feeling totally uselessrwe were eventually told to go in pairs and inform fans that
they could leave the ground. At this point I was approached by a man looking for his
son who was 11 years old. Myself and a Sergeant tried to find a number where he could
ring as everything was still in a confused state at this time. We were told thqt no
casualty bureau had been set up yet and he was advired to sit in the stand and wait,
he would be informed when the bureau number was available and assisted. I was then
                                -   3-                                          (q \
informed to leave the pitch and debriefed. During the time on the pitch
Liverpool fans were constantly approaching myself and other officers, swearing and
telling us that ire were useless, even hampering whatlittle we were trying to do to
help.


            Tkjnsi\
