   Statement re Hillsbrough.
   Vincent Thomas Ley.
   DOB 9.12.61
   Police Constable 2 7 6 3 .
   South Yorkshire Police,
   Main Street,
   Rotherham.


  At 8.30am on Saturday 15 th April 1989j I paraded at Main Street Police Station in full
   Police uniform. I was asigned to Serial No. 41, in the charge of Sergeant Dixon from
  Maltby Police Station. I was asigned to partner Police Constable 2133 Ekwubiri thoughout
   the days duty. We were then transported to Hillsbrough football ground in Police vehicles
   and arrived there at 9»55am. We then sat in the seated stand for the briefing by
  supervisory officers. Following this briefing we were issued with packed lunches which
   we then consumed. Myself and Constable Ekwubiri, together with the rest of our serial
  then made our way on foot, to our phase one positions, along the length of Halifax Road.
^ ^ A s the morning progressed, coaches, buses and cars started to arrive in the area and
  myself and Constable Ekwubiri positioned ourselves in the area of Halifax Road junction
  with Southey Green Road. As the morning progressed further, the young men arriving in
   the area focused their attention around the Thresher off licence and the White Horse
  public house situated at either side of that junction. The staff at Threshers Off licence
  were allowing the men into the store a couple at a time. The men were purchasing cans
   of beer and lager, and then walking away consuming them. The amount of men visting the
  off licence increased through the morning until a small queue could be seen outside the
   shop. Most of these sen walked across the road into the White horse public house’s yard
   to consume the cans. Access to the White Horse was restricted by the staff there and the
   more respectable looking men were allowed into the premises via the rear door.
   The crowd seemed good natured on the whole and the biggest problem for the fans seemed
^ ^ t o be where to urinate. Myself and Constable Ekwubiri stood in the White horse grounds,
   stopping people urinating in the rear yard and monitoring their behaviour.
   As the beginning of the match neared, approximately 2.40pm, the pub yard cleared, together
   with the surrounding streets. My Serial gathered together at the junction and we
   started to walk down Halifax Road towards the ground. I walked directly behind Inspector
   Brocmhead and Sergeant Dixon, listening to their pocket radios and asking the Inspector
   to relay to me what was happening when I missed something. I could clearly hear an
   officer va^uc&ly^ocfc1coming for permission to open the gates at Leppings Lane end of the
   ground because of the crowd problem. I commented on the fact that I had worked that duty
   on the previous years Eemi-final and experienced the crush at the turnstiles then. I
   also mads mention of the fact that our problems had only been alleviated by the fact that
   my serial Sergeant at that time was Sergeant Keenan who beconed the mounted section into
   that corner who organised the crowd into something similar to a queue, thus lightening
   the pressure on us.

   At the time of hearing the radio messages, we were around the Wadsley Bridge railway
station at this time.
We continued on towards the ground along Peniston Road and as we got to within 200 yards
of the ground we were made aware of some urgency and quickly made our way into the
ground. We entered the ground at 3»09pra and went straight onto the grounds perimeter
track between the Spion Cop and the North stand entrance. At the entrance to the pitch
we v/ere met by an officer of inspector or above( definitely of senior rank, wearing a
white shirt and flat cap). There he directed us in front of the Spion cop in order to
control that area of the ground. Our serial spread along the perimeter track, behind the
goals towards the far corner, assisting the one or two Police Constables remaining there.
On looking down the length of the pitch, I could see that there was a problem in the
Lepping Lane end of the stand. I could see fans being pulled and lifted up to the
upper balcony of the stand by other fans. I could see other officers at that end of
the pitch, but was at this stage totally unaware of exactly what was happening there and
how bad the situation had become.
Several Nottingham Forest fans started to climb onto the fencinf directly in front of
us but were quickly discouraged from doing so. The Nottingham fans were agitated and
this was not assisted by a Liverpool fan approaching the Spion Cop and beckoning the
crowd aggresively. The Nottingham Forest fans shouted and showed aggression towards the
fan, who ran back to the Liverpool end of the ground. There I saw him arrested by
Police officers.
I could see Liverpool fans starting to spill onto the pitch and people making, makeshift
stretchers form the wooden hoarding around the pitch perimeter. I could see the fans
carrying bodies of people towards the gap between the Spion Cop and North stand. Many
bodies were being place in that corner of the ground-and I could see fans and Police
officers giving mouth to mouth resusitation and heart massage to people laved all over
the playing pitch.
I saw a   large number of Liverpool fans start to charge towards the Spion Cop in an
arressive and very intimidating way. The.se eventually turned before they got to us
^and Police officers were then deployed across the pitch.
Some Liverpool fans came down to where we were stood and demolished the advertising hoardins
 to use as stretchers.-
At this time the Nottingham fans seemed to realise what was going on and apart from the
odd person, they were well behaved. Two people who said that they were doctors and
another two who said that they v/ere St. Johns ambulance men came to the front and were
allowed on the pitch, to assist. During this time a boy of about 13 years of age, two
youths of about 19years and 22 years of age, all fainted towards the front of the crowd.
They were quickly brought to the- front, out of the crowd and placed in the recovery positic
until after a short time they all came round. They 22 year old was stretchered away.
An old man of about 60 years fell at the front of the Spion Cop complaining of a
twisted.knee. It appeared to be twisted very badly and was apparently an epileptic.
He was assisted out of the cop and layed on the grass. Two St. Johis ambulance men

attended him and stretchered hi away for treatment. The Nottingham fans were if anything
at this time, helpful and extremely concerned. The anouncment was made that the game was
cancelled and the Nottingham fans made their way out of the ground in a very orderly manner.
Our serial was deployed back to our original positions on Halifax Road. As we were there
many Liverpool fans approached us trying to find out about their relatives. We were
unable to give much information except the emergency telephone number we had been given.
The only facts regarding the death toll, were what was being overheard on the car radios
of the fans.
The fans were quiet and subdued on the whole, but   many were obviously distressed and
upset at what had happened. Some were angry and we received comments from some of them
such as, " You're fucking shit," "Satisfied now ?" and " I hope you can sleep tonight.”
The comments were ignored due to the situation being potentially very volatile. People
who asked us for advice were told to telephone their families as a matter of priority.
Eventuall the crowds cleared, apart from the odd person awaiting and looking for
family and friends. We resumed to Claywheels Lane. After something to eat we resumed
to Main Street Police Station and went off duty at 7.15pm »




ir'oiarc#’ c o n s ta b le 2763 Ley
    cr------------------ -
