                                                                                       M IR .15
          effield Archives Ref:         11
PXHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised                                Number


Title
(Include source and any document number if relevant)


Receiver's instructiohs'^urgenTaction.— Yesip g
                                                                                                                   Receiver




                                                                                                                   Indexar
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised           ^[
                                                                                                               Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions

                                                                                                                <1 Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                     SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                               Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form              1
                                                                    Shipley
                                                                    West Yorkshire

                                                                    20 April 1989

    K Dalglish MBE
    Liverpool F C
    Anfield
    Liverpool
    Merseyside


                                            ■
                                                M

    Dear Kenny

    I was in the Leppings Lane pen on Saturday at 3.00 p.m. but was
    extremely fortunate to have been helped out by fans that
    brought me over the side fence.

    I am incensed by the Press and T.V. mis information since the
    tragedy. I did not know what to do or how to express my views;
    so I have set out what I did on Saturday afternoon along with
    questions that I feel need answering and are pertinent to the                                       ■A:i-
    disaster.

    I attach my statement and I would welcome the opportunity to
    attend any Enquiry or Meeting.

    Yours sincerely

                                                                                                ■ \ '< l   -rf
                                                                                         '■ '
                                                                                     ■     :        1      :   \
                                                                                         :'                C

    M G HILL                           J




                                                                       ^V^VV: V:i
              ' 'I-:'.-.



     VP                    "       "                                    - V :
                                                                                                 '''


                                                                            -V;;


•     ;   ■                    "           -■srsv^s. -




                                                         ■: ;-y.v
                                                                       rf
                                                                                                        z**•y-A
  HILLSBOROUGH



     LEPPINGS LANE

SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989




      MY VERSION

       H G HILL




Personal Details
Statement of Events
My Ticket
Hillsborough Questions
PERSONAL DETAILS

Michael Gerard Hill
Shipley-
West Yorkshire


Telephone:       Home
                 Work               (Ext,

Age:             37 Years
                 Married with 3 children




I am a Chartered Accountant and work as Financial Controller
for                 Bradford.

I have followed Liverpool F.C. for over 20 years, seeing on
average 20 games a season - including the Charlton, Luton,
Coventry, Derby and Sheffield games in recent weeks.
                      STATEMENT OF EVENTS

                    SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989

My ticket is Leppings Lane Standing Entrance B.     I have not
been into the Hillsborough Stadium before.       I was meeting
friends at 1.15 p.m. to 1.30 p.m. in the Fat Cat, Alma Street,
near the centre of Sheffield to go to Hillsborough together. I
drove south down the Ml to Junction 34 (Tinsley) arriving
before 1.00 p.m. - but then spent over 45 minutes travelling 4
miles to reach the city centre, late because of the traffic
congestion/roadworks.

We then travelled half the journey by car parking near Hillfoot
Bridge, Neapsnnd Lane where Forest fans had congregated.     We
walked up renistone Road, then up Parkside Road turning right
into Leppings ^Lane arriving at 2.35 p.m.   Penistone Road was
heavy with Forest fans.

In my opinion this time was comfortable bearing in mind that
the game was all ticket.    There was chaos in the narrow area
between Leppings Lane and the turnstiles.        There were 2
Policemen on horses outside the outer gate and 2 Policemen on
foot. No other Police were in sight. There appeared to be no
plan to the Police action when at the outer gate I noticed that
the ground gates to the right of the Entrance B were opened to
allow fans in directly. I was separated from my friends in the
crush by the panicking horses. In the mass of fans in the area
between the outer gates and the turnstiles, I headed for the
right of the turnstiles hoping to get to further turnstiles or
that the gates would be opened again.

The gates were opened for a second time and I entered the
ground at 2.50 p.m. without ticket inspection.   I still have
the full ticket.   In my opinion there was not a sufficient
crush to cause the gates to be opened.  There was no evidence
of any drunken behaviour - just many anxious people trying to
enter the ground.


Once inside the gates I was opposite the tunnel under the West
Stand and could see the pitch down the tunnel. From my ticket
map I assumed Entrance A and D led to the two corner areas
therefore I should go down the tunnel.         No Police were
before/in or at the end of the tunnel.
When through the tunnel I took to the right hand side to be
behind the goals.   It was still not kick off time.    I felt
uncomfortable as more and more fans kept coming down the
tunnel. I kept moving to the right heading away from the main
crush.

Soon after kick off I was getting squashed but still tried to
get to the right hoping that it would thin out towards the
corner of the ground.     There were no Police at the centre
behind the goal so whenthe first fans escaped to the edge of
the pitch the only immediate reaction was from the Press who
merely took photos of the crush.      It was nearly 5 minutes
between the crush becoming unbearable and any Police action.

As the game stopped I came upon a crash barrier and took the
risk of going underneath, but struggled to stand up. I managed
to move ftygtlmr to the right.   It was then I realised there
were fenced between the perimeter fence and the West Stand. I
was shoulder jfco shoulder with one fan who was next to the
fence.   He pursuaded supporters in the adjacent area to help
him climb and get over the fence.      I followed him over the
fence.   I then lay down and gradually recovered over the next
half hour. I saw no looting or any theft. I saw no Policemen
being attacked. The events between 3.10 p.m. and 4.00 p.m. are
well logged by T.V. so I have not covered them in any detail,
suffice it to say that there appeared to be insufficient
medical staff (i.e. St John's Ambulance volunteers/firemen) or
equipment (e.g. stretchers).
                                                                        m m             C*MC*M


                                  9
 if
    r

                                                        •*> .< r v H ^ y - • OB' ■
  The Official Programme is            :'if-                            ''r ‘ : ' : v
                                       >-■'■'■? ' t n z M ; y       •' *'■'■"   ”. . • • • ■ • J .
obtainable only at Hillsborough
              from
  Official Programme Sellers.
                                       ■       m   m    m       m


   BEWARE OF “PiRATE”
  PROGRAMME SELLERS.
                                                   &
                                                   CO                                         o
                                                   «fr m               N                      o
                                                   o _j             «* m
                                                   bl _j            n




                                  0>




  Mi'        ;X
                    HILLSBOROUGH QUESTIONS


Ticket allocations were clearly wrong. I would suggest
they should be in proportion to the average home gate. The
parking could have been as on match day, but Forest fans
use Parkside Road to reach Leppings Lane end.

Why was Junction 34 off the Ml used for Nottingham Forest
fans when there are diversions/roadworks which caused
considerable traffic delays.

The landlord of     the pub by Hillfoot bridge, Neepsend Lane
was interviewed     on ITV on 18 April. He was describing the
vast amounts of     alcohol consumed by fans - but did not
state that they     were Nottingham Forest supporters, instead
he impJgLeA' they   were Liverpool supporters.
          %
Many thousands of Forest fans must have arrived at the
Spion Kop turnstiles well after 2.35 p.m. Can the
electronic turnstile records show how many fans entered
the Spion Kop in the last 25 minutes compared to the
Leppings Lane end as the Liverpool fans accused of being
late; in my opinion more Forest fans were outside the
ground at 2.35 p.m.

The Police presence outside the Leppings Lane end was
minimal and inadequate. More officers should have been
there to do an initial ticket check to keep fans without
tickets well away from the turnstiles.

Why did the Police outside Leppings Lane not get the fans
to form queues. This is surely standard practice.

When the gates were opened the Police could still have
collected the ticket stubs as fans entered.

A better solution to cater for crowd safety outside the
ground would have been to delay the start by 15 minutes
to allow everyone to enter.
                                                             - 6 -

9.   The gates shown on BBC T.V. on 17 April and in the
     Financial Times on 18 April as the gates that were opened
     were not those that I entered the ground. The gates on
     T.V. were concertina metal gates to the left of turnstile
     B, I entered by wooden gates to the right of turnstile B.

10. The P.A. System should have been used to tell fans at the
    rear of the West Stand/outside that the central area was
    full. The video T.V.'s must have shown the concentration.
    The P.A. System could have given instructions how to get to
    the crowed - free areas. If the P.A. System was
    inadequate; then the Police/Ground Stewards could have done
    it.

11. The ticket ground plan needs clarifying. My ticket is
    Leppings Lane Standing Entrance B which the plan would lead
    you to the tunJSl'iimly. One would assume A and D have
    access to the corner terraces.

12. The tunnel was unlit and sloping downwards.     It would be
    far safer to be both properly lit and flat.

13. Why weren't the Police at either end/in the tunnel.

14. Why didn't the video T.V. show the crush and so action
    prior to kick off.

15. Why didn't the Press raise the alarm or help.

16. The Police action immediately after the game was stopped
    was very slow. Only a handful of Policemen were in the
    trouble spot.

17. Why were the fences across the uncovered standing area not
    taken down as the end was entirely Liverpool fans. The
    gates at the back of those fences should have been open.

18. Why didn't the Police have ladders or rope to pull fans
    out onto the ground fence.
19. Why was the immediate Police priority to create a Cordon
    across the pitch (approximately 100 Officers were out in
    the middle) when only a small number were assisting the
    crushed. Where were all the other Police.

20. Why wasn't the P.A.. System used properly. Instead of
    telling fans to get off the pitch it should have told the
    Forest fans what was happening and also asked for medical
    people in the ground; many doctors must have been in the
    ground unaware of the crisis. The P.A. could also have
    told fans to go back up the tunnel.

21. Why did there appear to be such a shortage of medical
    staff. Why was there such a lack of any medical equipment.

22. I was annoyed by the immediate T.V./Radio comments,
    partjfcuifarly from Mr Kelly. Why say the gates were forced
    by fans githout tickets if you are unsure. The Police
    waited until 7.00 p.m. before admitting that they had
    opened the gates. Why the four hour delay!
