CK
                    HILLSBOROUGH INCIDENT - Saturday, 15 th April, 1909.

Duties of:-
          r O ci
          i v,*..

Pc953 John MITGGLESTGNS,
C1 Sub Division.

Member of Seriel 53*

Inspector in Charge - Inspector CHAFLFS.

Sergeant in Charge - Sgt. Sown.

Sir,

On Saturday, 15 th April, 1989t I paraded on duty at Kain Street at f.h5am
and with other officers was then conveyed to the pre-match briefing at
Hillsborough StadiuE.

The duties of seriel 53 prior to the game were the supervision of tfce arrival
of coaches carrying Notts Forest supporters to the ground, and their allotted
parking area at the Ferries Hoad bus depot. This duty was carried out without
incident, as generally sneaking, the supporters were in high spirits, but
generally well behaved. As early as from 10.-Cam. I received requests for
directions to public houses, mainly from Forest fans, but from a few Liverpool
supporters, who, for some reason or other had found their way to the Fenistone
Road end of the ground.

Shortly before kick off, I was first made aware of a problem developing at
Leppings Lane, but, in accordance with instructions, at about 3.5pm. we were
instructed to make our way on foot to Claywheels Lane, for stand 8 & M by duties
and refreshments.

On route however, we were diverted to attend at the Leppings Lane end.

Shortly after arriving there, Seriel 53 was directed into the ground through
entrance C. The forecourt at that time had been partially cleared, but it was
obvious something serious had occurred by the conduct of supporters. I personally
was approached by several youths, obviously angry and annoyed, and was subjected
to verbal abuse, because in their view, we were late arriving. I was then
physically manhandled towards the tunnel beneath the West Stand.

On entering the tunnel, I was met with several people carrying ’bodies' out
and my first duty was to assist two fans with one such person whom they were havin
difficulty with because of his size. This person at that time was still alive
ana on reaching the forecourt, I commenced resuscitation before being relieved
by an ambulance man.

I then re-entered the tunnel and went to the terracing, referred to as Pen 3»
The first thing that struck me was the stench of stale perspiration,and alcohol.
Fans were .-creaming at me and other officers to 'get s u m a t done’. I went to the
foot of the terrace and saw a ’pile' of persons. It seemed to me they were at
least 5 or 6 deep. Entwined in these bodies was part of a crush barrier which
had collapsed.

I then began to remove the first ’body* I could get hold of which was partly
trapped by the crush barrier. Eventually it was released and dragged through
the perimeter fence gate on to the pitch. I was satisfied that person was dead
and could be no further helped. I therefor went back on to the terrace and assiste
in the recovery to the pitch, of a further k persons. In my view, they were
beyond help.

By this time, advertising hoarding were being made into make shift stretchers
and fans were placing 'bodies’ thereon and conveying them to the genistone Road
                                                                           cont...
end of the ground.

In my view their efforts were doomed to failure, but I did not consider
it prudent to try and tell their that at that time. They were obviously
very angry, distraught and upset, and most of them were influenced by
alcohol* and would not have listened to reason at that time.

I therefore assisted one such party to convey a youth to the stand near to the
entrance to the gymnasium. I supervised the placing of the stretcher under
the stand and made an examination of the person, but satisfied myself that
life appeared to be extinct. One of the fans with me „t that time obviously
knew the deceased, so I advised him to remain with the body. I then returned
via the pitch to the Leppings Lane end.

By that time, as far as I could see, all the bodies had been removed from the terra
either on to the pitch or out cf the ground.

I was then involved for what seemed a lengthy period in generally trying to placate
irate Liverpool supporters.

At one point, I had to intervene to prevent a newspaper photographer being
physically assaulted for trying to take pictures of deceased and grieving
relatives. In my view, their conduct was reprehensible and is not justified
by them stating that they are 'just doing their job'.

There was a brief moment also when the Forest fans taunted the Liverpool fans
which caused the latter to run towards the penistone Road end of the ground
and in my view, had not the fences been in place at that end, there may well
have been a serious law and order situation break out as well. This appeared to
be later controlled by a line of officers across the pitch.

During this time, I became separated from the rest of Seriel 53   andsaw no member
of it again that day.

My nexf direct instruction was to assist in diplomatically trying to persuade
Liverpool fans to leave the ground which was eventually achieved.

Thereafter, having failed to locate any other seriel member, I made my way
back to Claywheelg^ane fpx eventually stand down, and return to d .




      <j.Kuggiestone
2nd June, 1 9 8 9 .
