              J Sheffield Archives Ref:                                                        M IR .15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                       k 1    Datp anH time raised        l                 1 1 /3 0   Numher
                                                                                                                    ryrtb.
                                          K\ <   ^ v ,j o                          v
                                                                                                                     OuhM
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions - urgent action
                                                               ’f       )    '         -   t      Qoegr                Receiver
&     t ( 6T              u f;
                                                                                                                    3 1 ^Q
                                                                                                                           Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised      ^
                                                                                                                         5 Reader
                                                                                                                   Statement
                                                                                                                         lent Rea-
Statement reader's instructions   ApOt* . No (nMh                       NMj/iAiJJlU        •




                                                                                                                           Indexe
Indexed as indicated                                                        j>   s» i>
No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                    0 /M            SIO
Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                           Indexer
Further action No(s)
                                                                                                                   if®1p $. i r
When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                                       |4i
                                                      GJD/AMS


Derbyshire
                                                      21 April 1989




Dear Sir


REt irruJMQimnm - |$ APRIL 1989


X a® grateful to you for writing and the information that you included
in your letter Kill be of great interest to ay investigative teas.

It may be that we shall be to touch with you again to take up the points
that you have made.

Thank you very ouch for writing,


tours faithfully




Chief Constable
                                                      Derbyshire


                                                      Telephone

                                                      16th April, 1989.

Dear Sir,

                 Nottingham ForesC'^LiVerpool - 15.4.89

           Yesterday it was my misfortune to attend the Notts Forest v Liverpool
F.A. Cup Semi-Final in Sheffield and the events I witnessed there, what I have
subsequently read in newspapers, and what I have seen on T.V. has prompted me to
write to you.

           I am not a supporter of either Club but over the last 30 years I must
have attended over 1,000 Football matches in over 50 grounds. I drove to Sheffield
with my l8 year old son who had purchased two tickets in Nottingham arriving on the
City side of Hillsborough shortly before 1.30pm. It was a lovely day. We had lunch
on grass by the car before setting out in what was a carnival atmosphere at 1.45pm.
I have been to Hillsborough on many occasions before but never have I seen so much
drinking in the streets before the game. Crowds, all Nottingham Forest supporters,
had gathered outside pubs drinking from glasses, cans, or bottles they were
carrying with them. Many empty cans, bottles, and glasses littered the floor. I
suspect the same applied to Liverpool supporters at the other end.

           On arriving at the ground at 2.00pm we went straight inside to stand at
the very back of the Spion Kop - can I say at this stage if I had not got a ticket
I would nave not gone to Sheffield at all. I was suprised at tftis early time to see
the centre of the terraces at the opposite end of the ground tightly packed with
swaying supporters whist the wings were almost deserted. Even at kick-off time the
wings at the Liverpool end were not full which was most supprising as all tickets
had been sold. We were not aware of the mayhem outside the ground at kick-off time
which was obviously caused by a) Ticket holders arriving late, and b) Many people
arriving without tickets at all. Could not the kick-off have been delayed or did
no one inside realise what was happening outside? Those on the terraces at 2.00pm
were obviously ticket holders. They were well behaved, patient, and not like those
who arrived at the last minute - worse for drink.

           What happened at 3»07pm and subsequently is now history but it was
obvious that the Liverpool terraces had suddenly filled to full and overflowing
very quickly.

           Being aware that football supporters from the City of Liverpool have no
regard for authority or the need to purchase tickets in advance it comes as no
suprise that many thousands turned up at the turnstiles without tickets. I suspect
the common purpose was to gain admission for everyone especially as press reports
since the draw was made had made great play on the 'unfairness' to the 'loyal*
Liverpool supporters. Was there no Police intellegence from Liverpool with regard
to numbers travelling without tickets- As yet I have heard no condemnation of the
thousands who intended to gain illegal entry into the ground and my sympathy lies
with the Police commander who was faced with a riot outside the ground or risk a
crush inside. In retrospect I am sure he/she will agree that it was wrong to open
the gates but I am also sure that had he/she not done so the supporters with and
without tickets would have broken down gates and gained admission.


                                                               Contd
             The truth of the matter is that the hooligan element have won again.
They have escaped criticism and at the same time as killing 100 true Liverpool
supporters who ha-3 sufficient foresight to arrive early and properly they have
managed to point an accusing finger at the Police.

             This is not to say that the Police are free from criticisn. No one
seemed to be in charge. Many of those officers who were rushed into the ground, like
me, did not appear to know what was going on or what to do. The least that could
have been expected was swift and truthful loudspeaker annoucements and appeals -
there was none. Whether the maniacs pushing in at the back would have backed off we
shall never know but it would have been worth a try.

             Where does this all leave us for the future? I have heard cries for
all seater stadiums, and it looks as though identity cards will be introduced.
Neither would have prevented the horrors of yesterday as those who intended to gain
entry would have done so. In fact matters may have been worse.

             I am sorry to be so negative but I just don't know what to suggest.
I do make the following recommendations which may help:-

1. The building of a new and second National Stadium in the north so it and/or
   Wembley can both be used for big matches.

2. The use of more video cameras to monitor crowd movements in streets up to 200
   yards away from grounds.

3.Perimeter fencing consisting of hugh swinging type gates which when unlocked
   and opened can allow easy access to the pitch (keep the small gates for the
   Police and stewards to enter the terraces).

4. Audible and efficient loudspeaker systems are essential both inside and outside
   all grounds no matter how small.

5. Better medical and first aid facilities are required by law.

6. Ground stewards and Police should be issued with personal radios on a ratio of
   1 radio to two persons so they all can be made aware at an early stage of what
   is required rather than passing messages by word of mouth.

              Thankyou for taking the time to read my letter.



                                         Yours faithfully,




  Copies to:-
  Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
  Chief Constable, West Midlands
  Colin MOYNIHAN M.P.
  The Football Association.
