                                       ~7' /V^rrS T2
                                   /^) l


                           SUMMARY OF 1988 SEMI-FINAL

                         VIDEO TAPES (1 - 1, 1 - 2 and 2)


CONCLUSIONS


1.     3' portable barrier appears to be across some of the open outer
        perimeter gates leading to the A - G turnstiles.

       Stewards are by these barriers.

       Stewards are more noticeable in this area.

2.     There are two sets of Portable Barriers in the service road which
        effectively isolates Gate C.

3.     Foot Officers are evident outside the perimeter gates.

4.     There is a 3' Police Barrier inside the West Stand Enclosure byGate C
       which appears to contain Programme Sellers.

5.     There is a continual steady influx of fans - no serious pushing or
        trying to force the outer perimeter gates.

6.     There is no sudden influx of fans.

7.     On the approach to the A - G turnstiles only one outer perimeter gate
        is open and this appears to cope adequately with the numbers approaching
        the turnstiles.

8.     The fans appear to be clearing from the concourse area quite quickly.

9.     Fans are more orderly outside, no pushing or apparent pressure put on
        the outer perimeter gates. No apparent pressure in the concourse areas.

10. Police Officers are in the terraces by the centre tunnel.

11. The Southern Pens on the terracing are filled.

12.     In the pens the fans are generally more calmer and outside they are
        more leisurely.




D.S.
                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                             HILLSBOROUGH INCIDENT

                                  15 APRIL 1989

                          SUMMARY OF VIDEO TAPES MARKED
                           No 1 - 1 SEMI FINAL 9.4.88
                              No 1 - 2 SEMI FINAL
                             No 2 SEMI FINAL 9 A .88


TAPE NO 1 - 1

Commences at 1007 and shows views of inside and outside the ground. 1153
shows views of the service road with barriers across isolating Gate C. By
mid-day a small number of fans at Leppings Lane, they begin to gain access
to the terraces. Stewards are by outer perimeter gates. Police are there
and in the service road and the enclosure.

From mid-day a slight build up of fans occurs at Leppings Lane - of no
significance.

Tape concludes at 1306.

TAPE NO 1 - 2

1307     The tape commences and shows views of Leppings Lane and Penistone
         Road outside the turnstiles, and views within the ground. They
         switch from scene to scene on a timed basis. There is a
         distinctive difference in quality compared with the views shown of
         the scene on 15 April 1989- The 1988 video tape shows clearer
         pictures. The views on Leppings Lane are directed towards the
         A - G turnstile area. The 1 - 16 turnstiles are visible but not
         clear.

         The views of Leppings Lane from this time shows two mounted
         officers by the outer perimeter gates.

         There are fans in the area but they are sparse, most of them just
         remaining in the vicinity of Leppings Lane.

         Vehicular traffic     is moving along Leppings Lane

         A foot officer is by one of the open outer perimeter gates leading
         to the 1 - 1 6 Concourse area checking fans as they come through,
         other foot officers are in the area. The pace of everyone appears
         leisurely.

         There appears to be a 3' high portable barrier across the
         open outer perimeter gates leading to the A - G Concourse area
         which causes fans   to file through an open outer perimeter gate
         nearest the large dividing fence.

         Official stewards are by this portable barrier.
                                   -   2   -




1310.16   At the top of Pens 3 and 4 where the mouth of the tunnel is
          situated a Police Officer is present. He is later joined by
          another officer. Fans are continually filing into the pens but the
          space is available.

1312      A Police transit van is shepherding fans alongLeppings Lane and
          is assisted by a dog van and mounted officers.

1317      Views show the concourse area and footpaths along Leppings Lane
          have a build up of fans.
          The 3' portable barrier is still in position and manned by
          stewards.
          The fans appear to be entering the ground so there is no compaction
          within the concourse area.

1327      Pens 3 and 4 contain a good number of fans but they are not
          tightly packed at this time.

1329      Plenty of space in West Stand seating area.

1330      Fans on Leppings Lane footpath approaching concourse area which is
          not packed.
          3' high portable barrier is still across the outer perimeter gates
          leading to the A - G concourse.
          The outer perimeter gates leading to the 1 - 1 6 concourse area
          appear to be open and fans are entering.
          Mounted and foot officers are present and stewards are visible.
          It appears a serial of officers are deployed by the outer
          perimeter gates.

1331.42   Police are present in the enclosure by the A - G turnstiles.

1333      Pen 6 has plenty of space available. Pen 4 has a lot of fans but
          they are loose.
          The gate on the back of the terracing separating Pens 2 and 3 is
          open.

1337      A number of foot officers are evident outside the outer perimeter
          gates.

1343      3' portable barrier across service road by Gate C. There is a 3'
          portable barrier in the West Stand Enclosure by Gate C which
          creates a possible sterile area about 10' wide by the boundary
          wall.   It appears programme sellers are in this area.

          The barrier across the service road by Gate C has stewards in
          attendance.

          A number of Police Officers are in the "sterile area" between the
          portable barriers by Gate C and the outer perimeter gates.

1347      Shows the service road has two sets of portable barriers either
          side of Gate C which in effect steriles the area of Gate C outside
          in the service road.

          Stewards are by one barrier.         A number of Police Officers are by
          the other barrier.
1347.47   A steward is closing the outer perimeter gate on the river-side by
          the service road. Police Officer of rank is present.

1348      An influx of fans coming along Leppings Lane is being escorted by
          a Police transit van. They are starting to fill the road. Mounted
          and foot officers are present.

1350      Plenty of space in Southern Pen.

1352.50    Shows rear of Pen 4 to be quite full. Fans are jumping up and
          down. Fans are stood on the brick wall at the back of Pen 4 by the
          tunnel.

1353.35   Shows the areas on both sides of the outer perimeter gates to be
          filling with fans.
          Large number of fans approaching along Leppings Lane.

          Access to the A - G Concourse area is by the open perimeter gate by
          the large dividing fence.

1356      West Stand seating area has plenty of space. Pens 3 and 4 are
          filling up. Southern Pen has plenty of space. Police Officers in
          the enclosure watching fans coming through the turnstiles

1400      Terracing behind goals (Pens 3 and 4) are packed with fans but they
          are comfortable. The tunnel area is packed with fans. Unable to
          see any Police presence. West Stand seating area shows ample room.

          Fans are approaching along Leppings Lane and the concourse areas
          are beginning to fill. On approach to the A - G Concourse area the
          outer perimeter gates by the service road are closed and fans are
          gaining access by the gate nearest the large dividing fence.
          Mounted and foot officers are present and stewards can be seen.

          The concourse area does not become compact and it is assumed they
          are going efficiently through the turnstiles.
           There is minor swaying in Pens 3 and 4.

          There is ample space in the enclosure, Police are present.

1407.04   Heavy surge in Pen 3-

1408.30   Shows clearer views of stewards in attendance by outer perimeter
          gates.

1409.46   Stewards closing outer perimeter gates after allowing a vehicle
          to leave. Foot officers by gates.

1411      At this time fans on    Leppings Lane appear orderly - no pushing -
          Gates are opened for    a short time but there is no attempt to rush
          through and fans are    still filing through the open gateby the
          large dividing fence    where a mounted officer is present.
1411 .40   The central outer perimeter gate leading to the A - G turnstiles is
           opened and fans walk through at a leisurely pace.

1412 .09   Break in the tape.

1412 .20   Views begin again.

           Fans are congregating outside the perimeter gates.

1413 .47   Fans are jumping up and down in Pen 3. A Police Officer is at the
           rear of Pen 3 near the tunnel and later another officer is visible.

1414 .05   The central outer perimeter gate leading to the A - G turnstiles
           is now closed.

1414 .17   Some people being allowed through Gate C.
           Views of Pens 3 and 4 show it to be quite full.    Fans jumping and
           surging.

1419 .02   Officers on foot outside perimeter gates within the crowd.

           Swaying of fans is mainly in Pen 3.

1422 .22   Southern Pen is sparsely filled with fans.    Plenty of room.

1430       Fans are approaching turnstiles along footpath on Leppings Lane.
           Vehicular traffic is moving.
           The perimeter gate is open near the large dividing fence leading
           to the A - G turnstiles and fans are filing through. Mounted are
           present. The central gate and the one by the river-side
           appear closed with stewards nearby.
           Fans are entering the 1 - 16 turnstiles.
           The service road remains clear.

           Police are in the enclosure watching fans coming through the A - G
           turnstiles. The enclosure is relatively clear of fans.

           Southern Pen has plenty   of space.
           Pen 3 looks packed with   fans.
           West Stand seating area   is filling.
           The fans are reasonably   still.

           As time proceeds fans begin to enter the service road area but no
           problems are apparent.

1436. 25   Southern Pen is filling up.    Police Officers are within
           the crowd at the rear.

1439       Minor sfirging in Southern Pen.

           Pen 3 is packed but comfortable, space available at the front.
                                   -   5   -




1441      Slight increase in number of fans entering concourse areas. There
          is never a build up which causes a back log on to Leppings Lane
          itself. Service road area still clear. Mounted and foot officers
          are evident in the area.

          The A - G turnstile concourse area looks full of fans but it does
          appear to be comfortable.

          The 1 - 1 6 turnstile concourse area shows movement of fans
          indicating there is a lot of space available

1442      Fans attempting to climb from terracing into West Stand seating
          area. Prevented by Police.

1450      No significant change in events. Fans approaching the concourse
          areas appear to be dwindling. No apparent pressure outside the
          outer perimeter gates. Fans in concourse areas. Service road
          clear. Enclosure has plenty of space and Police are present.

          West Stand seating area is filling.

          Only the one outer perimeter gate leading to the A - G turnstiles
          is open. There appears to be free access to the 1 - 16 turnstile
          concourse area with free movement of fans.

          Fan climbing from terracing into West Stand seating area.

          Vehicles still moving along Leppings Lane.

          Only restricted views now of Leppings Lane and Pens 3 and 4.

1459*50   Leppings Lane is significantly less crowded.    The concourse
          areas are clearing.

          Pens 3 and 4 are quite full.

          Fans still coming through turnstiles. Southern pens are full of
          fans but they are comfortable. Surging in the pens towards the
          front.

          Fans coming through turnstiles are leisurely.

1502.05   Heavy surging - Pen 3.

          Fans almost clear at Leppings Lane - few stragglers approaching.

          As time progresses there is continued surging in the terraces.

1502.44   Two Police Officers at back of terracing by centre tunnel.

1510.12   Fan climbs from terracing to West Stand seating.

1514.54   Leppings Lane is clear of fans.
155^.23   Fans in numbers are climbing from terracing to West Stand seating
          area.

1603.58   Tape concludes.


TAPE NO 2

This tape contains views shown in tapes 1 - 1 and 1 - 2 and are in a fast-
forward mode. Additional views are of pictures within the ground and fans
leaving after the game has finished.
