                Hillsborough Family Support Group
               FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION


TO:                     Mr Richard Wells - Chief Constable
COMPANY:                South Yorkshire Police_____

FAX NO:                 Trevor Hicks

FROM:
DATE:                   23   October 1991

NO OF PAGES:                     including this on*




SUBJECT:            HILLSBOROUGH    disaster




Herewith my open letter which will be released to the Press at
11.00 an this morning.   Could you please ensure the necessary
people are advised*
Regards,




TREVOR HICKS
   flttfE MTTB*   -   I88?EP BX FAX AT   U . 00   AM   -   23RD   OCTOBER 1»»1


 TO: MR RICHARD WELLS - CHIEF CONSTABLE, SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

      BRIGADIER POWNALL - POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
      MR DAVID DUCKENFIELD

      MR BERNARD MURRAY



 BIL1SBOROUOH/POLIC8 DISCIPLINE

 It is now some months        since the Police Complaints Authority

 instructed the South Yorkshire Police to instigate disciplinary

proceedings against Messrs Duckenfield and Murray in respect of

the Hillsborough Disaster on the 15th April 1989.



Nothing has, so far, happened - allegedly due to Mr Duckenfield's

incapacity on undisclosed sickness grounds.



Whilst we regret Mr Duckenfield's illness, the investigation of

the   Hillsborough     Disaster   remains a       matter    for    deep   public

concern and it is totally unacceptable for the current stalemate

to continue.      The healing process and the restoration of the

public's confidence in both the Police and the Judicial Process

can only begin when these matters are adequately dealt with.



On the 24th of October 1991 it will be 90 days since the 26th of

July, when Mr Duckenfield commenced sick leave.              He will then be

entitled to apply for early retirement on ill health grounds and

the disciplinary matters relating to him would automatically
lapse.
Whilst Acknowledging Mr Duckenfield's right to take this course

of action I implore him not to exercise this option but to grasp

the opportunity of clearing his name by?-



1.   Submitting himself for independent medical assessment.

2.   Allowing the disciplinary tribunals to proceed with him

     being legally represented - thus sparing him the rigours of

     the tribunal, yet ensuring his interests are protected.



Similarly 1 call upon the South Yorkshire Chief Constable Mr

Richard Wells and the Police Complaints Authority to immediately

begin the disciplinary proceedings involving Mr Murray.



AS long ago as October 1989 the All-Party Home Affairs Committee

of MP's fully endorsed the retirement statement of the first

Chairman of the Police Authority, Sir C e d i Clothier QC, who:-

a)   Castigated some Police Forces for delaying disciplinary

     proceedings and falling to prosecute them with vigour.

b)   Expressed concern over the ever-increasing number of cases

     involving officers who were allowed to retire, whilst they

     were under investigation.

c)   He called upon the Home Office to set up a Board to review

     all applications for medical retirements under these

     c ircumstance s .

d)   Called for tougher action to be taken even when an

     Officer was found to be unfit and granted medical

     retirement.

e)   Called for time limits, to be introduced by the end of

     1989, to eliminate delays in disciplinary proceedings.
One can hardly expect myself, other members of the Hillsborough

families,   or   indeed the general public to accept   indefinite

delays and/or this matter not being brought to a satisfactory

conclusion.



I implore all those concerned to prevent further distress and

acrimony by dealing with these outstanding matters immediately.




TREVOR HICKS

                                       NORTH YORKSHIRE.

TEL* I             I(HOME), i       ~1 (OFFICE)
