                                                                                          M IR .15




               C UM E NT FORM                   Date and tim e raised                                Number



T itle
(Include source and any document number if relevant)

                                                   Qcu
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No _ z rx "
                                                               rc       Ca      t     Ovex/rvi
                                                                                                                  Receiver
          W     U   v S


                                                                                                                     Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                 044           .



                                                                                                              Statem ent Reader
Statement reader's instructions                                         i(£3t
                                                                                                                v^-7.,«=?

                                                                                                                     Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No|s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                              0 /M     I   S10
Examined - ■ fu rth e r action to be taken                                                                    ^        1           .




                                                                                                                     Indexer
 Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
                                                                 JMJ/DH

                                                                 15 June 1989




 East Kilbride
 GLASGOW




Dear Mr

COMBHSS OH CRU&I BARRIER IHSPECTHW AND TESHSG




S = E ^ 3 S = S T “'ss«'~“
S S S E r-^ w s a s a s s s .
If I need to contact you further or respond to your comments t w i n an ««
in response to your very kind invitation?           comments I will do so

Yours sincerely




 mroi
          t Chief Constable (H.I.)
                                                                              1



                                                             JNJ/DH

                                                              15 JUtae 1989
                                                                              *1
Dr W Eastwood
Ea3 twood Consultant Eng.
Kingfield Road
SHEFFIELD




Dear Dr Eastwood

TESTIHG OF BARRIERS

I an trying to locate the test data which relates to the examination of all
t h ™ e S barriers which were examined In 1983. it the present tine the
Health and Safety Executive have been given an indication of the results of
those tests but not the supporting data similar to that produced to lord
Justice Taylor's Inquiry in respect of the 1988 tests.

I wonder if you could help me by checking your records to see if you have
In your possession those barrier testing record sheets. If so, I will
arrange for an officer to collect than from you without delay.

An early response would be appreciated by Lord Justice Taylor, preferably
by fax.
 I thank you in anticipation of your co-operation.




      jtant Chief Constable
                                                              JMJ/DH

                                                              15 June 1989




 Mr G Mackrell
 Secretary
 Sheffield Wednesday
 Football Club
 Penniston Road North
 Sheffield




Dear Mr Mackrell


TESTING OF BARRIERS

I as trying to locate the test data which relates to the examination of all
those crash barriers which were examined in 1983. At the present time the
Health and Safety Executive have been given an indication of the results of
those tests but not the supporting data similar to that produced to Lord
Justice Taylor's Inquiry in respect of the 1988 tests.

I wonder if you could help me by checking your records to see if you have
in your possession those barrier testing record sheets. If so, I will
arrange for an officer to collect them from you without delay.

An early response would be appreciated by Lord Justice Taylor, preferably
by fax.                                                                 J

I thank you in anticipation of your co-operation.
V m m xi      »»




Assistant Chief Constable
                                                                  15 June 1989



SGS Laboratories
Materials Testing Division
89-91 Livery Street
Birmingham
B3 1RJ




Dear Mr Armltage

MECHANICAL BARRIER PROCEDURES

I would just like to say thank you for responding so quickly to my faxed
letter of 13 June 1989 requesting information on your procedures.

I have passed on the information you supplied to Lord Justice Taylor and his
technical assessor. They have both asked me to thank you for the most
useful information you supplied, together with the very prompt way in which
you responded.

If it is felt necessary to make further contact with you, I do hope you
Will not mind me doing so.

Thank you once again.   There is no need to respond to this letter.




       it)Chief Constable (H.I.)
Nuttall Yarwood & Partners
3 Marningham Villas
Bradford                                                          JMJ/DH
BD8 HB
                                                                  15 June 1989


Dear Sir

I am currently leading an investigation into the Hillsborough disaster on
behalf of Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry.

Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to contact companies who undertake crush
barrier testing in order to establish how they go about their research and
in particular tow they Interpret Annex C 'Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds.' On initial reading there does seem to be seme confusion on the
precise interpretation of recovery rates.

It would be helpful for me to know as soon as possible how you interpret
Annex C, particularly as it relates to the recovery, i.e. do you relate
your recovery to the first test, second or third? Have you any other
observations to make upon Annex C.

The second question relates to determining the capacity of grounds, and in
particular pens. Again the Green Guide helps on Pages 64-69. Have you any
experience of this kind of work? If not, can you refer us to anybody who
can help?

Thirdly, have you any observations cm the appropriateness or otherwise of
the Green Guide? Lord Justice Taylor is particularly interested where
there say be anomalies, confusions or ambiguities, which may be helpful at
tnls time to rosody•

I do hope you will be able to help our inquiry into this matter
Treasury Solicitors
c/o Town Hail
Surrey Street
SHEFFIELD
SI 2HH




I forward herewith the procedures adopted by S.G.S. Inspection Services
in respect of mechanical barrier testing. The documentation represents
extracts from their Procedure Manual.

I have also asked for other companies to be contacted to see what their
procedures are and I will write again in due course.




   EHC

  Copies sent to   Mr R M Whalley, Professor Maunder and Dr Nicholson
