                                                                                           MIR.15


OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised       i                               Number



Title
          (V cJ? cj                            {b e      t=r-7 c p ^ -^ K s r ^ ^ 'i   6 c ^ ^ \ j ^ \ C & >r[<JS£s

{Include source and any document number if relevant)


Receiver's instructions - urgent action    i/N o
                                                                                                                          Receiver



                                                                                                                       3~?3C
                                                                                                                           ?
                                                                                                                             Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                      Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions

                                                                                                                       3 1 3 D
                                                                                                                             Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                      O /M         SIO
Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
—    ----                 VrftS


          4 •- t . */*. o   ,           »*■«■•*»«■,-   -■




    6p^)


    [jC^A                               /


    ■^rtva^vt y                 ^
      j      — ' ff   -
    1/t-i ^nw-(/S .
                          ^         ^     4(K^m
          cfrtVH*
0



                                                                        ACTION

4(xv)   HXLLSBOROOGH FOOTBALL TRAGEDY - COMMUNICATIONS DIFFICULTIES

        Following discussion at the last Ccmnunications Group
        meeting on the 20th June 1989, and the T.A.R.C meeting
        held cxi the 13th July, Mpssrs. CROMPTON and GAUKE were
        requested to oversee a Wbrking Group to examine additional
        frequency requirements.

        Chief   Superintendent GAUKE   presented    a   paper   (copy
        attached at Appendix 'G').

        He explained the Working Group recaimended the following        Recommendation'
        allocation    of emergency channels to meet foreseeable         approved.
        service requirements.                                           Referred to
                                                                        TARC


           (a)   Four channels for unplanned emergency use.
                 These would     be two frequency channels for
                  semi-duplex working.

           (b)   Eight channels for policing planned events and
                  for in-Force squads as a secondary use. These
                 also    to   be   two   frequency channels for
                  semi-duplex working.

           (c)   Eight single frequency (simplex) channels for
                  use by Force squads utilising the base station
                  transmit frequencies of the same eight channels
                  in Recommendation (b) above.

                 These    reccnme notations   included   the   four
                 channels    already     allocated    as   national
                 emergency channels.

        It was strongly recommended that the twelve two-frequency
        channels and the eight single frequency channels should be
        allocated national channel numbers common to all Forces.

        The Chairman welcomed the paper and said that, in view of
        the pressing requirement for additional emergency channels
        Radio Frequency Planning Group (R.F.P.G.) should make the
        recommended allocation available as soon as possible.

        Mr. POOLEY said that, officially, they did not get the
        frequency band until the end of this year. Nevertheless,
        the Secretary had    written asking for the matter to be
        given   some   urgency   and it was possible that the
        channels might get earlier release.     He said that, at
        worst, they    would   be available by the end of the year
        but he would strive to make it earlier.

        The Chairman then asked for a report on the question of
        noise interference at football matches and recalled that
        this aspect had been referred to S.R.D.B. and P.R.S.U.
USE AND EXPANSION OF POLICE UHF EMERGENCY CHANNELS



INTRODUCTION
Four national UHF emergency channels are currently available to
police forces in England and Wales.  These are two-frequency
channels operating through fixed or mobile base stations.  It has
become common practice for these channels to be used not only for
unplanned emergency police operations but also for planned events
(eg policing football matches), and for in-group communications by
various squads within forces.
Following representation by a number of forces to the Radio
Frequency Planning Group (RFPG) of the Home Office for additional
UHF emergency channels the head of the RFPG prepared a paper
inviting the ACPO Communications Group to identify and recommend a
service requirement.  This is in the context of the prospect of
additional UHF channels becoming available to the police in 1990.
Mr Pooley's paper dated 31 May, 1989 is attached at Annex B.

At its meeting on 20 June, 1989, the ACPO Communications Group
requested Mr Crompton to form a sub-group to consider the issue
and make recommendations (item 7 d. of minutes dated 20 June, 1989 _
refers).  This sub-group met on 25 July, 1989.  Details of members
are attached at Annex A.

ISSUES ARISING
The sub-group agreed that Mr Pooley's paper of 31 May, 1989
accurately reflected the current position and highlighted well the
major problems.  In particular it was agreed that the requirement
for emergency channels fell into three broad categories ie:-

     i.    Unplanned emergencies

     ii.   Planned events

      iii. In-group communications by force squads

In reaching its conclusions the sub-group took account of the
following:-
      a.   Mr Pooley indicated that the exact number of additional
           UHF channels likely to become available is not yet
           known. He believed it may be in      region of thirty
           six, with twenty becoming available in late 1989 or in
           1990 and the balance being releasd in about two years
           time.
      b.   Mr Pooley also stated that there are numerous demands
           for expansion of U H F sub-divisional schemes as well as
           for ad-hoc purposes. These will have to be met from the
           additional channels which will become available. It is
           necessary to recognise that channels set aside for
           emergency use will not be available for, and therefore
           inhibit, expansion of every day force schemes.
         t +-
            is necessary to take into account equipment
         limitations? ^The ninety-nine channel UHF personal
         radios in common use will however accommodate h
         additional channels recommended in this paper. Tn         1
         mobile/portable base stations also in common use will
         however accommodate only 10 channels. This is below the
         totSl number recommended in this paper and some in force
         prioritising will be required as a .c°?seq“®"°e;he
                  v... +.v,0 n of Tels representative that the
         specification for n L ' b a s e stations is for synthesised
         multi-channel working.

d        The problem of inadequate m m b e r s of                        timeS®13


                   of^these*and^til^leave channels l i a b l e                 for
          un—planned emergencies.
          With the Hillsborough Enquiry in mind the sub-group
"        considered that provision must be made ter                            of
          two dedicated UHF channels for each major event.
          It will be recognised that by their nature emergency
          channels will lie dormant for much of the time and in
          that sense can be considered an Vn“ec°£om^ bU ®® °
          scarce spectrum. With this in mind, the sub-group
          considered that separate                      ^j°
           allocate^for^planne^event^should be S e i s e d for this
           Duroose   It was the view of the sub-group that use of
           these channels by squads should be secondary, planned
           events having first claim.
    a     All emergency channels should be two-frequency semi
    g*    duplex working, as is the case now. However    h-. sub--
           group recognise that force squads, on occasions, have a

            SSilSEfthS; S
                        it”Pi i ^ o i S
                                      sei5erSdS?hitW?he eight channels
            recommended for planned events !3hOUg£.tlon                              —
            as simplex channels using the base
            frequency in each «*•«.             ^
    h      The sub-group explored the possibility of using a UHF

                M                                                              k
            purpose.
    i      The sub-group considered the question of an inter
            service command channel.     H   o   w this requirement is
                                                     e   v   e   r   ,


            aireadv being addressed by Mr M o r n t t in the area of
            ? « ? 2 h yand Rescue communications - ACp o communications
            Group minutes of 20 June, item 4.2 d refers.

                                     2
■/ ■JF .
/ E.R.
                     group supported the need for such a channel but this
                     should be in addition to the recommendations in this
                     paper.

           RECOMMENDATIONS
           The Emergency Channel Sub-Group recommends the following
           allocation of emergency channels to meet foreseeable service
           requirements while at the same time not impinging excessively on
           other demands for UHF channels:-
                                        V

                a.   Four channels for un-planned emergency use. These
                     should be two-frequency channels for semi duplex
                     working.
                b.   Eight channels to be made available for policing planned
                     events and for in-force squads as a secondary use.
                     These also to be two-frequency channels for semi duplex
                     working.
                c.   Eight single frequency (simplex) channels to be made
                     available for use by force squads utilising the base
                     station transmit frequencies of the same eight channels
                     in recommendation b. above.

           These recommendations include the four channels already allocated
           as national emergency channels.
           It is strongly recommended that all twelve two-frequency channels
           and also the eight single frequency channels are allocated
           national channel numbers common to all forces.
           There is a pressing requirement for additional emergency channels
           and it is recommended that the RFPG is urged to make the
           recommended allocations as soon as possible.




           J Gajiyke
           Chief Superintendent
           Police Requirements
           Support Unit

           14 September 1989




                                             3
                  EMERGENCY CHANNEL SUB-GROUP


                     TUESDAY 25 JULY, 1989




PRESENT:



Ch Supt Gauke                    PRSU (Chairman)

Supt Cope                        Greater Manchester Police

Insp Evans                       West Midlands Police

Supt Fairless                    Devon and Cornwall Police



Supt Hargreaves             )
                            )    Essex
Sgt                         )

WPC                              Public Order Forward
                                 Planning Unit

Insp Inskip                      Metropolitan Police


Supt Mitford
                             )    Northumbria Police
Mr                           )

Ch Supt Mott                     HMCIC

Mr Pooley               -        RFPG, Home Office

Ch Insp Purdy           -         PRSU

Mr Sharrocks            -         D of Tels
USE AND EXPANSION OF POLICE UHF EMERGENCY CHANNELS
       A number of Police forces       ^   v   e   w   r   i   t   t   e   n   to the Home^office^^
Radio F r e q u e n c y Planning                    UHF Emergency
to be assigned for tasks tnat                DOlicing of football grounds.
                  d i v i s i o n a l channels for such occasional use is
considered^to be inefficient use of spectrum.

     An opportunity arises in                0^ t c e ! ° ? o r cons!d«Ition
spectrum becomes available     number of Emergency channels
to be given to increasing                                  ke account of the
                     place - o n " ^ a v a i l a b i l i t y of channels for
other purposes.
                     ,      ,„rrpnn v used for a number of tasks
     Emergency channels are currently
that is:
          Major incidents:    Riots, Major road accidents,
            J                 A e r o p l a n e crashes etc.

                                       Football matches, Pop festivals,
         ii. Planned events.                    Royal shows etc.

        •••    M(nnr souads•          Surveillance tasks by CID, Burglary
        in.    Minor squads.          Squads, Handbag Squads etc.

      A number of problems arising from the above usage need to be
 addressed these being:

          >■   ~
               incidents of unforeseen nature.
               The    limitation   of having only                          four   Emergency channels
         ii.



         111

                   of this is questionable.

         in view of the foregoing d i f f i c u l t y » d the ° P P ° f ^ ^ rum
  afforded to the Home ° “ ^ e ^   AcPO C o m m u n i c a t i o n s Committee ar
  S E T S advise t h e Radio Frequency Planning Group in regard to
  1.
                   To what extent is the present allocation of four
                   Emergency channels inadequate.
                   The purpose for which Emergency channels are to be used
                   for?

                                               - 1 -
         The operational strategy for the use of Emergency
         channels?
         Where it is identified that Emergency channels are
         being misused for certain tasks what other radio
         channels should be used instead?




                             D A Pooley
                             Radio Frequency Planning Group




31 May 1989
F7 Division
Horseferry House
