                                                                                               MIR.15



O T H E R DOCU M EN T FORM
                                                                 „ es V \ \ ' 6 > cv . V»«d
                                              Date and time raised — \ ------ ---------------------------   Number


                                                                                                                     ^ NN<
Title
(Include source and any document number i f relevant}


Receiver's instructions - urgent action                                                                                       Receiver
                                                                         V
                                                                                                                             Y* r v
                                                                                                                              Indexer
Document registertd/im jrfed as indirated
        —

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                        Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



 Indexed as indicated

 No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                         O/M            SIO
 Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                               In c h * *
 Further action No(s)

 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
           HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM ENQUIRY




           SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE
               INJURED AND BEREAVED




          On 15th April 1989, 95 men, women and children

died and very many more were injured, at the Hillsborough

Stadium, Sheffield.   The object of this Enquiry is to

determine what caused those deaths and injuries.



          The immediate cause of death was crushing,

and the immedate cause of the crushing was over­

crowding in pens three and four at the West end of

the ground.



          What then caused the overcrowdincr?   It is

submitted that beyond doubt there were two causes;

the first in time was the presence in those pens prior

to 2.52 p.m. of too many spectators for safety, and
                          2.




certainly more than would have been permitted had

safety capacities been designated in accordance

with the advice given by the Home Office in the

"Green Guide"; and certainly more in aggregate than

the 2,200 apparently but not actually designated.



           It is submitted that this overcrowding was

certainly the cause of many injuries, possibly the

immediate cause of some deaths and certainly a

contributory factor in the remaining deaths and injuries.



           The second cause of the overcrowding was the

ingress into pens three and four at or immediately

after 2.52 p.m. of hundreds of spectators due to the

opening of gate C at the Leppings Lane end of the

stadium.



           What was the cause of the overcrowding prior

to 2.52 p.m.?



           There were, in our submission, two basic

causes, the first the configuration and construction of

the pens themselves, and the second the absence of anv

system for filling the pens to a safe or any other

specific capacity.
                          3.




          There can now, at the conclusion of the

evidence, be little if any doubt as to the genesis

of the potentially lethal pens three and four.



          It is clear that the initial impetus for

a change in the terraces at the West end came from

the police and was inspired by a desire to ensure the

segregation of spectators.     This was a very reasonable

and sensible desire.   The splitting of the long

terrace into, effectively/ three - later four - pens

had, from a policing view two clear advantages.      Firfet,

it is easier to control the behaviour of a crowd if it

is split into small self-contained units, and second,

by creating separate pens it would be possible to

accommodate both 'home* and 'away* supporters at the

West end of the ground.



          The obvious disadvantage of putting in radial

fences without further changes was that they would

override and render virtually useless the system of

monitoring the overall capacity of the terrace     (10,100)

by means of the computer based on'the turnstiles.      I

say "virtually useless" because one method of using the

turnstiles remained as an option - namely the filling of

pens one by one using the computer figures progressively.
                          4.




           This system was suggested by Mr Evans of

the F.A.   Whilst, as we shall see, filling of pens

progressively was practiced for league games there is

no firm evidence that the computer was used as a

monitor, and in any event the method is hardly, to

use a phrase now in vogue,     'customer-friendly'.



           An examination of the documents and the oral

evidence leads to the painful conclusion that nobody

in a position of responsibility ever addressed their

minds to this problem.



           Dr Eastwood claimed in his evidence that he

had considered the matter and had been given an assurance

by the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club ("S.W.F.C.")

that once the radial fences were installed they would

operate a system of monitoring the numbers entering the

individual pens.



           With all respect to Dr Eastwood, it is difficult

to accept that evidence, and our submission is that his

recollection is faulty.   He is an intelligent man.   Had

his mind been adverted, in 1981, to the problem of

controlling the numbers in the individual pens, he would

have - must have - appreciated that there are only two
methods of control - mechanical or by observation.

Control by observation cannot possibly be successful

even to an approximation; estimating the number of

spectators in a section of the terraces would have

nullified the requirements of the Green Guide and the

conditions in the Safety Certificate relating to

safe capacities.



           Our submission is that, in dealing with one

problem, namely crowd segregation, those responsible

completely overlooked a second problem - control of

safe capacities, which in the real world could only be

effected by having separate turnstiles for each separate

section.



           It was asserted many times during the course

of the evidence, both by Dr Eastwood and senior police

officers, that the erection of the radial fences did

not in fact create separate pens on the West terraces,

because there was free movement    from   pens three and

four at the very back of the fence dividing them (in fact

a narrow strip between the end of the radial fence and

the end of the entrance tunnel).   This argument, when

applied to the physical conditions on the ground, enters

the realms of unreality.   The radial gates are narrow
and situated at the very back of the terrace, on the

last and uppermost step; the retaining wall of the

tunnel projects well   beyond the uppermost steps; when

the pens are relatively full, let alone when they are

full to capacity it is so fantastical to regard the

terraces as undivided that it is difficult to believe

that men of intelligence could ever have believed

this to be so; it is indeed so difficult to accept that

it is our submission that this argument has been thought

up ex post facto to attempt to excuse what we submit was

the actual error committed - namely to have overlooked

the problem completely.



          It is further submitted that the alteration to

the terrace by the erection of the radial fences was so

fundamental and the absence of separate turnstiles so

glaringly obious that the oversight constituted a major

blunder and not merely an excusable error of judgment.



          Before considering whose blunder it w a s , it

should be recalled that in 1985 Dr Eastwood actually

drew up plans which would effectively have achieved

the creation of separate pens; these plans were dropped;

there is no minute of the S.W.F.C. Board recording the

abandonment of the planned improvement but we see no
reason to reject the explanation now given - namely that

the money set aside for the work was redirected to fire

prevention in the wake of the Popplewell report on the

Bradford City disaster.



          There is nothing in the documentation which

suggests that safety - and the means of ensuring safe

capacities - was a consideration in the contemporaneous

discussions, but those responsible are caught by a

Morton's fork; if they did not even by then appreciate

the real need for separate turnstiles, the continuing

oversight aggravated the previous blunder made in 1981;

if they did, then on the abandonment of the scheme they

should have been keenly alerted to the continuing dangers

presented by the radial fences.



          Those responsible were clearly the police, who

had inspired the idea of the radial fences and were

members of the Officer Working Party, the South Yorkshire

County Council who were the local authority responsible

for the Safety Certificate required by S.W.F.C.,purusant

to the provisions of the Safety at Sports Grounds Act

1975, Dr Eastwood and of course S.W.F.C. itself.



          It is simply not possible to make submissions
                           8.




relating to the thinking of (or absence of it) of

the Club and the County Council, since the latter

has been disbanded and no officer has been called as

a witness, and the then secretaries of S.W.F.C., Mr

England and Mr Chester were also absent from the witness

box; it is therefore difficult at this stage to place

the responsibility precisely where it ought to lie,

but all those referred to clearly contributed to the

initial blunder.



            The witnesses who were called from the Club

and the present licencing authority, the Sheffield

City Council, deserve some sympathy.



            Mr Mackrell succeeded Mr England's successor,

Mr Chester; there being no interregnum he received no

briefing but read the file.



            Mr Bownes inherited his can of worms from a

different authority without a briefing but he also read

the file.    Mitigation is not an excuse, and in our

submission, whilst acknowledging the former, there can

be no excuse for either man in not recognising the

existence of a problem.
                            9.




            It would appear from the documentation that

the only person to pick up the possibility of a problem

was A.D.O. Grimshaw of the Fire Service who at a meeting

of the Officer Working Party on 18 April 1985, raised

the question of the safe spreading of the crowds in

the terraces.    If he   is believed he was given an assurance

by the police, in the person of Inspector Calvert, that

suitable arrangements existed between the Club and the

police for the safe packing of the terraces.     In our

submission there is no reason to disbelieve him.



            A.D.O. Grimshaw is of course to be congratulated

for raising the matter.     Since the prime concern of the

Fire Service was, and is, the prevention and fighting

of fire, evacuation and rescue we do not criticise his

acceptance of an assurance which on a detailed analysis

he would have found worthless.



            It is now necessary to examine that assurance,

and the whole lamentable history of the "arrangements"

between the police and S.W.F.C. in relation to 'crowd

control'.


            Confused thinking leads to the use of imprecise

language; imprecise language, applied to prevailing

circumstances, leads to confusion of action.     Barristers
                            10.




and Judges are not infrequently lampooned for what is

seen as pomposity of language; that pomposity is however

usually (though admittedly not always!) the result of

an effort to achieve precision of language to avoid

misunderstandings.   During the course of the evidence,

witnesses referred frequently to 'crowd control',         'packing

or filling the terraces',    'spreading the crowd',      'the

need for a police or steward presence on the terraces', a

terrace being 'full' or the 'direction of spectators'.

Such phrases are also   used        in documentation.



          It is clear   from        an examination of    the use made

of these phrases that   they        bore for different   people

different meanings; this led to misunderstandings and

these materially contributed to the overcrowding of pens

three and four prior to the opening of Gate C.



          A proper analysis of these phrases leads to

the following conclusion.      Crowd control consists of a

number of different tasks.        First, there is the control,

by prevention and if necessary suppression, of misbehaviour;

second there is the task of preventing a crowd in excess

of capacity in each separate section of the terraces;

third, within each separate section, the task of ensuring

an even spread of spectators to avoid uncomfortable or

dangerous pressure building up in one part of the section;




                                                                        J
fourth the task in the stands of directing spectators

to their correct seats; fifth, the task of directing

spectators at the turnstiles to their correct stairways

or entrances to the terraces? sixth the task of

ensuring that gangways and exits are kept clear for

use in an emergency evacuation.



          The term 'crowd control' may be and has been

used to refer to any or all of the above activities;

it is a dangerously imprecise and ambiguous term;

similarly the term 'packing or filling the terraces'

has been used to describe both the second and third of

the above tasks with consequent misunderstanding between

user and listener   (or reader).



           Despite the overall confusion I propose to

deal at length only with those misunderstandings which

have a direct bearing on the Hillsborough tragedy.      The

remainder can be dealt with shortly.



          Control of crowd behaviour is a matter for the

police.   There has never been any or any material mis­

understanding in this respect.     The input of the Club

and the stewards will be minimal and confined to alerting

the police when they observe situations that have, or
are about to become, out of control.



            The manner in which the police deal with

misbehaviour is a matter for them and them alone.

Methods and policy will vary from ground to ground,

and from match to match; action to be taken when an

incident occurs must be a matter for the discretion of

each individual police officer, dictated by his or her

experience, training and briefing.     Operational decisions

in relation to crime, both constitutionally and as a

matter of common sense, must be for the Chief Constable

and for him and him alone.



            Thus, it would be a fruitless - and constitutionally

dangerous - exercise to consider whether, in respect of

the control of crowd behaviour police officers should or

should not have 'a presence on the terraces', or when

they should enter terraces to effect arrests, or whether

and when they should use sterile gangways or "pens"    (e.g.

"pen" 5).



            We submit that no misunderstandings existed in

relation to this aspect of crowd control; if they did,

they did not contribute to the tragedy.
however a confusion on their part of just what this

function entailed.



           It was suggested that there should have been

a stewarding presence on the terraces.      The Safety

Certificate did not however provide for stewards on the

West terraces.    Should it have done so?



           At the rear of the radial fences there were

gates; these were controlled by the police - or ought

to have been.    There were no designated gangways for

the stewards to keep clear on the West terraces.         From

the rear of each pen it would not be easy to ascertain

whether one area of a pen was more closely packed than

another.



           In any event even spread of spectators within

the separate pens was not a problem of any substance.

The smaller the pen, the less the problem.     The real

problem of uneven spread is likely to arise on a terrace

the size of the Kop with its capacity of 21,000.         Even

assuming that that capacity •••is not exceeded there remains

danger from uneven spread on that enormous terrace.



           It is worth digressing shortly from the
causes of the tragedy to consider "even spread".        The

only satisfactory means of ensuring this result is by

observation of the terrace from the touchline and/or

by CCTV monitors where they exist, and by exhortations

to the spectators in the overcrowded areas to move in

one direction or another; these exhortations may be made

by tanoy or by stewards on the touchline either by

gestures or by loud hailers.



          This task is, as I have said, in the end for

the Club to perform.   However at Hillsborough with its

CCTV monitors and Police Control Box it would be common

sense for the police to be involved.     Due to mis­

understandings due to confusion of thought this task was

simply not performed at all at Hillsborough; it is more

important to perform it at the Kop end    (and easier

though less important to perform on the West terraces by

reason of the position of the Police Control Box) and it

is crucial - indeed in the light of the tragedy, literally

vital - that the Club and the police get their act

together before another capacity or near capacity crowd

is permitted again on the Kop.



          I now turn at last to the only task involved in

crowd control which materially contributed to the deaths
and injuries, namely the task of filling the various

sections of the terraces so as to avoid exceeding the

designated safe capacities - or alternatively, and

sadly, if no safe capacities were designated or it

was the policy of the Club or the police not to seek

to achieve this aim, at the very least the task of

monitoring the crowds in the individual sections so

as to prevent them reaching danger levels.



          It may be objected that a level that has not

reached danger point must logically be safe, and that

therefore the tasks coincide.   This may well sub­

consciously have been the thinking of police, Club,

Dr Eastwood and the licensing authorities.   If so, and

there was no direct evidence to support such a suspicion,

it was wrong.



          In all activities material to this Inquiry

safety limits are set well below danger point.     The safe

working load of a chain is not the load just below that

which will break the chain, but a fraction of it.

Similarly, the safe capacity of a pen will be well below

the capacity which will produce death or injury.



          On the occasion of the semi-final between
Liverpool and Nottingham Forest nobody monitored the

safe capacity of pens three and four at the Leppings

Lane end; had anybody tried to do so they would in

fact have been attempting the impossible, since neither

pen three nor pen four had a designated safe capacity;

nor was any system operated even for monitoring the West

terraces to ensure that the danger point of over­

crowding was not reached.   (The aggregate safe capacity

of the various West pens and the designated safe capacity

of the Kop were of course being monitored by the computer

based on the turnstiles - in the latter case effectively.)



          These tragic blunders directly led to the

dangerous overcrowding of the central pens behind the

Leppings Lane end goal; what caused them?



          They were caused by confused thinking, muddled

and imprecise language and, inevitably, a total break­

down in communcation between S.W.F.C. and the police.

The ambiguous use of the term 'packing the pens' or

'packing the terraces' may well lie at the root of this

bungle.



          It is, at the end of weeks of evidence, not

difficult to summarise the sequence of events.
             Once the radial fences were installed an

unprecedented situation arose - the existence of separate

pens without separate turnstile-controlled entrances.

They had been created specifically to segregate Sheffield

Wednesday supporters from visiting supporters, so as

to enable the Leppings Lane end to be used safely by

both in League    (or presumably cup) matches involving

the home side.



             Attendances at these matches being as a rule

well below capacity, it was the wish of the police not

to use all the pens where this was unnecessary, since

a lightly filled pen encouraged movement by those bent

on trouble rather than enjoying the quality of the foot­

ball.   A system therefore developed, by agreement between

the Club and the police, whereby the police accepted the

responsibility for filling these pens at league matches.



             The safe capacities of the pens was clearly

not in the forefront of police thinking, if it entered

it at all.     In fact the police view was that the overall

safe capacity of the West terraces was too high, but they

raised no clamour when nothing was done about it;

the overall capacity of the combined contral pen had
been set at 2,200 - too high by Green Guide criteria;

and after that pen was itself split the figures of

1,000 and 1,200 for the resulting two pens had been

informally set by one of Dr Eastwood's partners and

had no official standing at all.     But let all these

blunders pass; they had little if any bearing on the

tragedy, since no attempt was made to restrict the crowd

in any individual pen to a particular number of

spectators.



             The police operated a system of filling the

terraces pen by pen, by utilising moveable barriers

and police officers; theoretically they could, as

suggested by Mr Evans of the F.A . , have used the computer

and swift mathematics to ensure that safe capacities -

in those pens where they existed! - were not exceeded,

 but there is little or no evidence to suggest that this

was done; using observation and judgement they would

declare one pen full, close it off and then fill another.



             Thus it was, the Green Guide and the South

Yorkshire Police Standing Orders notwithstanding, that

it became accepted in practice that the police "packed

the pens".
          Seven years passed before Hillsborough was

awarded the first semi-final subsequent to the

installation of the radial fences; seven years is not

a period normally regarded as beyond the memory of man,

but it was apparently beyond the reach of the corporate

memories of the police and S.W.F.C.    Nobody apparently

recalled that the system of packing by police, designed

for supporter segregation, had never - could never -

have been intended to erode the need to ensure that safety

capacities were not exceeded.    (The Club was of course

entitled to fulfil its obligations by means of servants

or agents - and had every right to use the police, if

they agreed, to carry out duties for which it in the

last resort was responsible.)



          Thus it came about when Leeds United met

Coventry City in the semi-final of 1988 that there being

no need to segregate supporters at the Leppings Lane

end (the whole of the North and West stands and the West

terraces being allocated to Leeds United, and the South

stand and Kop to Coventry City) the police took no action

to "pack the pens".



          "Crowd control" had become synonymous with

"packing the pens";   "packing the pens" had become
synonymous with the successive opening filling and

closing of pens; the latter not being necessary, the

police did virtually nothing to monitor the numbers

entering the pens.   The policy was to allow into the

whole terrace the safe capacity and then - the separation

of the pens notwithstanding - to permit spectators "to

find their own level", the theory being that if a

spectator felt him or herself being crushed, or in pain,

or maybe only in extreme discomfort, he or she would

push out of the crowd, find an exit and somehow transfer

to a pen less crowded.                                     -•



            It would be difficult, it is submitted, to

choose language stronger than that justified by the

evidence.   Such a policy might have been arguably only

mildly idiotic on the Kop, where at least lateral

movement was possible; in the Leppings Lane pens it

was crass, so crass indeed that we are tempted to submit

that the probability is that no senior police officer

actually ever knowingly instituted such a policy, but

that, no thought ever having been given to the matter,

and no Chief Superintendent being willing to admit to a

monumental blunder, the oversight was ex post facto

dignified with the cloak of a system.
           Be that as it may, the "system" of the fans

finding their own level on the terraces was attested

to by Chief Superintendant Mole, the Commander in

1988   (D7, p . 13), Assistant Chief Constable Jackson

(DIO, p. 27), Superintendant Marshall         (DIO, p .77) and

Inspector Creaser    (D14, p. 20).       Superintendant

Greenwood, the actual Ground Commander on the day of the

tragedy, on the other hand, was, for a senior police

witness, unusually frank; he did not know what the

arrangement was if pens three and four became full

(D12, p . 47).   Chief Superintendant Duckinfield, as

we shall see later, thought the whole responsibility

was that of S.W.F.C. and nothing to do with the police

(D7, p . 120; D 8 , p.76; D 8 , p.77).



            To return to the 1988 semi-final, and to the

area between the turnstiles and the wall of the West

stand.   Seven turnstiles were allocated to the terraces;

on entering the ground the large tunnel leading to pens

three and four lay ahead; to reach pens six and seven,

which were in no way signed, one had to pass through

a narrow gate in a brick wall to the left; to reach

pens one and two - which were very inadequately sign­

posted - the route lay to the right; the totality of

the evidence     (some evidence to the contrary in relation
to the semi-final of 1981 notwithstanding) was, it is

submitted, to the effect that in any event those fans

who knew the layout would make for the pens behind

the goal; and so it fell out that those pens soon

became so overcrowded that some fans were making their

way out (giving some minimal support, no doubt, to the

"finding their own level" theory!) as others were

streaming in.



          Tragedy was averted that year only because

some police officers, using their own initiative, and

realising that the central pens were full, closed off

the tunnel and directed fans thereafter to the wing

pens.   It is submitted that those officers must have

been of junior rank; three factors point to this

conclusion.     First, no senior officer who gave evidence

had heard of the incident, since it had not been included

in the debriefing reports; had a sergeant or above known

of the closing of the tunnel then it would have reached

the debriefing.     Second, there was no provision for such

an action in the briefings and was thus unlikely to have

been part of an Inspector's policy without some prior

or subsequentreport to a more senior officer; third,

and lamentably, a sober consideration of the evidence

and actions of all ranks leads to the conclusion that a
search for policing skills in the South Yorkshire

Force is more likely to be successful among the

junior ranks than among the senior.



          By 1989 the police were perfectly satisfied

with their system.     It was stoutly defended by more

than one senior officer on the ground that it had always

previously worked satisfactorily.     It is submitted that

this argument is doubly flawed.



          First, the fact that a system or procedure

has not in the past resulted in disaster is no

guarantee that it will always remain so successful,

particularly if on an objective appraisal it is

reasonably foreseeable that it will result in danger.

Many is the unfenced guillotine or in-running nip that

has not, for a period of years, amputated or mangled an

operative's arm!     Complacency is the worst enemy of

safety.



          Second, as we have seen, the policy was not

successful in 1988; many spectators behind the goal

at the Leppings Lane end suffered discomfort and worse,

and a major tragedy was only averted by the initiative

taken by police officers of probable lowly status.
                          25.




           And so it was that in 1989, in the absence

of any controls, the crowd swarmed into pens three

and four; it is impossible to prove when the overall

"capacity" of 2,200 was reached or exceeded just as it

is impossible to prove when the crowd reached danger

point.   Bearing in mind that spectators themselves

have become conditioned to uncomfortable crowd

conditions, it is submitted that the probability is

that the pens had reached 'capacity' by 2.30 p.m.;

by 2.45 p.m. the evidence points to them being

uncomfortably overcrowded to the point of danger;

certainly prior to 2.52 p.m., the evidence suggests,

injuries had been suffered and it is even possible that

deaths had occurred.



           This situation was hardly hidden from sight.

It developed in the full view of the Police Control

Box above and immediately to one side of the pens;

there were police officers   (but no stewards) on the

perimeter fence; there were police officers and stewards in

the West stand with a bird's eye view; there were senior

officers and S.W.F.C. officials in other parts of the

ground with a clear view of the West terraces.   With

the exception of the junior ranks on the perimeter fence

who had had no briefing whatsoever in crowd capacities,
all were to blame.



          Most particularly was the approach of the

police, persisted in throughout the hearing, to blame.

Cross-examination on their behalf, again no doubt on

instructions, reflected that approach.     If spectators

could move their arms, they were not overcrowded; if a

square centimetre of space could be observed between

spectators on photographs, w h y , to be sure, there must

have been room for at least one more fanl



          These then were the causes of the chronic

overcrowding of the pens prior to 2.52 p.m. - first

the installation of the radial fences without the

installation of separate turnstiles; second the failure

even to attempt any other system for controlling the

numbers entering the pens; third the failure to observe

that the pens actually were overcrowded.



               This was the situation when at 2.52 p.m.

hundreds of fans entered pens three and four causing

additional pressure, a surge down the terrace and the

immediate deaths of all or most of the 95 who died and

many more injuries.
           The cause of this unwelcome ingress was the

opening of Gate C; the cause of the opening of the

gate was an order given by Chief Supt. Duckinfield;

that order was caused by a request from Supt. Marshall;

that request in turn was caused by the crowd situation

outside the turnstiles in Leppings Lane.     It will be

necessary to examine the cause of that crowd situation,

but first I turn to the other actions referred to.



           Supt. Marshall, the Commander outside the

ground at the Leppings Lane end first made a request for

the gates to be opened at 2.47 p.m.; he repeated his

requests, making his last at 2.52 p.m.



           For reasons which will be apparent when the

crowd situation is considered we do not submit that Supt.

Marshall was wrong to make his requests, nor do we

criticise Chief Supt. Duckinfield for acceding to that

request.   However there was no necessary cause and effect

between cstrdering the gates to be opened and the entry of

hundreds of spectators into the already overcrowded pens.



           We believe that we are on safe ground in submitting

that it was a blunder for Chief Supt. Duckinfield to have

ordered the opening of the gates before ordering the
closure of the tunnel, since in evidence he admitted

that it was    (indeed, apart from a minor error admitted

by Mr Bownes, the only error we believe admitted by

anyone at the hearing!).



             That it was a fundamental and inexcusable

blunder can be demonstrated from the time-scale; this

was no oversight committed in the agony of the moment

in response to a sudden emergency; between four minutes

and one second and five minutes and fifty nine seconds

elapsed between Supt. Marshall's first request and Mr

Duckinfield's decision.     There was ample time - even

taking four minutes - to make a full appraisal of the

situation.     He was in the Control Box directly overlooking

pens three and four; he was in a prime position to see

that at the very least they were full to a safe capacity;

he had a very experienced superintendant telling him of

a potentially lethal situation at the turnstiles and he

knew because he had walked the ground of the juxtaposition

of Gate C and the tunnel.



             In our submission there is evidence to justify

a finding as to the reason for Mr Duckinfield's fatal

error.   In the face of repeated urgent requests from Mr

Marshall, Mr Duckinfield remained silent.     He had beside
him the experienced Mr Murray; he neither asked his advice

nor did he use him as a sounding board for his own

thoughts; he only made his actual decision upon Mr

Murray saying "Mr Duckinfield, are you going to open

the gates?".   One can only guess as to the inflexion

in Mr Murray's voice   (unless his own loyal evidence -

that it was a simple question and thlat he thought

his chief was evaluating the situation - is accepted

at face value).   In our submission the evidence points

to Mr Duckinfield having been frozen in indecision,

and his final decision, given in response to Mr Murray's

prompting was a snap one, taken without real thought.



           What then caused Mr Marshall's requests?

Beyond., doubt at 2.47 p.m. the situation outside the

Leppings Lane turnstiles was serious, potentially fatal

and beyond the control of the police.    The case presented

by the police, that this situation was unforseeable due

to the late arrival of thousands of Liverpool fans a

large proportion of whom were drunk, hooligans or without

tickets   (or all three), simply will not, in our

submission stand up to scrutiny - though it did, of course

to the deep distress of the injured and bereaved, provide

field day for the sub-editors of our popular press.       (It

may be worth observing here that if there is one group
of citizens less open to restraint than drunken

football fans, it is sober sub-editors.)



          Our submission, to the contrary, is that the

undoubted presence of drunken, ill-behaved and non­

ticket holding fans notwithstanding, the chaos outside

the ground at 2.47 was entirely foreseeable and was due

first to the unsuitability of the Leppings Lane

entrance to Hillsborough to cope with a capacity crowd,

second to a total absence of communication of crucial

information between the inside and outside of the ground,

and third to poor policing in Leppings Lane itself and

the area between the turnstiles and the road.



          Many of the problems facing the police on 15th

April 1989 had their origin in the different conditions

encountered in the run-of-the mill league and cup games

involving the home Club, and those resulting from semi­

final ties - rare enough occurrences in recent years;

one in 1981, and then two in successive years.    The

Club and the police appear, to have been lulled into a

false sense of security by the adequacy of the stadium

as a whole to cope with crowds of 15,000 or so, and the

absence of disasters on the rare occasions since the rise

of Sheffield Wednesday to the First Division when a
capacity or near capacity crowd had arrived   (e.g. visits

by Manchester United).



          The sad, but visually obvious, truth is that

the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground has for many

years been a potential death trap; that it has not until

1989 fulfilled its lethal potential has been due to

generally low crowds, different conditions applying

to league matches, only three semi-finals having been

played in the last decade and good fortune and good

policing having attended the other two.



          The principal feature of the Leppings Lane

end is the configuration of the road and turnstile

area (i.e. the area between the turnstiles and the blue

entrance gates near the bend in Leppings Lane).   Crowds

approaching down the lane from the roundabout and from

the direction of Catchbar Lane over the River Don bridge,

funnel through the entrance gates and congregate in the

restricted turnstile area; this has, apart from its

inadequate area and insufficient turnstiles, the further

unfortunate feature, the arc formation of the two banks of

tnrnstiles.   Applying the Green Guide maximum criteria

that area could only accommodate 4,700 spectators in

safety if they were stationary; but crowds at a turnstile
are not stationary; they have a continuing forward

impetus.



           It is not really necessary to enter the realms

of mathematics in order to call into question the

sufficiency of the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end;

the rate of flow depends on a smooth and continuous

passage of spectators, and this may be hindered by a

crush at the narrow entries, by a machinery malfunction

or by a spectator presenting the wrong   (or no!) ticket;

there can therefore be no certainty as to what the flow

rate will be at any given time.



           Furthermore, since for a semi-final twenty

three turnstiles are provided unevenly for a total of

24,300 and since it would be impossible for a police

officer observing a crowd approaching the turnstile area

to know for which part of the ground they were destined,

he would require information from Club Control gleaned

from the computer to know how long it would be likely to

take to get them into the ground.



           However, applying Green Guide figures it is clear

that Mr Collins was right to assert that given the best

possible conditions it would take one and a half hours
for a crowd to enter   (though our figure actually

comes to one hour twenty four minutes).



            Since on the one hand a few people arrive

more than one and a half hours before kick-off the

turnstiles would not have to deal with all 24,300 in the

last ninety minutes; on the other hand, conditions are

never perfect, the flow would rarely be the maximum of

7:50 per hour per turnstile.



            Moreover, the turnstiles provided for the

terraces were a mere seven for 10,100; i.e. one per

1,400; those for the West stand seats were six for

4,500.i.e. one per 740.    Thus the reality on the ground

was that it would take a minimum period of about one hour

to fill the stand, but nearly two hours to fill the

terraces.



            Given the best possible condition therefore

the crowd for the terraces would have to begin arriving

two hours before the kick-off.    There is little

attraction to standing on a terrace for two hours with

nothing to do and nothing to look at.    Mr Kelly, on behlaf

of the F.A.,was of the opinion that 'Pop' music on the

tanoy was just the thing to attract and keep enthralled
spectators standing on the terraces; he poured cold

water on our suggestion that a short match between

Liverpool and Nottingham schoolboys might have been

an improvement.     He gave two reasons.



             First, he said that at a recent match at

Wembley a pre-kick off match between two ladies teams

had only attracted an early crowd of about 1,000.       We

are not surprised.     The essence of a football

atmosphere is good humoured 'needle'.      Suitable pre­

match publicity in the Liverpool and Nottingham press

might well have produced considerable interest in such

a contest.     We submit that Mr Kelly might just be a trifle

out of touch with his customers.



             Mr Kelly's second objection was that the pitch

could not be used for pre-match entertainment as the

players might want to utilise it for an early warm-up.

With the greatest respect to our footballing stars and

their managers, where crowd safety is at risk, they can

be told that if they wish to emerge at odd times for a

warm-up, they can do what substitutes have to do without

visible signs of resentment or rebellion; they can use

the touchline!
            It is clear from the foregoing that at any

semi-final there was a real and substantial risk that

if the crowd arrived unevenly the turnstile area

would quickly fill.     If only 25% of the crowd arrived

within fifteen minutes or so (hardly an unforeseeable

event)   the area would be full; queuing would long have

been an impossibility, the arcing having the effect of

merging the queues after a very short length; the

police would be hemmed in by the crowd; passage through

the turnstiles would be slowed, and the crowd would be

joined at the back by more would-be spectators all with

forward impetus.



            In such circumstances it was reasonably

foreseeable that the police would be unable to control

the crowd within the area, and that a serious risk of

crushing would arise.



           The senior police officers did not foresee

the danger simply because it had never happened before.

In fact there is evidence to suggest that in 1988 the

police had filtered the crowd coming down Leppings Lane

from the Penistone Road roundabout, and in 198? the

match had been played at mid-day and the kick-off had

been delayed.
            Be that as it may there is the clearest

evidence that on 15th April 1989, for whatever

reason, the Nottingham crowd were in early whilst

the Liverpool fans had not arrived in any numbers

at 2 p.m.   Much has been made by and on behalf of the

police of the phrase   'late arrivals'.   The Liverpool

fans arrived in considerable numbers between 2 p.m.

and 2.30 p.m.    We venture to suggest that arriving,

say, three quarters of an hour prior to kick-off can

hardly be stigmatised by the use of that phrase as a

pejorative, particularly as no warning to arrive earlier

appeared on the tickets   (and even though there was the

magnet of tannoyed pop music to attract them earlier).



            It is unnecessary for the purposes of this

submission to seek to resolve conflicts of evidence in

relation to specific conversations in the Club Control

room; wherever the truth lies, the overwhelming weight

of evidence points to the fact that it was, or should

have been, obvious to those inside the Police Control

Room, from direct observation and from viewing the

C.C.T.V. monitors that one hour before kick-off very

many thousand (in the region of eight) fewer spectators

were in the Leppings Lane end and North stands then had been

there the year before.    The terraces would normally take
two hours or more to fill; the only pens containing any

numbers at all were three and four - a total of only

2,200 when full.



          On the most simple evaluation of the information

literally staring them in the eyes, neither police nor

Club officials took any action to alert Supt. Marshall

to the inevitably approaching problem and its attendant

danger.   If the remaining spectators arrived with

evenness there was not the time to get them in the ground

and there would by 3 p.m. be a dangerous build-up of

spectators in the turnstile area.



           If the crowd arrived unevenly, then the build­

up would take place earlier   (or, of course, later).

Supt. Marshall was not only not told of the unexpectedly

large numbers still to come, he was not told either

of the maximum flow rates through the turnstiles.



           The consequence of these blunders inside the

ground, for which both S.W.F.C. and the police must

take responsibility, was that Supt. Marshall had no

warning of the impending problem and danger.



          What if he had been given the proper information?
There are two possibilities.   The first is that he

would have taken no different course of action, primarily

because the circumstances had not been provided for in

the Operational Plan handed on from the previous year

and there had been no briefing to cover such an

eventuality, but also because in Mr Marshall's view,

once a large section of a capacity crowd arrived within

a .short space of time the situation was beyond the

ability of the police to control.



          Those who have viewed the Leppings Lane end

and done some basic calculations in relation to the

turnstiles will have a great deal of sympathy with this

latter point of view.   If it is indeed correct, then

Hillsborough was not a suitable venue for a semi­

final; it should not have been chosen by the F.A. and

if chosen the South Yorkshire Police should have

refused to police the event.



          We submit that it was reasonably foreseeable

that a substantial section of the 24,300 crowd might

arrive within a short compass of time; that if this

happened a serious problem would arise; that the situation

would present the police with an operational difficulty

so serious as to render the stadium unsuitable for the
event; but that if the event went ahead sophisticated

policing could have prevented a tragedy occurring.



          No such sophisticated policing occurred

because first the eventuality had not been anticipated

and therefore nobody had applied his mind to methods

of solving the problem in order to include a contingency

plan in the Operational Order for the tie; and second

because, overcome without warning by the tide of

spectators, Supt. Marshall neither sought advice from

Control nor considered any action save emergency action

at the turnstiles themselves.



          I do not propose to deal at any length with the

events in Lappings Lane, since the evidence overwhelmingly

points to one story.   It is clear that between about

2.15 p.m. and 2.30 p.m. a trainload of Liverpool supporters

(well behaved, sober and good humoured)   arrived in a

police-controlled crocodile at about the same time as, or

followed by, a large influx of supporters who arrived from

Penistone Road and Catchbar Lane; by 2.17 p.m. the situation

was sufficiently of :concern to Mr Marshall that he

successfully requested permission to close Lappings Lane.



          Inside Police Control there was therefore as early
as 2.17 p.m. - forty three mintues before kick-off -

knowledge from inside and outside the ground.    Mr

Marshall, ignorant of the situation inside the

ground, was not in a position to collate the information;

Chief Supt. Duckinfield and Supt. Murray were.    It is

not straining criticism of Mr Duckinfield to submit

that at 2.17 he should have been seriously considering

delaying the kick-off and sending preliminary warnings

to S.W.F.C. and the two team managers.



          By 2.30 p.m. the turnstile area was full, and

hundreds more were streaming towards the turnstiles;

the progressive build-up was of course clearly foreseeable,

but the only action taken by Mr Marshall was to send for

reinforcements of foot and mounted police in and around

the jammed area.



          It is submitted that this policy was wrong and

constituted poor policing on two grounds; first, the

reinforcements themselves became trapped   and ineffectual

in the press before the -turnstiles; the mounted police

were worse than ineffectual - they were, through no fault

of the individual officers, positively counter-productive;

many of them, as clearly seen in the photographs, soon

retired from the battle, but were helplessly and uselessly
marooned in t h e sterile area by the side of the River

Don.



          Meanwhile, as was predictable, the mass of

people in front of the turnstiles was rendering the

flow through them difficult and slow; a further

complication was that people presented themselves at the

wrong turnstiles - due entirely to confusing instructions

on the tickets and inadequate and confusing signs above

the turnstiles.



          Complicating even this complicated situation

was the presence at the turnstiles of non-ticket holders,

to whom I will return later.



          In view of the case presented by and on

behalf of the police it is important to observe that by

2.30 p.m., half an hour before the kick-off, grave

discomfort and fear of serious injury was being experienced

in the crowd, which included families, women and children;

there is no evidence that at this time hooliganism or

excess consumption of alcohol presented a problem to any

material extent.



          In our submission the thrust of the complaint
against Mr Marshall's handling of the situation is that

he concentrated on the near impossible task of

attempting to prevent the waves of spectators crashing

against the rock of the turnstile wall, instead of stemming

the tide still coming down Leppings Lane, which, as he

should have realised, could only serve to increase the

pressure at the turnstiles.



          No criticism can be levelled at individual

officers on horse or foot; many of them were apprehensive

for their own safety; some used their individual

initiatives in permitting in non-ticket holders or

wrong ticket holders to avoid further delays at the

turnstiles; some effected short term opening of gates

to get spectators into the right section of the ground;

many were pleading with the crowd not to push, or to

move backwards.



          Indeed, at one stage, Mr Marshall requested

and obtained the use of a van with a loud hailer to

plead with the crowd not to push.



          It would be wrong to criticise this action and

we do not do so, but it did reflect the thinking of

many police officers at the scene, thinking which in our
submission displayed a wholly wrong approach to the

emergency.



          The police appear to have believed   (and

apparently still believe) that the problem had been

caused, at 2.15 p.m. - 2.30 p.m., by late arriving

fans who were unreasonably pushing towards the turnstiles

in an impatient effort to get into the ground, and that

the solution was in their own hands   (or feet); if only

they would stop pushing and shoving all would be well.



          That approach failed to take on board the

reality of the situation within an overcrowded area

when the impetus is for forward movement.   People were

struggling and pushing because they in turn were being

pushed; they were not in a position to stop pushing,

still less to obey futile commands to move backwards.



          The solution was to relieve pressure at the

rear by preventing further spectators joining the

throng, just as the means of preventing the emergency

arising had been control of spectators coming down the

lane and across the bridge.



          No such action was ever taken, and it was
therefore predictable that the situation would

deteriorate.



          The one intelligent move came too late;

once the crowd in the turnstile area had reached a

dangerous density, but not before, the horses were

used to close the blue outer gates; the theory was

sound; once movement through the turnstiles had

removed a substantial number of spectators from the

enclosed area, pressure would be relieved and the

problem resolved; once the police had regained control,

more spectators could be allowed through the blue

gates.



          It was suggested in cross-examination on

behalf of the police that this move failed because

wickedly intentioned fans deliberately broke open the

gates by shaking and rattling them; the actual evidence

does not bear out that theory; the evidence from at least

one police officer who witnessed the opening of the

gates is that crowd pressure was responsible; indeed, so

great was the crowd pressure in Leppings Lane itself,

due to the never ending wave of spectators, that one

metal vertical locking bolt was bent.
          It is clear that this obvious means of filtering

the crowd was used too late and at a time when, if the

gates had remained shut, serious injury or deaths might

have been caused by people being crushed against them.



          The case made on behalf of the police - and

by some of the senior officers in their evidence - was

that the problem and emergency arose solely as a

result of drunken, loutish fans arriving late, many

without tickets and determined, come what may, to effect

entry into the ground.   Other police officers agreed,

however, that the main cause of the dangerous pressures

was crowd numbers and that drunks, louts and non-ticket

holders were merely a complicating factor.



          The evidence that some fans, particularly late

arrivals, were badly affected by alcohol is incontrovertible

and we do not challenge it; similarly the conduct of some

of the crowd in the closing stages was undoubtedly

deplorable; again, there can be little doubt that an

appreciable number of would-be spectators arrived without

tickets, but hoping to effect entry.



          Sub-editors, seeking sensational headlines,

had a field day with the police allegations, much to the
distress of many of the bereaved and injured.     It is

therefore necessary to examine the evidence and place

it in context.



           From the totality of the evidence it is

clear that for some years, when an all-ticket match

has been staged (and is a sell-out)    fans have developed

the practice of turning up at the ground without

tickets.   They hope to effect entry in one of a number

of ways.



           First they hope to purchase a ticket   (usually

well above face value) from a tout - or, as one of

our legislators will have it, ja broker performing a

public service.     This problem can and should be dealt

with (and often is) by the arrest of the tout for

obstruction.     A better solution would be the creation

of an offence, punishable by imprisonment, for selling

tickets in certain circumstances within a set distance

of the ground fct more than face value.



           Second, they hope to be able to bribe a

turnstile operative; so obvious is this practice that

the Club anticipates it and seeks to prevent it by

mechanical means.
            Third, they hope that if they remain outside

the ground, the police will eventually let them in;

they have a reasonable but not certain chance of

this happening; apparently different forces apply

different policies; but it is clear that some forces

reckon that a few hundred added to acapacity crowd, which

has in-built safety margin, is preferable to leaving

visiting fans outside the ground, where they may be

let loose on the windows of neighbouring shopkeepers.



             It was therefore predictable that a number of

fans would turn up without tickets.     If the South

Yorkshire Police did not know of these practices their

intelligence gathering section should be ashamed of

itself.     We do not for one minute suggest that they did

not, and we submit that it was more convenient for the

police case to claim that it all came as an unwelcome

surprise.



             Those who drink in moderation - or not at all -

will have been nauseated by the evidence, which we do not

seek to challenge in substance (though some of the detail

may have been somewhat exaggerated), of the excess

drinking of alcohol by a minority of the fans prior to

the game and the conduct of a few in urinating in gardens
near the ground.    It must however be emphasised

that this is not a problem confined to football

generally still less to Liverpool supporters

specifically.   Alcohol abuse has now developed into a

serious national problem, and the only groups who do

not acknowledge it as such are those who abuse alcohol.



            Problems relating to and arising from alcohol

abuse are not unknown in some police forces - particularly

problems arising from the 'macho' approach to a man's

ability to 'take his liquor'; some of my clients even

allege that excess consumption of alcohol is not entirely

unknown in Fleet Street or in the district of Wapping.

Headlines luridly encapsulating police allegations of

insobriety among spectators must be kept in perspective.



            To what extent did drunkenness affect the

pressures in and outside the turnstile area?    There is

of course a wealth of police evidence that it was a major

contributory factor.    It is not submitted that individual

police officers lied to the Inquiry.    What is submitted

is that when a number of people witness an occurrence,

different aspects of it will later be etched on their

memories.
          To police officers, hemmed in on their

horses or on foot by a crowd, gradually increasing

in numbers and impatience, a lasting impression will

have been created by the behaviour of those who were

actually drunk, or whose behaviour and language

disgusted them.   To spectators, some fearing for their

own or their childrens' safety, and anxious in any

event to enter the ground, the lasting impression will

have been the inability of the police to control the

chaos, and the language and behaviour of individual

officers who were venting their anger and frustration

at the fans in general, and their city of origin.



          We therefore do not seek to rely wholly on

those witnesses who claim that no fans were drunk or

ill-behaved- their attention may not have been drawn to

them, or they may not, in the circumstances, have

remained in their recollection; similarly we submit

that the picture drawn from the evidence of the officers

under pressure at the time, or under criticism during

the course of the Inquiry, is one that should be viewed

with some scepticism.   Undoubtedly some bad behaviour

took place, either as a result of drink or impatience

to get to the turnstiles   (or even on one occasion late

on, to deliberate fooling about) but in our submission
this was not as widespread as some police officers have

come to believe, nor did it have more than a marginal

effect on the intense crowd pressures much further forward.



          It is highly significant that a police officer

passing the rear of the crowd at 2.52 p.m. and who

consequently had a close view of the very part of the

crowd said to have been behaving worst of all, did not

even mention drunkenness or i11-behaviour at all.



          In our submission the truth probably lies

somewhere between the two extreme and partisan accounts.

Undoubtedly there were some fans - possibly hundreds,

most certainly not thousands - waiting near the bridge,

without tickets in the hope of being allowed in, and they

may well have joined the rear of the crowd at about

the time Gate C was opened.



          Equally undoubtedly some of them, and many

others who had been drinking in the town and had for

that reason arrived late, were the worse for drink, that

is, excess consumption of alcohol was affecting their

 behaviour.   However, there were too few of them in

relation to the remaining thousands and too far away

from the turnstiles wall to have had much effect on
the severe crushing in that area.   However disgusting

their conduct they should not be made the scapegoats

for the real causes of the chaos, one of which was

inept policing.



          We accept that by 2.47 p.m. the situation

was so dangerous and so potentially lethal that Supt.

Marshall was justified in making his first, and of

course subsequent, requests for the gates to be opened.



          The necessity for those requests - which would

not necessarily have led to fatalities, and would not

have done but for Chief Supt. Duckinfield's blunder -

arose because the uneven arrival of the crowd had not been

foreseen prior to the day of the tie, had not even been

foreseen after 2 p.m. on the day, because the turnstiles

could not cope, the area in front of them dangerously

restricted, and because Supt. Marshall failed to devise

suitable means to deal with the situation.



          Whilst the plan we submitted may not, unamended,

provide the ideal answer to the problem (we would suggest

a straight turnstile wall to enable long parallel

queuing) Dr Eastwood accepted that it was perfectly

possible so to alter the Lappings Lane end as to provide
for parallel queuing, far more turnstiles and an area

between them and the gate which would safely accommodate

far more people - enabling in addition police horses to

manoeuvre more freely.   If S.W.F.C. can not afford the

alterations, then capacity crowds will inevitably lead

to danger and the ground is unfit to stage a semi-final

tie.



           Similarly we submit that the Tribunal should

reject police arguments that it would have been

impractical to have filtered and controlled the crowd

some distance from the turnstile area.   Quite apart from

the evidence suggesting that this had been done in previous

years, we submit that there would have been nothing to

prevent the early closing of the road and the placing

of police cordons with loud hailers near the roundabout

and on the far side of the Don bridge, with the twin

objectives of refusing further passage to non-ticket

holders and obvious drunks, and controlling the flow of

ticket holders to the turnstile area.



           I have now dealt with what were in our

submission the fundamental causes of the tragedy.   It

is now necessary to deal briefly with a number of

miscellaneous matters.   Some of these issues are
major ones, but we do not conceive it as our task to

consider in depth issues that may not have had a direct

causative link with the deaths and injuries.



            When the fatal crushing took place after

  "52 p.m. the perimeter police were beyond doubt slow

to respond, and they were inactive during several

minutes when great suffering was being endured in pens

three and four.    Many of our clients, who have viewed

these scenes on television, accuse the police of

indifference to this suffering.    The evidence however

points unequivocally to a different reason.



            The young police officers on the perimeter

fence, and indeed their superiors, were conditioned by

their training and briefing to have in mind hooliganism

and pitch invasion.    Some blame for this must of course

lie with hooligans and pitch invaders themselves, but

police training should be sufficiently sophisticated to

enable more than one problem to be dealt with at a time.



            Similarly, once the nature of the problem had

been recognised the police response was to say the least

variable.    Some police officers used their own

initiatives; foremost among these was P.C. Philip
Hooson        , who believing he was flouting orders 4 h e

almost certainly was!_l nevertheless decided to risk

a reprimand and opened a perimeter gate.       Other police

officers were active, but to no useful effect; it was

little use, for the same reasons as given in relation

to the crowd in the turnstile area, to tell the crushed

people at the front to move back.       Others, again, were

completely inactive.



              The basic cause of the confused actions and

inactivity was in our submission, lack of leadership,

though it may also be that some of the younger officers

were in a state of shock once the bodies were on the

pit c h f   Whatever the reason it was not until the arrival

of Det. Chief Supt. Nesbitt that order was produced out

of chaos.      More than one police officer testified to

his immediate assumption of authority, of his organisation

of a chain rescue through the gates and of his tireless

energy t"covered in sweat'-“said one young officer?,.

The value of example shown by senior ranks cannot be

overstated.



              Did the initial inaction and subsequent short

term disorganisation cause death or injury?       The medical

evidence doubted this; whilst it must remain a possibility

there is no evidence which would support a submission
that these delays actually caused death or serious

injury.     The doctors, including Dr Phillips, a fairly

vehement critic of the police, were of the view that

probably <though not certainly! all deaths were the

immediate result of the surge at 2."52 p.m., and that

those who were not then dead, probably all in the end

survived.     The delays must, however, have caused

increased and unnecessary suffering among the injured.



             The same considerations apply to the gates

in the perimeter fence.     These did not conform to the

sizes advised by the Green Guide.     In regard to these

fences the Guide is in fact unhelpful.



            It became clear during the course of the

evidence, as frankly it should have been to the authors

of the Green Guide, that gates are required in the

perimeter fence for two quite distinct reasons, to

enable the police to enter a pen for public order

reasons and to enable the escape from the pen of

spectators in distress.    For the former purpose the

gates should be as narrow as possible to prevent an

incipient pitch invasion; for the latter they should be

as wide as is consistent with the integrity of the

fence.    In this regard, thought and money could produce
perfectly safe fences e.g. large sliding panels or

sections.



            However the Green Guide does not cater for

this dual rol e , and as it transpired the gates in pens

three and four were too narrow to confirm to the

requirements of an exit gate.    It is therefore little

wonder that difficulty was encountered in pulling dead

and injured from the pens, and it is submitted that this

undoubtedly contributed significantly to the suffering

of the injured.



            I now turn to the perimeter fences themselves.

It must be recalled that the lowest step of the terraces

was well below the level of the original wall which

formed the base of the fence.    Consequently, in the

absence of the fence all but the tallest of those at

the front would still have been crushed and received

serious injuries or suffered death when the final surge

took place.



            The absence of the fence may well have made

a substantial difference prior to '2.52 p.m.   The crowd

pressure in pens three and four caused initially slight

discomfort and then progressively worse discomfort and

ultimately injuries and possibly death.    If there had been
no fence, those at the front would have escaped onto

the perimeter track before the pressure grew so intense

that injuries resulted; this in turn would have relieved

the pressure inside the pens.



          On the evidence it would appear that so long

as fences are necessary to prevent pitch invasions,

no danger will result from them so long as there is no

danger of fire on the terraces and so long as effective

steps are taken to avoid overcrowding.   The latter may

not be a simple task; even if proper safe capacities

are designated and monitored by computer, means will

have to be devised to overcome the problems of forged

tickets, bribed gatemen, the abuse of visiting stewards*-

tabards   and other devious means adopted to effect

unlawful entry.   Regrettably, whilst the fences remain

terraces will never be entirely safe places.



          Allegations were made relating to the absence

or shortage of equipment to deal with the injured.

Having heard the evidence we do not feel justified in

making any submissions critical of the Club, the St.

John's Ambulance Service or S.Y.M.A.S.   Certainly

S.W.F.C. were hardly lavish in their treatment of the

Ambulance service and were in a muddle over the duties
of their doctor, but none of this could have had any

material effect on the victims; it would be unreasonable

to expect every large stadium to anticipate and cater

for a disaster causing so many deaths and injuries -

but nothing could in any event have 'helped those killed

within a minute or two, and the injured, on the evidence,

probably all survived.



             We would however submit that S.W.F.C. having

erected an immoveable fence containing gates suitable

for entry rather than exit, most certainly ought to have

had suitable bolt or wire cutters.     Their absence may

not have caused death but the suffering of injured men

women and children was thereby undoubtedly prolonged.



             I turn next to the safety barriers, two of

which may be very relevant to the tragedy.     One barrier

collapsed.     Three questions are thereby raised.   First,

would it have collapsed if reasonably foreseeable pressure

had been applied to it?     In other words, was the pressure

created by the surge of supporters after 2.52 p.m. so

great that a perfectly constructed barrier would also

have collapsed?     Second, suppose that the barrier had

been sufficiently strong to withstand the pressure,

would it have made any difference?     Third, if the barrier
was faulty, was anyone to blame?



          If (and this is by no means certain!) we have

understood the technical evidence the first question

is not susceptible of an answer, since there is no way

of measuring the load sustained by the barrier at the

time of its collapse.



          The answer to the second question is not easy.

If the barrier had not collapsed, not so many spectators

would have fallen and been trampled on; but if they

had remained upright in front of the barrier they would

for certain   have been crushed to death against it.

Possibly some spectators in front of the barrier may

have been felled and subsequently killed by the collapse,

and if so, these may have been saved had the barrier

remained in place.   We do not consider ourselves to be

in a position to make firm submissions on this issue.



          Similarly, it is clear that there are two

views as to the proper approach to testing the barriers.

We make no submissions in this respect since even if

on an objective scientific analysis Dr Eastwood's

method is unsatisfactory he cannot be criticised if he

has adopted a method approved by a reasonable body of
                            60.




skilled engineers.



          The other barrier in issue - no. 144 - was

considered by the police to be a hindrance to the

smooth flow of spectators into pens three and four,

since it sat astride the tunnel exit itself; consequently,

so the theory ran, it was a prime viewing point, behind

the goal and raised, and early spectators tended to

congregate there, thus blocking entry to later arriving

spectators and creating the danger of a build-up in the

tunnel.



          The removal of the barrier, however, involved

the creation of a barrier free corridor from the

tunnel down to the barrier which collapsed, in total

contradiction to the fundamental philosophy of barrier

placement and function.



          In our submission there could not on any

sensible appraisal of the facts have been any contest

between the two theories.     We do not criticise the police

for making the initial suggestion; they were after all

raising a legitimate worry; but they should have been

told flatly by Dr Eastwood that the removal of a lesser

risk would give rise to a far greater one.      As it was
a snap decision of the"Officer Working Party"was made

to remove barrier 144.     Dr Eastwood's explanation was

that, whatever the merits of the decision, he "was

ordered to take it down".



          Regrettably we are driven to submit that this

extraordinary interpretation of events fell far below

the standard of evidence expected of a professional man.



          Mr Bownes, who adjudicated on behalf of the

current Licencing Authority, on his own admission, knew

little about football grounds; his familiarity with the

problems was derived from a fairly cursory reading of

the files inherited from the County Council; he relied,

he said, on the experts.



          The expert was Dr Eastwood.     He had argued in

1985 for the retention of the barrier.     He now was

'influenced by the police view' which was 'tenable'.

It was removed 'on the instruction of the Working Party';

he was not, he insisted, in a position to make a ruling.

It was the Licencing Authority who ruled.



          In our submission the main blame for what was

yet another major blunder lies with Dr Eastwood, an expert
and consultant on safety, who in all probability made

an error of judgement at the time and at the hearing

produced an ex post facto explanation in an attempt

to make the police and Mr Bownes scapegoats.



          For major blunder it turned out to be.     The

surge of spectators entering at 2.52 p.m. cut a swathe

through the crowd, unhindered by a barrier, and caused

the terrible crush in pen three which was the direct

cause of the barrier collapsing.



          I now turn to a consideration of how blunders

of the type which caused the disaster could have occurred

when, subsequent to the Wheatley Report there has been

leglisation to prevent a recurrence of tragedies caused

by overcrowded terraces.



          Pursuant to legislation certain grounds can only

operate if licenced.   However it is plain from the dismal

history of the S.W.F.C.    licence that the system is only as

strong as the Licencing Authority choose it to be, and

each separate watchdog has a discretion as to the sharpness

of its set of teeth.



          In the case of S.W.F.C., the South Yorks. County
Council appear to have erred on the side of near

toothlessness.     The conditions originally laid down

did not embrace the need for stewarding, save in

respect of keeping exits and gangways clear; there

was no provision for the even spreading of spectators

on the Kop and West terrace.     No consideration appears

to have been given to the potentially lethal layout,

in the event of a capacity crowd, at the Leppings Lane

turnstile.



             Furthermore, without any alteration to the

licence, the radial fences were permitted to be installed

without the provision of separate turnstiles.     The

history of the licence in the hands of the successor -

and current - authority, the Sheffield City Council is

somewhat somnolent.      The Officer Working Party has never

been properly convened     and further alterations to the

ground permitted    (including the removal of barrier 144)

without alterations to the licence conditions.     For two

years the licence has been 'under consideration'.



             It is a criminal offence for a Club to breach

the conditions of a licence.     There is no sanction on a

licencing authority to impose any particular conditions.

It is our submission that this reflects a weakness in the
legislation which must be cured.



          On the whole, the Green Guide is an excellent

piece of work.   Defects have, during the course of

the Inquiry, been uncovered.    The perimeter gates

have already been mentioned.   There may   (but we do not

necessarily accept it to be so) be an ambiguity in

relation to the requirement for separate entrances for

separate sections.    Some amendments to the Guide are

clearly called for.



          However, the major weakness of the Guide was

demonstrated several times during the questioning of Dr

Eastwood by Mr Collins.    On each occasion when the latter

pointed to a breach of the Guide, Dr Eastwood's fore­

finger was raised aloft in admonition.     There could be

no breach of the Guide, he several times insisted, since

it contained advice only, and that advice had to be

applied by experts with common sense and professional

judgement.



          We have no means of knowing whether this

attitude is confined to Dr Eastwood or is general.       It

is certainly dangerous and likely to undermine the

effectiveness of the Guide.    This is not the time to
consider the detail, but in our submission, where

practicable, the advice given in the Guide should now

be enshrined in Regulatoins with a criminal sanction.



          Prior to the Hillsborough disaster some

spectators may have looked to the Football Association

to supervise safety arrangements in relation to the major

events staged by them.     After all, they had the task

of choosing from the hundreds available, the grounds

suitable for staging events likely to attract great

crowds - such as semi-finals.     Surely, in making their

choice they would carry out inspections and enquiries

with a view to acting as a safety umbrella.



          Some umbrella!     We now know that in 1989

Mr Kelly wrote to thirteen clubs asking them if they

would be prepared to stage a semi-final.     Twelve replied

in the affirmative.    One of these was Sheffield United

who did not at the time hold a current Safety Certificate

this was apparently unknown to the F.A.     Asked what

would have happened if Bramhall Lane had been chosen as

the venue, Mr Bownes replied that the police would

presumably have refused to police the event.     We

certainly hope so!    However such an occurrence would

have attracted a certain degree of criticism of
the F.A.    (and, we suspect, no little mirth at their

expense).



            The truth is that the enquiries made by the

F.A. are fairly cursory, and inspections are limited

to a visit on thie day of a tie by a representative

who makes a report in relation to such things as crowd

trouble.    For more fundamental matters, the F.A. rely

on the Safety Certificates, the existence of which they

assume, and of the conditions of which they must of

necessity be ignorant.



            Much evidence was given in relation to a

breakdown in radio communication.    We have no technical

evidence to justify the making of any submissions bar

one - namely that if, which we do not accept,

communication between Police Control and others was

thereby inhibited, it would have been a matter of thirty

seconds or so for messengers from Control to carry orders

to serials on either side of the turnstiles.



            Nor do we accept the inevitability of a break­

down in communication between police on the ground

and Control due to crowd noise drowning the radio.       Many

cricket umpires would, we feel sure, be prepared to give
lessons if necessary in the efficacy of hand and arm

signals.



           In summary, therefore, it is our submission

that this tragedy was caused by



(a)        overcrowding of pens three and four prior to

           2.52 p.m. caused by



           (i)     the installation of the radial fences

                   without the installation of separate

                   turnstiles;



           (ii)    the failure   to institute any other system

                   for monitoring the numbers entering

                   the new pens three and four;



           (iii)   the failure   to institute a clear system

                   - understood by club and police - to

                   monitor by observation the density of

                   the crowds in the separate sections;



           (iv)    the failure   of police and club alike

                   actually on the day to monitor or control

                   the numbers   entering pens three and four;
(v)     the   failure of the police and club

        alike on the day to observe and

        appreciate before 2.52 p.m. that pens

        three and four were dangerously over­

        crowded;



overcrowding at or shortly after 2.52 p.m.

caused by



{i)     the   failure of Chief Supt. Duckinfield

        to order the sealing of the tunnel

        before permitting the opening of the

        gates;



(ii)    the   failure of the police and club alike

        to appreciate as early as 2 p.m. that by

        reason of the low number of Liverpool

        supporters in the ground, a problem was

        almost certain to arise in the ensuing

        hour;



(iii)   the   failure to police adequately the

        crowd arriving between 2 p.m. and 2.52

        p.m. at the Leppings Lane end including

        failure to plan for the contingency which
                 occurred, failure to communicate necessary

                 information from Police Control to

                 Supt. Marshall, failure to control and

                 filter the crowd before it reached the

                 turnstile area and permitting the turn­

                 stile area to become packed;



          (iv)   the provision of inadequate turnstiles,

                 poor signposting, and a restricted

                 turnstile area at the Leppings Lane end,

                 providing no margin for safety in the

                 event of a capacity crowd being

                 expected;



(c)       the removal of barrier 144.



          We attach Appendices, listing our complaints

against the Police, S.W.F.C., the two Licencing

Authorities, Dr Eastwood and the F.A.   These complaints

are not intended to be exhaustive, they are confined

in any event to those which in our submission were

causative of deaths or injuries, and they do not

necessarily import criminal or civil liability.
                    APPENDIX I




      FAILURES OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE




1.       Failed When devising a plan     for the policing

of the crowd to ensure that clear arrangements were made

with Sheffield Wednesday Football Club    (S.W.F.C.)

for the control of the numbers entering each separate

pen in the West Terrace.




2.       Requested the installation of radial fences

on the West Terraces without ensuring that by separate

turnstiles or otherwise the safe capacities of each

pen would not be exceeded.




3.       Failed to ascertain, and/or     brief Ground

Commanders in the anticipated flow rates through the

turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end.
                           2.




4.       Failed adequately or at all to brief police

officers in attendance at Hillsborough in Police

Control, Club Control, and West Stand and on the

perimeter at the West end that it was their duty to

monitor the numbers of spectators in the separate

pens on the West Terraces and in particular to observe

and report to Police Control if and when any particular

pen was approaching capacity, particularly when they

knew or ought to have known that S.W.F.C. had ignored

a police warning that the capacity of the West Terraces

as a whole was too high.




5.       Failed adequately or at all to monitor the

numbers of spectators in the separate pens on the West

Terraces from the Police Control Room, and/or the Club

Control Room and/or by Police Officers in the West Stand

and/or by Police Officers on the perimeter fence, but to

the contrary operated a policy of allowing spectators "to

find their own level" on the whole terrace, and on the

basis that so long as spaces existed in any part of a

pen, that pen could not have reached capacity.




6.        Failed to appreciate or ignored the fact that
brick walls at the exit from the tunnel into pens three

and four and the position and size of gates at the rear

of the pens hindered in practice "self levelling" of

spectators throughout the whole terrace.




7.          Failed as early as 2 p.m. when informed that

8,000 fewer were in the ground than the previous year,

and that the majority of those were expected at the

Leppings Lane end to appreciate that a crowd problem

at the Leppings Lane turnstiles was likely to occur and

failed to warn         Superintendent Marshall accordingly.




8.          Failed to observe and report that by 2.45 at

the latest, pens three and four were for all practical

purposes full to, or at the very least were approaching,

capacity.




9.          The officers in Police Control or elsewhere

failed to report to S.W.F.C. by their proper officers

whether the Head Steward or otherwise and/or to the

Stewards in the area between the turnstiles and the

tunnel that by 2.45 at the latest pens three and four
were for all practical purposes full to, or at the

very least were approaching capacity.




10.       Failed to warn the F.A. and/or the Sheffield

City Council and/or S.W.F.C. that in the event of as few

as one third of the total capacity of the North and

West Stands and the West Terraces arriving in Leppings

Lane within a period of fifteen minutes or so, the

police would not be capable of controlling the crowd

and that a dangerous crushing situation was likely to

or might develop.




11.             Superintendent Marshall,



(a)       failed at 2.17, on requesting the closure of

          Lepping Lane, or at any material time thereafter,

          to seek information from Police Control as to

          the approximate numbers still expected through

          the Leppings Lane turnstiles;



(b)       failed between 2.17 and 2.30, or at any material

          time thereafter adequately to respond to a

          situation which he believed to be unprecedented
                         5.




          (namely the arrival at Leppings Lane,

          including the turnstiles area, of sufficient

         numbers to justify the closure of the road

         and which had caused some six to eight

         thousand people to be in the lane with more

         expected) by evaluating the situation and by

         giving orders for the control of the numbers

          joining the crowd already in the bottleneck

         of the turnstile area;



(c)      failed prior to 2.35 to inform Police Control

          that a dangerous situation was developing and   to

          seek advice and guidance from Control and in

         particular from Chief Superintendent Duckinfield.




12.      The officers patrolling the turnstile area and

or Leppings Lane, both mounted and on foot:-



(a)      caused or permitted the area between the

          turnstiles and the blue perimeter fence to

         become jammed with spectators thereby causing

          crowd pressure and rendering movement through

          the turnstiles insufficient;
                         6.




(b)      failed after 2.25 to control the crowd

          approaching the turnstiles area from Leppings

         Lane from both directions adequately or at all,

          if necessary by cordons across the road and the

         use of horses on Leppings Lane nearer the

         roundabout then the turnstiles;



(c)      permitted the build up of several thousand

          spectators with forward impetus when those at

          the front were liable to be crushed either

          against the perimeter gates or against the

          turnstiles wall;



(d)      permitted horses to become trapped within the

          turnstiles area where their presence was

          counterproductive or at least useless when

          they were in fact needed on Leppings Lane.




13.       Failed at 2.17 or at any time thereafter to

inform       Superintendent Marshall of the numbers still

expected to arrive at the ground at the Leppings Lane

end.
         Chief Superintendent Duckinfield:



(a)   having at 2.4 7 been warned by the said Marshall

      that a dangerous situation existed outside the

      turnstiles and that "the gates" should be

      opened, failed, despite two intervening and

      urgently expressed identical requests to give

      an answer until 2.52;



(b)   failed between 2.47 and 2.52 to evaluate the

      consequence inside the ground of opening the

      gates and in particular the danger that those

      entering by Gate C would be likely to or

      might enter pens three and four via the tunnel;



(c)   having correctly decided at 2.52 to order the

      opening of the gates failed prior to transmitting

      such an order to warn S.W.F.C. and his own

      officers in the area of his intended action in

      order to prevent further ingress into pens three

      and four by sealing the tunnel;



(d)   failed to inform the Ground Commander, Superintendent

      Greenwood that he had ordered the opening of the

      gates and that there was a likelihood (or even
            a possibility) that further spectators might

            have entered the already packed pens three and

            four.




15.         The officers in Police Control, Club Control,

in the West Stand and/or on the West perimeter fence,

failed to appreciate sufficiently quickly that the

problems obviously existing in pens three and four were

not due to hooliganism or an attempted 'pitch invasion'

but were to the contrary due to overcrowding and in

consequence failed in time to take action to save further

crushing.




16.         Failed to train, instruct and/or   brief the

officers on the perimeter fence adequately in the

dangers of and consequent upon overcrowding, but to

the contrary so concentrated their minds on the problems

consequent on hooliganism and pitch invasions that their

judgement was likely to be clouded.




17.         Failed, by tannoy and/or signals   or otherwise

to order or arrange for the immediate e\racuation through
the tunnel of spectators at the rear of the pens

three and four to relieve pressure to enable those at

the front to comply with otherwise impossible demands

by police on the perimeter fence to move backwards.




18.         Failed at 2.15 p.m. or at any other material

time thereafter to arrange for the postponement of the

kick-off.




19.         The senior officers on the perimeter fence

failed in the period between it becoming apparent to

them that there was overcrowding resulting in injuries

and the arrival of Chief Superintendent Nesbitt, to

organise a rescue operation.




20.         Failed to institute a system of hand and arm

signals to enable officers on the ground to communicate

with Police Control in the event of crowd noise or

breakdown causing the radios to be inaudible.




            The officers both outside the ground and on the
perimeter fence failed to appreciate that where crowd

pressure had developed, the proper way to relieve

such pressure was to achieve it from the rear forwards

and not from the front backwards.




22.      Operated a general policy of   crowd control on

the false assumptions



(a)      that a crowd arriving in large numbers at a

          football match in 1989 would be wholly sober,

          patient and self disciplined, all with tickets

          and with a desire for 'policing by consent'

          and that in consequence little control by

          police officers would be called for; and



(b)      that because no problems had   arisen from their

          policing plan in the past, no problems would

          arise in the future.
                      APPENDIX II




      FAILURES OF SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB




1.          Failed to provide at the Leppings Lane end

adequate turnstiles facilities to accommodate a crowd

of 24,000; such facilities would have included:



(a)         at least 30 turnstiles;



(b)         turnstiles accommodated on a straight wall     or

             on two or more straight walls to enable

             spectators to queue parallel to each other;



(c)         adequate space between the turnstiles and the

             public part of Leppings Lane to permit longer

             parallel queuing than at present possible, and

             to accommodate in the region of 7,000

             spectators, but certainly more than 5,000;
(d)      the provision of parallel rails at right

          angles to the turnstiles to delineate the

          queues at each turnstile;



(e)      clear signs, plainly visible to approaching

          spectators indicating the separate turnstiles

          for the North and West Stands and the West

          End Terraces.




2.       Failed within the ground at the Leppings Lane

end to sign clearly the existence of, and way to,

pens 1/2 and 6/7.




3.       Failed to provide any mechanical or any other

means of monitoring the numbers in the individual pens

on:the West Terraces.




4.       Ignored a warning from the police that the

designated capacity of the West Terraces as a whole was

too high for safety.
5.       Failed to co-ordinate with the police and

agree a clear division of responsibility for the

visual monitoring of the numbers in the pens on the

West Terraces.




6.       Obtained a Safety Certificate on a representation

to the City Council that they had agreed a system of

crowd control with the police, when no clear system had

been agreed which would in a semi-final have monitored

effectively the numbers in each pen or section.




7.        Failed to appreciate that by reason of the

existence of the radial fences, the projecting walls

at the rear of pens three and four and the size and

position of the gates in the radial fences, the crowd

required assistance from stewards and/or police to

enable even spread to be achieved.




8.        Failed to inform the police of the estimated

flow rate through the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane

end.
9.          Failed to observe that by 2.45 at the latest

pens three and four were full or at the least

approaching capacity.




10.         Failed to institute any or any adequate

system for informing stewards and/or police in the

concourse between the turnstiles and the West Stand

wall that pens three and four were approaching

capacity.




11.         Failed to station any or sufficient stewards

in the concourse between the turnstiles and the West

Stand Wall to enable them if and when necessary to

direct spectators from any pen which was approaching or

had reached capacity, and failed to formulate any plan

for the sealing of the tunnel (by closing one or both

doors, by moveable barriers or by a cordon of police or

stewards or otherwise).




12.         Failed to inform stewards and/or police between

the turnstiles and the West Stand wall that by 2.45 at

the very latest pens three and four were full or at the
least approaching capacity, and when this was or

ought to have been visible on the Club's C.C.T.V.

monitors.




13.         Placed   in the perimeter fence, in particular

in pens three and four, gates which were too small to

be exit gates.




14.         Failed   to place stewards at the gates in

the perimeter fence, with clear instructions as to

when to open the them.




15.         Failed   to ensure that the crush barriers in

pens three and four were of adequate strength and

permitted the removal of barrier 144.
                   APPENDIX III




              FAILURES OF DR EASTWOOD




1.       Failed as the Club's     Safety Consultant to

advise against the erection of radial fences without

the installation of separate turnstiles.




2.       Failed, when his own     plans for new turnstiles

had been abandoned, to advise the Club of the necessity

to remove the radial fences.




3.       Accepted assurances that the Club and the

Police had agreed a system of monitoring the numbers

entering the pens at the Leppings Lane and, when on

a proper analysis, it should have been clear that no

such system could operate efficiently, particularly if

the pens were not filled one by one.
4.        Regarded the pens formed by the radial

fences as still constituting one individual terrace.




5.        Failed to advise against the removal of

barrier 144, and failed to warn the Club, the Officer

Working Party and/or the Sheffield City Council of the

dangers thereof.
                    APPENDIX IV




       FAILURES OF THE LICENCING AUTHORITIES



South Yorks C.C.



1.        Granted S.W.F.C. a licence containing

inadequate conditions:     adequate conditions would have

provided for:



(a)      suitable   exit gates in the perimeter fences;



(b)      adequate   stewarding to prevent uneven spread

          of spectators and overcrowding;



(c)      separate   entrances for each separate section

          of the ground.




2.       Permitted the erection     of radial fences without

the simultaneous installation of separate turnstile

entrances.
Sheffield City Council




1.        Failed adequately timeously or at all to

review the S.W.F.C. licence.




2.        Failed to convene meetings of the Officer

Working Party.




3.        Permitted the removal of barrier 144 without

considered advice from the Officer Working Party and

without having adequately analysed and considered the

views of the Police and Dr Eastwood.




4.        Renewed the S.W.F.C. licence when the conditions

thereon were inadequate.
                    APPENDIX V




       FAILURES OF THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION




          Chose Hillsborough as a venue for semi­

final ties when they:



3,.      Had   failed to consider the terms of the

          S.W.F.C. licence.



2.       Had   failed to make a detailed inspection

          of :the stadium and its approaches and/or an

          appraisal of its facilities.



3-       Had   failed to ascertain the means whereby the

          numbers entering the Leppings Lane pens would

          be monitored.



4.       Had   failed to consider whether, whichever

          team was allocated the West and North Stands

          and West Terraces, the Leppings Lane end turnstiles

          could comfortably cope with a crowd of 24,300.
           HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM ENQUIRY




           SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE
               INJURED AND BEREAVED




          On 15th April 1989, 95 men, women and children

died and very many more were injured, at the Hillsborough

Stadium, Sheffield.   The object of this Enquiry is to

determine what caused those deaths and injuries.



          The immediate cause of death was crushing,

and the immedate cause of the crushing was over­

crowding in pens three and four at the West end of

the ground.



          What then caused the overcrowdina?   It is

submitted that beyond doubt there were two causes;

the first in time was the presence in those pens prior

to 2.52 p.m. of too many spectators for safety, and
                          2.




certainly more than would have been permitted had

safety capacities been designated in accordance

with the advice given by the Home Office in the

"Green Guide"; and certainly more in aggregate than

the 2,200 apparently but not actually designated.



           It is submitted that this overcrowding was

certainly the cause of many injuries, possibly the

immediate cause of some deaths and certainly a

contributory factor in the remaining deaths and injuries.



           The second cause of the overcrowding was the

ingress into pens three and four at or immediately

after 2.52 p.m. of hundreds of spectators due to the

opening of gate C at the Leppings Lane end of the

stadium.



           What was the cause of the overcrowding prior

to 2.52 p.m.?



           There were, in our submission, two basic

causes, the first the configuration and construction of

the pens themselves, and the second the absence of any

system for filling the pens to a safe or any other

specific capacity.
                          3.




          There can now, at the conclusion of the

evidence, be little if any doubt as to the genesis

of the potentially lethal pens three and four.



          It is clear that the initial impetus for

a change in the terraces at the West end came from

the police and was inspired by a desire to ensure the

segregation of spectators.     This was a very reasonable

and sensible desire.   The splitting of the long

terrace into, effectively/ three - later four - pens

had, from a policing view two clear advantages.       Fir&t,

it is easier to control the behaviour of a crowd if it

is split into small self-contained units, and second,

by creating separate pens it would be possible to

accommodate both 'home' and 'away' supporters at the

West end of the ground.



          The obvious disadvantage of putting in radial

fences without further changes was that they would

override and render virtually useless the system of

monitoring the overall capacity of the terrace     (10,100)

by means of the computer based on .'the turnstiles.     I

say "virtually useless" because one method of using the

turnstiles remained as an option - namely the filling of

pens one by one using the computer figures progressively.
                          4.




           This system was suggested by Mr Evans of

the F.A.   Whilst, as we shall see, filling of pens

progressively was practiced for league games there is

no firm evidence that the computer was used as a

monitor, and in any event the method is hardly, to

use a phrase now in vogue,     'customer-friendly'.



           An examination of the documents and the oral

evidence leads to the painful conclusion that nobody

in a position of responsibility ever addressed their

minds to this problem.



           Dr Eastwood claimed in his evidence that he

had considered the matter and had been given an assurance

by the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club     ("S.W.F.C.")

that once the radial fences were installed they would

operate a system of monitoring the numbers entering the

individual pens.



           With all respect to Dr Eastwood, it is difficult

to accept that evidence, and our submission is that his

recollection is faulty.   He is an intelligent man.     Had

his mind been adverted, in 1981, to the problem of

controlling the numbers in the individual pens, he would

have - must have - appreciated that there are only two
                           5.




methods of control - mechanical or by observation.

Control by observation cannot possibly be successful

even to an approximaticki; estimating the number of

spectators in a section of the terraces would have

nullified the requirements of the Green Guide and the

conditions in the Safety Certificate relating to

safe capacities.



           Our submission is that, in dealing with one

problem, namely crowd segregation, those responsible

completely overlooked a second problem - control of

safe capacities, which in the real world could only be

effected by having separate turnstiles for each separate

section.



           It was asserted many times during the course

of the evidence, both by Dr Eastwood and senior police

officers, that the erection of the radial fences did

not in fact create separate pens on the West terraces,

because there was free movement    from   pens three and

four at the very back of the fence dividing them (in fact

a narrow strip between the end of the radial fence and

the end of the entrance tunnel).   This argument, when

applied to the physical conditions on the ground, enters

the realms of unreality.   The radial gates are narrow
                          6.




and situated at the very back of the terrace, on the

last and uppermost step; the retaining wall of the

tunnel projects well   beyond the uppermost steps; when

the pens are relatively full, let alone when they are

full to capacity it is so fantastical to regard the

terraces as undivided that it is difficult to believe

that men of intelligence could ever have believed

this to be so; it is indeed so difficult to accept that

it is our submission that this argument has been thought

up ex post facto to attempt to excuse what we submit was

the actual error committed - namely to have overlooked

the problem completely.



          It is further submitted that the alteration to

the terrace by the erection of the radial fences was so

fundamental and the absence of separate turnstiles so

glaringly obious that the oversight constituted a major

blunder and not merely an excusable error of judgment.



          Before considering whose blunder it w a s , it

should be recalled that in 19 85 Dr Eastwood actually

drew up plans which would effectively have achieved

the creation of separate pens; these plans were dropped;

there is no minute of the S.W.F.C. Board recording the

abandonment of the planned improvement but we see no
                          7.




reason to reject the explanation now given - namely that

the money set aside for the work was redirected to fire

prevention in the wake of the Popplewell report on the

Bradford City disaster.



          There is nothing in the documentation which

suggests that safety - and the means of ensuring safe

capacities - was a consideration in the contemporaneous

discussions, but those responsible are caught by a

Morton's fork; if they did not even by then appreciate

the real need for separate turnstiles, the continuing

oversight aggravated the previous blunder made in 1981;

if they did, then on the abandonment of the scheme they

should have been keenly alerted to the continuing dangers

presented by the radial fences.



          Those responsible were clearly the police, who

had inspired the idea of the radial fences and were

members of the Officer Working Party, the South Yorkshire

County Council who were the local authority responsible

for the Safety Certificate required by S.W.F.C.,purusant

to the provisions of the Safety at Sports Grounds Act

1975, Dr Eastwood and of course S.W.F.C. itself.



          It is simply not possible to make submissions
                           8.




relating to the thinking of (or absence of it) of

the Club and the County Council, since the latter

has been disbanded and no officer has been called as

a witness, and the then secretaries of S.W.F.C., Mr

England and Mr Chester were also absent from the witness

box; it is therefore difficult at this stage to place

the responsibility precisely where it ought to lie,

but all those referred to clearly contributed to the

initial blunder.



            The witnesses who were called from the Club

and the present licencing authority, the Sheffield

City Council, deserve some sympathy.



            Mr Mackrell succeeded Mr England's successor,

Mr Chester; there being no interregnum he received no

briefing but read the file.



            Mr Bownes inherited his can of worms from a

different authority without a briefing but he also read

the file.    Mitigation is not an excuse, and in our

submission, whilst acknowledging the former, there can

be no excuse for either man in not recognising the

existence of a problem.
                            9.




            It would appear from the documentation that

the only person to pick up the possibility of a problem

was A.D.O. Grimshaw of the Fire Service who at a meeting

of the Officer Working Party on 18 April 1985, raised

the question of the safe spreading of the crowds in

the terraces.    If he   is believed he was given an assurance

by the police, in the person of Inspector Calvert, that

suitable arrangements existed between the Club and the

police for the safe packing of the terraces.     In our

submission there is no reason to disbelieve him.



            A.D.O. Grimshaw is of course to be congratulated

for raising the matter.     Since the prime concern of the

Fire Service was, and is, the prevention and fighting

of fire, evacuation and rescue we do not criticise his

acceptance of an assurance which on a detailed analysis

he would have found worthless.



            It is now necessary to examine that assurance,

and the whole lamentable history of the "arrangements"

between the police and S.W.F.C. in relation to 'crowd

control'.


            Confused thinking leads to the use of imprecise

language; imprecise language, applied to prevailing

circumstances, leads to confusion of action.     Barristers
and Judges are not infrequently lampooned for what is

seen as pomposity of language; that pomposity is however

usually   (though admittedly not always!) the result of

an effort to achieve precision of language to avoid

misunderstandings.   During the course of the evidence,

witnesses referred frequently to 'crowd control',      'packing

or filling the terraces',    'spreading the crowd',   'the

need for a police or steward presence on the terraces', a

terrace being 'full' or the 'direction of spectators'.

Such phrases are also used in documentation.



           It is clear from an examination of the use made

of these phrases that they bore for different people

different meanings; this led to misunderstandings and

these materially contributed to the overcrowding of pens

three and four prior to the opening of Gate C.



           A proper analysis of these phrases leads to

the following conclusion.    Crowd control consists of a

number of different tasks.    First, there is the control,

by prevention and if necessary suppression, of misbehaviour

second there is the task of preventing a crowd in excess

of capacity in each separate section of the terraces;

third, within each separate section, the task of ensuring

an even spread of spectators to avoid uncomfortable or

dangerous pressure building up in one part of the section;
                          11.




fourth the task in the stands of directing spectators

to their correct seats; fifth, the task of directing

spectators at the turnstiles to their correct stairways

or entrances to the terraces; sixth the task of

ensuring that gangways and exits are kept clear for

use in an emergency evacuation.



          The term 'crowd control' may be and has been

used to refer to any or all of the above activities;

it is a dangerously imprecise and ambiguous term;

similarly the term 'packing or filling the terraces'

has been used to describe both the second and third of

the above tasks with consequent misunderstanding between

user and listener   (or reader).



           Despite the overall confusion I propose to

deal at length only with those misunderstandings which

have a direct bearing on the Hillsborough tragedy.      The

remainder can be dealt with shortly.



           Control of crowd behaviour is a matter for the

police.   There has never been any or any material mis­

understanding in this respect.     The input of the Club

and the stewards will be minimal and confined to alerting

the police when they observe situations that have, or
                           12.




are about to become, out of control.



            The manner in which the police deal with

misbehaviour is a matter for them and them alone.

Methods and policy will vary from ground to ground,

and from match to match; action to be taken when an

incident occurs must be a matter for the discretion of

each individual police officer, dictated by his or her

experience, training and briefing.     Operational decisions

in relation to crime, both constitutionally and as a

matter of common sense, must be for the Chief Constable

and for him and him alone.



            Thus, it would be a fruitless - and constitutionally

dangerous - exercise to consider whether, in respect of

the control of crowd behaviour police officers should or

should not have 'a presence on the terraces', or when

they should enter terraces to effect arrests, or whether

and when they should use sterile gangways or "pens"    (e.g.

"pen" 5).



            We submit that no misunderstandings existed in

relation to this aspect of crowd control; if they did,

they did not contribute to the tragedy.
                            13.




            Nor do we believe that there were any

material misunderstandings in respect of the fourth

and sixth tasks.     They were both on paper and in

fact tasks for S.W.F.C. to perform; they were in fact

performed by them.     The fifth task was clearly for the

Club to perform.     In fact it was badly performed on the

day of the tragedy,    (as we shall see) but it could never

have been thought by the Club that it was a policing

function.



            Serious misunderstandings arose about the

second and third tasks, but on a close examination of

the evidence, although the confusion over the

responsibility for the even spread of the crowd within

the separate sections was almost scandalous it did not

in truth contribute to the tragedy, which arose not

because in pens three and four there were spaces in some

places and overcrowding in others, but because over the

overwhelming majority of the areas of the pens the crowd

was packed like sardines.



            The responsibility for this task lay

unequivocally in the first place on S.W.F.C.       The Green

Guide specifically says so.       Cross-examination on behalf

of the police - no doubt on instructions - reflected
                           14.




however a confusion on their part of just what this

function entailed.



           It was suggested that there should have been

a stewarding presence on the terraces.      The Safety

Certificate did not however provide for stewards on the

West terraces.   Should it have done so?



           At the rear of the radial fences there were

gates; these were controlled by the police - or ought

to have been.    There were no designated gangways for

the stewards to keep clear on the West terraces.         From

the rear of each pen it would not be easy to ascertain

whether one area of a pen was more closely packed than

another.



           In any event even spread of spectators within

the separate pens was not a problem of any substance.

The smaller the pen, the less the problem.      The real

problem of uneven spread is likely to arise on a terrace

the size of the Kop with its capacity of 21,000.         Even

assuming that that capacity      ’is not exceeded there remains

danger from uneven spread on that enormous terrace.



           It is worth digressing shortly from the
                          15.




causes of the tragedy to consider "even spread".        The

only satisfactory means of ensuring this result is by

observation of the terrace from the touchline and/or

by CCTV monitors where they exist, and by exhortations

to the spectators in the overcrowded areas to move in

one direction or another; these exhortations may be made

by tanoy or by stewards on the touchline either by

gestures or by loud hailers.



          This task is, as I have said, in the end for

the Club to perform.   However at Hillsborough with its

CCTY monitors and Police Control Box it would be common

sense for the police to be involved.     Due to mis­

understandings due to confusion of thought this task was

simply not performed at all at Hillsborough; it is more

important to perform it at the Kop end    (and easier

though less important to perform on the West terraces by

reason of the position of the Police Control Box) and it

is crucial - indeed in the light of the tragedy, literally

vital - that the Club and the police get their act

together before another capacity or near capacity crowd

is permitted again on the Kop.



          I now turn at last to the only task involved in

crowd control which materially contributed to the deaths
                         16.




and injuries, namely the task of filling the various

sections of the terraces so as to avoid exceeding the

designated safe capacities - or alternatively, and

sadly, if no safe capacities were designated or it

was the policy of the Club or the police not to seek

to achieve this aim, at the very least the task of

monitoring the crowds in the individual sections so

as to prevent them reaching danger levels.



          It may be objected that a level that has not

reached danger point must logically be safe, and that

therefore the tasks coincide.   This may well sub­

consciously have been the thinking of police, Club,

Dr Eastwood and the licensing authorities.   If so, and

there was no direct evidence to support such a suspicion,

it was wrong.



          In all activities material to this Inquiry

safety limits are set well below danger point.     The safe

working load of a chain is not the load just below that

which will break the chain, but a fraction of it.

Similarly, the safe capacity of a pen will be well below

the capacity which will produce death or injury.



          On the occasion of the semi-final between
                            17.




Liverpool and Nottingham Forest nobody monitored the

safe capacity of pens three and four at the Leppings

Lane end; had anybody tried to do so they would in

fact have been attempting the impossible, since neither

pen three nor pen four had a designated safe capacity;

nor was any system operated even for monitoring the West

terraces to ensure that the danger point of over­

crowding was not reached.     (The aggregate safe capacity

of the various West pens and the designated safe capacity

of the Kop were of course being monitored by the computer

based on the turnstiles - in the latter case effectively.)



          These tragic blunders directly led to the

dangerous overcrowding of the central pens behind the

Leppings Lane end goal; what caused them?



          They were caused by confused thinking, muddled

and imprecise language and, inevitably, a total break­

down in communcation between S.W.F.C. and the police.

The ambiguous use of the term 'packing the pens' or

'packing the terraces' may well lie at the root of this

bungle.



          It is, at the end of weeks of evidence, not

difficult to summarise the sequence of events.
                            18.




             Once the radial fences were installed an

unprecedented situation arose - the existence of separate

pens without separate turnstile-controlled entrances.

They had been created specifically to segregate Sheffield

Wednesday supporters from visiting supporters, so as

to enable the Leppings Lane end to be used safely by

both in League    (or presumably cup) matches involving

the home side.



             Attendances at these matches being as a rule

well below capacity, it was the wish of the police not

to use all the pens where this was unnecessary, since

a lightly filled pen encouraged movement by those bent

on trouble rather than enjoying the quality of the foot­

ball.   A system therefore developed, by agreement between

the Club and the police, whereby the police accepted the

responsibility for filling these pens at league matches.



             The safe capacities of the pens was clearly

not in the forefront of police thinking, if it entered

it at all.     In fact the police view was that the overall

safe capacity of the West terraces was too high, but they

raised no clamour when nothing was done about it;

the overall capacity of the combined contral pen had
                            19.




been set at 2,200 - too high by Green Guide criteria;

and after that pen was itself split the figures of

1,000 and 1,200 for the resulting two pens had been

informally set by one of Dr Eastwood's partners and

had no official standing at all.     But let all these

blunders pass; they had little if any bearing on the

tragedy, since no attempt was made to restrict the crowd

in any individual pen to a particular number of

spectators.



             The police operated a system of filling the

terraces pen by pen, by utilising moveable barriers

and police officers; theoretically they could, as

suggested by Mr Evans of the F.A., have used the computer

and swift mathematics to ensure that safe capacities -

in those pens where they existed! - were not exceeded,

 but there is little or no evidence to suggest that this

was done; using observation and judgement they would

declare one pen full, close it off and then fill another.



             Thus it was,the Green Guide and the South

Yorkshire Police Standing Orders notwithstanding, that

it became accepted in practice that the police "packed

the pens".
                           20.




           Seven years passed before Hillsborough was

awarded the first semi-final subsequent to the

installation of the radial fences; seven years is not

a period normally regarded as beyond the memory of man,

but it was apparently beyond the reach of the corporate

memories of the police and S.W.F.C.    Nobody apparently

recalled that the system of packing by police, designed

for supporter segregation, had never - could never -

have been intended to erode the need to ensure that safety

capacities were not exceeded.     (The Club was of course

entitled to fulfil its obligations by means of servants

or agents - and had every right to use the police, if

they agreed, to carry out duties for which it in the

last resort was responsible.)



           Thus it came about when Leeds United met

Coventry City in the semi-final of 1988 that there being

no need to segregate supporters at the Lappings Lane

end   (the whole of the North and West stands and the West

terraces being allocated to Leeds United, and the South

stand and Kop to Coventry City)   the police took no action

to "pack the pens".



           "Crowd control" had become synonymous with

"packing the pens";   "packing the pens" had become
synonymous with -the successive opening filling and

closing of pens; the latter not being necessary, the

police did virtually nothing to monitor the numbers

entering the pens.   The policy was to allow into the

whole terrace the safe capacity and then - the separation

of the pens notwithstanding - to permit spectators "to

find their own level", the theory being that if a

spectator felt him or herself being crushed, or in pain,

or maybe only in extreme discomfort, he or she would

push out of the crowd, find an exit and somehow transfer

to a pen less crowded.                                     J



            It would be difficult, it is submitted, to

choose language stronger than that justified by the

evidence.   Such a policy might have been arguably only

mildly idiotic on the Kop, where at least lateral

movement was possible; in the Leppings Lane pens it

was crass, so crass indeed that we are tempted to submit

that the probability is that no senior police officer

actually ever knowingly instituted such a policy, but

that, no thought ever having been given to the matter,

and no Chief Superintendent being willing to admit to a

monumental blunder, the oversight was ex post facto

dignified with the cloak of a system.
                              22.




             Be that as it may, the "system" of the fans

finding their own level on the terraces was attested

to by Chief Superintendant Mole, the Commander in

1988     (D7, p.13), Assistant Chief Constable Jackson

(DIO, p .27), Superintendant Marshall        (DIO, p .77) and

Inspector Creaser      (D14, p.20).     Superintendant

Greenwood, the actual Ground Commander on the day of the

tragedy, on the other hand, was, for a senior police

witness, unusually frank; he did not know what the

arrangement was if pens three and four became full

(D12, p . 47).    Chief Superintendant Duckinfield, as

we shall see       later, thought the whole responsibility

was that of S.W.F.C. and nothing to do with the police

(D7, p . 120; D8, p. 76; D 8 , p.77).



             To    return to the 1988 semi-final, and to the

area between       the turnstiles and the wall of the West

stand.     Seven turnstiles were allocated to the terraces;

on entering the ground the large tunnel leading to pens

three and four lay ahead; to reach pens six and seven,

which were in no way signed, one had to pass through

a narrow gate in a brick wall to the left; to reach

pens one and two - which were very inadequately sign­

posted - the route lay to the right; the totality of

the evidence      (some evidence to the contrary in relation
                            23.




to the semi-final of 1981 notwithstanding) was, it is

submitted, to the effect that in any event those fans

who knew the layout would make for the pens behind

the goal; and so it fell out that those pens soon

became so overcrowded that some fans were making their

way out (giving some minimal support, no doubt, to the

"finding their own level" theory!)    as others were

streaming in.



          Tragedy was averted that year only because

some police officers, using their own initiative, and

realising that the central pens were full, closed off

the tunnel and directed fans thereafter to the wing

pens.   It is submitted that those officers must have

been of junior rank; three factors point to this

conclusion.     First, no senior officer who gave evidence

had heard of the incident, since it had not been included

in the debriefing reports; had a sergeant or above known

of the closing of the tunnel then it would have reached

the debriefing.     Second, there was no provision for such

an action in the briefings and was thus unlikely to have

been part of an Inspector's policy without some prior

or subsequentreport to a more senior officer; third,

and lamentably, a sober consideration of the evidence

and actions of all ranks leads to the conclusion that a
                            24.




search for 'policing skills in the South Yorkshire

Force is more likely to be successful among the

junior ranks than among the senior.



          By 1989 the police were perfectly satisfied

with their system.     It was stoutly defended by more

than one senior officer on the ground that it had always

previously worked satisfactorily.     It is submitted that

this argument is doubly flawed.



          First, the fact that a system or procedure

has not in the past resulted in disaster is no

guarantee that it will always remain so successful,

particularly if on an objective appraisal it is

reasonably foreseeable that it will result in danger.

Many is the unfenced guillotine or in-running nip that

has not, for a period of years, amputated or mangled an

operative's arml     Complacency is the worst enemy of

safety.



          Second, as we have seen, the policy was not

successful in 1988; many spectators behind the goal

at the Lappings Lane end suffered discomfort and worse,

and a major tragedy was only averted by the initiative

taken by police officers of probable lowly status.
          And so it was that in 1989, in the absence

of any controls, the crowd swarmed into pens three

and four; it is impossible to prove when the overall

"capacity" of 2,200 was reached or exceeded just as it

is impossible to prove when the crowd reached danger

point.   Bearing in mind that spectators themselves

have become conditioned to uncomfortable crowd

conditions, it is submitted that the probability is

that the pens had reached 'capacity' by 2.30 p.m.;

by 2.45 p.m. the evidence points to them being

uncomfortably overcrowded to the point of danger;

certainly prior to 2.52 p.m., the evidence suggests,

injuries had been suffered and it is even possible that

deaths had occurred.



          This situation was hardly hidden from sight.

It developed in the full view of the Police Control

Box above and immediately to one side of the pens;

there were police officers   (but no stewards) on the

perimeter fence; there were police officers and stewards

the West stand with a bird's eye view; there were senior

officers and S.W.F.C. officials in other parts of the

ground with a clear view of the West terraces.   With

the exception of the junior ranks on the perimeter fence

who had had no briefing whatsoever in crowd capacities,
                         26.




all were to blame.



          Most particularly was the approach of the

police, persisted in throughout the hearing, to blame.

Cross-examination on their behalf, again no doubt on

instructions, reflected that approach.     If spectators

could move their arms, they were not overcrowded; if a

square centimetre of space could be observed between

spectators on photographs, why, to be sure, there must

have been room for at least one more fan!



          These then were the causes of the chronic

overcrowding of the pens prior to 2.52 p.m. - first

the installation of the radial fences without the

installation of separate turnstiles; second the failure

even to attempt any other system for controlling the

numbers entering the pens; third the failure to observe

that the pens actually were overcrowded.



               This was the situation when at 2.52 p.m.

hundreds of fans entered pens three and four causing

additional pressure, a surge down the terrace and the

immediate deaths of all or most of the 95 who died and

many more injuries.
           The cause of this unwelcome ingress was the

opening of Gate C; the cause of the opening of the

gate was an order given by Chief Supt. Duckinfield;

that order was caused by a request from Supt. Marshall;

that request in turn was caused by the crowd situation

outside the turnstiles in Leppings Lane.    It will be

necessary to examine the cause of that crowd situation,

but first I turn to the other actions referred to.



           Supt. Marshall, the Commander outside the

ground at the Leppings Lane end first made a request for

the gates to be opened at 2.47 p.m.; he repeated his

requests, making his last at 2.52 p.m.



           For reasons which will be apparent when the

crowd situation is considered we do not submit that Supt.

Marshall was wrong to make his requests, nor do we

criticise Chief Supt. Duckinfield for acceding to that

request.   However there was no necessary cause and effect

between ordering the gates to be opened and the entry of

hundreds of spectators into the already overcrowded p e n s .



           We believe that we are on safe ground in submitting

that it was a blunder for Chief Supt. Duckinfield to have

ordered the opening of the gates before ordering the
                            28.




closure of the tunnel, since in evidence he admitted

that it was    (indeed, apart from a minor error admitted

by Mr Bownes, the only error we believe admitted by

anyone at the hearing!).



             That it was a fundamental and inexcusable

blunder can be demonstrated from the time-scale; this

was no oversight committed in the agony of the moment

in response to a sudden emergency; between four minutes

and one second and five minutes and fifty nine seconds

elapsed between Supt. Marshall's first request and Mr

Duckinfield's decision.     There was ample time - even

taking four minutes - to make a full appraisal of the

situation.     He was in the Control Box directly overlooking

pens three and four; he was in a prime position to see

that at the very least they were full to a safe capacity;

he had a very experienced superintendant telling him of

a potentially lethal situation at the turnstiles and he

knew because he had walked the ground of the juxtaposition

of Gate C and the tunnel.



             In our submission there is evidence to justify

a finding as to the reason for Mr Duckinfield's fatal

error.   In the face of repeated urgent requests from Mr

Marshall, Mr Duckinfield remained silent.     He had beside
him the experienced Mr Murray; he neither asked his advice

nor did he use him as a sounding board for his own

thoughts; he only made his actual decision upon Mr

Murray saying "Mr Duckinfield, are you going to open

the gates?".   One can only guess as to the inflexion

in Mr Murray's voice   (unless his own loyal evidence -

that it was a simple question and tliat he thought

his chief was evaluating the situation - is accepted

at face value).   In our submission the evidence points

to Mr Duckinfield having been frozen in indecision,

and his final decision, given in response to Mr Murray's

prompting was a snap one, taken without real thought.



           What then caused Mr Marshall's requests?

Beyond., doubt at 2.47 p.m. the situation outside the

Leppings Lane turnstiles was serious, potentially fatal

and beyond the control of the police.    The case presented

by the police, that this situation was unforseeable due

to the late arrival of thousands of Liverpool fans a

large proportion of whom were drunk, hooligans or without

tickets   (or all three), simply will not, in our

submission stand up to scrutiny - though it did, of course

to the deep distress of the injured and bereaved, provide

field day for the sub-editors of our popular press.       (It

may be worth observing here that if there is one group
                         30.




of citizens less open to restraint than drunken

football fans, it is sober sub-editors.)



          Our submission, to the contrary, is that the

undoubted presence of drunken, ill-behaved and non­

ticket holding fans notwithstanding, the chaos outside

the ground at 2.47 was entirely foreseeable and was due

first to the unsuitability of the Leppings Lane

entrance to Hillsborough to cope with a capacity crowd,

second to a total absence of communication of crucial

information between the inside and outside of the ground,

and third to poor policing in Leppings Lane itself and

the area between the turnstiles and the road.



          Many of the problems facing the police on 15th

April 1989 had their origin in the different conditions

encountered in the run-of-the mill league and cup games

involving the home Club, and those resulting from semi­

final ties - rare enough occurrences in recent years;

one in 1981, and then two in successive years.    The

Club and the police appear: to have been lulled into a

false sense of security by the adequacy of the stadium

as a whole to cope with crowds of 15,000 or so, and the

absence of disasters on the rare occasions since the rise

of Sheffield Wednesday to the First Division when a
capacity or near capacity crowd had arrived   (e.g. visits

by Manchester United).



          The sad, but visually obvious, truth is that

the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground has for many

years been a potential death trap; that it has not until

1989 fulfilled its lethal potential has been due to

generally low crowds^ different conditions applying

to league matches, only three semi-finals having been

played in the last decade and good fortune and good

policing having attended the other two.



          The principal feature of the Leppings Lane

end is the configuration of the road and turnstile

area (i.e. the area between the turnstiles and the blue

entrance gates near the bend in Leppings Lane).   Crowds

approaching down the lane from the roundabout and from

the direction of Catchbar Lane over the River Don bridge,

funnel through the entrance gates and congregate in the

restricted turnstile area; this has, apart from its

inadequate area and insufficient turnstiles, the further

unfortunate feature, the arc formation of the two banks of

tnrnstiles.   Applying the Green Guide maximum criteria

that area could only accommodate 4,700 spectators in

safety if they were stationary; but crowds at a turnstile
                          32.




are not stationary; they have a continuing forward

impetus.



           It is not really necessary to enter the realms

of mathematics in order to call into question the

sufficiency of the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end;

the rate of flow depends on a smooth and continuous

passage of spectators, and this may be hindered by a

crush at the narrow entries, by a machinery malfunction

or by a spectator presenting the wrong   (or no!) ticket;

there can therefore be no certainty as to what the flow

rate will be at any given time.



           Furthermore, since for a semi-final twenty

three turnstiles are provided unevenly for a total of

24,300 and since it would be impossible for a police

officer observing a crowd approaching the turnstile area

to know for which part of the ground they were destined,

he would require information from Club Control gleaned

from the computer to know how long it would be likely to

take to get them into the ground.



           However, applying Green Guide figures it is clear

that Mr Collins was right to assert that given the best

possible conditions it would take one and a half hours
                           33.




for a crowd to enter   (though our figure actually

comes to one hour twenty four minutes).



            Since on the one hand a few people arrive

more than one and a half hours before kick-off the

turnstiles would not have to deal with all 24,300 in the

last ninety minutes; on the other hand, conditions are

never perfect, the flow would rarely be the maximum of

7:50 per hour per turnstile.



            Moreover, the turnstiles provided for the

terraces were a mere seven for 10,100; i.e. one per

1,400; those for the West stand seats were six for

4,500.i.e. one per 740.    Thus the reality on the ground

was that it would take a minimum period of about one hour

to fill the stand, but nearly two hours to fill the

terraces.



            Given the best possible condition therefore

the crowd for the terraces would have to begin arriving

two hours before the kick-off.    There is little

attraction to standing on a terrace for two hours with

nothing to do and nothing to look at.    Mr Kelly, on behlaf

of the F.A.,was of the opinion that 'Pop' music on the

tanoy was just the thing to attract and keep enthralled
                            34.




spectators standing on the terraces; he poured cold

water on our suggestion that a short match between

Liverpool and Nottingham schoolboys might have been

an improvement.     He gave two reasons.



             First, he said that at a recent match at

Wembley a pre-kick off match between two ladies teams

had only attracted an early crowd of about 1,000.       We

are not surprised.     The essence of a football

atmosphere is good humoured 'needle1.      Suitable pre­

match publicity in the Liverpool and Nottingham press

might well have produced considerable interest in such

a contest.     We submit that Mr Kelly might just be a trifle

out of touch with his customers.



             Mr Kelly's second objection was that the pitch

could not be used for pre-match entertainment as the

players might want to utilise it for an early warm-up.

With the greatest respect to our footballing stars and

their managers, where crowd safety is at risk, they can

be told that if they wish to emerge at odd times for a

warm -up, they can do what substitutes have to do without

visible signs of resentment or rebellion; they can use

the touchline1
                            35.




            It is clear from the foregoing that at any

semi-final there was a real and substantial risk that

if the crowd arrived unevenly the turnstile area

would quickly fill.     If only 25% of the crowd arrived

within fifteen minutes or so (hardly an unforeseeable

event)   the area would be full; queuing would long have

been an impossibility, the arcing having the effect of

merging the queues after a very short length; the

police would be hemmed in by the crowd; passage through

the turnstiles would be slowed, and the crowd would be

joined at the back by more would-be spectators all with

f orwa rd impe tu s .



            In such circumstances it was reasonably

foreseeable that the police would be unable to control

the crowd within the area, and that a serious risk of

crushing would arise.



            The senior police officers did not foresee

the danger simply because it had never happened before.

In fact there is evidence to suggest that in 1988 the

police had filtered the crowd coming down Leppings Lane

from the Penistone Road roundabout, and in 198? the

match had been played at mid-day and the kick-off had

been delayed.
                           36.




            Be that as it may there is the clearest

evidence that on 15th April 1989, for whatever

reason, the Nottingham crowd were in early whilst

the Liverpool fans had not arrived in any numbers

at 2 p.m.   Much has been made by and on behalf of the

police of the phrase   'late arrivals'.   The Liverpool

fans arrived in considerable numbers between 2 p.m.

and 2.30 p.m.    We venture to suggest that arriving,

say, three quarters of an hour prior to kick-off can

hardly be stigmatised by the use of that phrase as a

pejorative, particularly as no warning to arrive earlier

appeared on the tickets   (and even though there was the

magnet of tannoyed pop music to attract them earlier).



            It is unnecessary for the purposes of this

submission to seek to resolve conflicts of evidence in

relation to specific conversations in the Club Control

room; wherever the truth lies, the overwhelming weight

of evidence points to the fact that it was, or should

have been, obvious to those inside the Police Control

Room, from direct observation and from viewing the

C.C.T.V. monitors that one hour before kick-off very

many thousand   (in the region of eight) fewer spectators

were in the Leppings Lane end and North stands then had been

there the year before.    The terraces would normally take
                          37.




two hours or more to fill; the only pens containing any

numbers at all were three and four - a total of only

2,200 when full.



          On the most simple evaluation of the information

literally staring them in the eyes, neither police nor

Club officials took any action to alert Supt. Marshall

to the inevitably approaching problem and its attendant

danger.   If the remaining spectators arrived with

evenness there was not the time to get them in the ground

and there would by 3 p.m. be a dangerous build-up of

spectators in the turnstile area.



          If the crowd arrived unevenly, then the build­

up would take place earlier     (or, of course, later).

Supt. Marshall was not only not told of the unexpectedly

large numbers still to come, he was not told either

of the maximum flow rates through the turnstiles.



          The consequence of these blunders inside the

ground, for which both S.W.F.C. and the police must

take responsibility, was that Supt. Marshall had no

warning of the impending problem and danger.



          What if he had been given the proper information?
                          38.




There are two possibilities.    The first is that he

would have taken no different course of action, primarily

because the circumstances had not been provided for in

the Operational Plan handed on from the previous year

and there had been no briefing to cover such an

eventuality, but also because in Mr Marshall's view,

once a large section of a capacity crowd arrived within

a ;short space of time the situation was beyond the

ability of the police to control.



          Those who have viewed the Leppings Lane end

and done some basic calculations in relation to the

turnstiles will have a great deal of sympathy with this

latter point of view.   If it is indeed correct, then

Hillsborough was not a suitable venue for a semi­

final; it should not have been chosen by the F.A. and

if chosen the South Yorkshire Police should have

refused to police the event.



          We submit that it was reasonably foreseeable

that a substantial section of the 2 4,3 00 crowd might

arrive within a short compass of time; that if this

happened a serious problem would arise; that the situation

would present the police with an operational difficulty

so serious as to render the stadium unsuitable for the
                         39.




event; but that if the event went ahead sophisticated

policing could have prevented a tragedy occurring.



          No such sophisticated policing occurred

because first the eventuality had not been anticipated

and therefore nobody had applied his mind to methods

of solving the problem in order to include a contingency

plan in the Operational Order for the tie; and second

because, overcome without warning by the tide of

spectators, Supt. Marshall neither sought advice from

Control nor considered any action save emergency action

at the turnstiles themselves.



          I do not propose to deal at any length with the

events in Le.ppings Lane, since the evidence overwhelmingly

points to one story.   It is clear that between about

2.15 p.m. and 2.30 p.m. a trainload of Liverpool supporters

(well behaved, sober and good humoured)   arrived in a

police-controlled crocodile at about the same time as, or

followed by, a large influx of supporters who arrived from

Penistone Road and Catchbar Lane; by 2.17 p.m. the situation

was sufficiently oficoncern to Mr Marshall that he

successfully requested permission to close Leppings Lane.



          Inside Police Control there was therefore as early
                         40.




as 2.17 p.m. - forty three mintues before kick-off -

knowledge from inside and outside the ground.    Mr

Marshall, ignorant of the situation inside the

ground, was not in a position to collate the information;

Chief Supt. Duckinfield and Supt. Murray were.    It is

not straining criticism of Mr Duckinfield to submit

that at 2.17 he should have been seriously considering

delaying the kick-off and sending preliminary warnings

to S.W.F.C. and the two team managers.



          By 2.30 p.m. the turnstile area was full, and

hundreds more were streaming towards the turnstiles;

the progressive build-up was of course clearly foreseeable,

but the only action taken by Mr Marshall was to send for

reinforcements of foot arid mounted police in and around

the jammed area.



          It is submitted that this policy was wrong and

constituted poor policing on two grounds; first, the

reinforcements themselves became trapped   and ineffectual

in the press before the turnstiles; the mounted police

were worse than ineffectual - they were, through no fault

of the individual officers, positively counter-productive;

many of them, as clearly seen in the photographs, soon

retired from the battle, but were helplessly and uselessly
marooned in the sterile area by the side of the River

Don.



          Meanwhile, as was predictable, the mass of

people in front of the turnstiles was rendering the

flow through them difficult and slow; a further

complication was that people presented themselves at the

wrong turnstiles - due entirely to confusing instructions

on the tickets and inadequate and confusing signs above

the turnstiles.



          Complicating even this complicated situation

was the presence at the turnstiles of non-ticket holders,

to whom I will return later.



          In view of the case presented by and on

behalf of the police it is important to observe that by

2.30 p.m., half an hour before the kick-off, grave

discomfort and fear of serious injury was being experienced

in the crowd, which included families, women and children;

there is no evidence that at this time hooliganism or

excess consumption of alcohol presented a problem to any

material extent.



          In our submission the thrust of the complaint
                         42.




against Mr Marshall's handling of the situation is that

he concentrated on the near impossible task of

attempting to prevent the waves of spectators crashing

against the rock of the turnstile wall, instead of stemming

the tide still coming down Leppings Lane, which, as he

should have realised, could only serve to increase the

pressure at the turnstiles.



          No criticism can be levelled at individual

officers on horse or foot; many of them were apprehensive

for their own safety; some used their individual

initiatives in permitting in non-ticket holders or

wrong ticket holders to avoid further delays at the

turnstiles; some effected short term opening of gates

to get spectators into the right section of the ground;

many were pleading with the crowd not to push, or to

move backwards.



          Indeed, at one stage, Mr Marshall requested

and obtained the use of a van with a loud hailer to

plead with the crowd not to push.



          It would be wrong to criticise this action and

we do not do so, but it did reflect the thinking of

many police officers at the scene, thinking which in our
                         43.




submission displayed a wholly wrong approach to the

emergency.



          The police appear to have believed   (and

apparently still believe) that the problem had been

caused, at 2.15 p.m. - 2.30 p.m., by late arriving

fans who were unreasonably pushing towards the turnstiles

in an impatient effort to get into the ground, and that

the solution was in their own hands   (or feet); if only

they would stop pushing and shoving all would be well.



          That approach failed to take on board the

reality of the situation within an overcrowded area

when the impetus is for forward movement.   People were

struggling and pushing because they in turn were being

pushed; they were not in a position to stop pushing,

still less to obey futile commands to move backwards.



          The solution was to relieve pressure at the

rear by preventing further spectators joining the

throng, just as the means of preventing the emergency

arising had been control of spectators coming down the

lane and across the bridge.



          No such action was ever taken, and it was
                         44.




therefore predictable that the situation would

deteriorate.



          The one intelligent move came too late;

once the crowd in the turnstile area had reached a

dangerous density, but not before, the horses were

used to close the blue outer gates; the theory was

sound; once movement through the turnstiles had

removed a substantial number of spectators from the

enclosed area, pressure would be relieved and the

problem resolved; once the police had regained control,

more spectators could be allowed through the blue

gates.



          It was suggested in cross-examination on

behalf of the police that this move failed because

wickedly intentioned fans deliberately broke open the

gates by shaking and rattling them; the actual evidence

does not bear out that theory; the evidence from at least

one police officer who witnessed the opening of the

gates is that crowd pressure was responsible; indeed, so

great was the crowd pressure in Lappings Lane itself,

due to the never ending wave of spectators, that one

metal vertical locking bolt was bent.
                          45.




          It is clear that this obvious means of filtering

the crowd was used too late and at a time when, if the

gates had remained shut, serious injury or deaths might

have been caused by people being crushed against them.



          The case made on behalf of the police - and

by some of the senior officers in their evidence - was

that the problem and emergency arose solely as a

result of drunken, loutish fans arriving late, many

without tickets and determined, come what may, to effect

entry into the ground.   Other police officers agreed,

however, that the main cause of the dangerous pressures

was crowd numbers and that drunks, louts and non-ticket

holders were merely a complicating factor.



          The evidence that some fans, particularly late

arrivals, were badly affected by alcohol is incontrovertible

and we do not challenge it; similarly the conduct of some

of the crowd in the closing stages was undoubtedly

deplorable; again, there can be little doubt that an

appreciable number of would-be spectators arrived without

tickets, but hoping to effect entry.



          Sub-editors, seeking sensational headlines,

had a field day with the police allegations, much to the
                            46.




distress of many of the bereaved and injured.       It is

therefore necessary to examine the evidence and place

it in context.



           From the totality of the evidence it is

clear that for some years, when an all-ticket match

has been staged    (and is a sell-out)   fans have developed

the practice of turning up at the ground without

tickets.   They hope to effect entry in one of a number

of ways.



           First they hope to purchase a ticket     (usually

well above face value)    from a tout - or, as one of

our legislators will have it, ia broker performing a

public service.     This problem can and should be dealt

with   (and often is) by the arrest of the tout for

obstruction.     A better solution would be the creation

of an offence, punishable by imprisonment, for selling

tickets in certain circumstances within a set distance

of the ground kt more than face value.



           Second, they hope to be able to bribe a

turnstile operative; so obvious is this practice that

the Club anticipates it and seeks to prevent it by

mechanical means.
                           47.




            Third, they hope that if they remain outside

the ground, the police will eventually let them in;

they have a reasonable but not certain chance of

this happening; apparently different forces apply

different policies; but it is clear that some forces

reckon that a few hundred added to acapacity crowd, which

has in-built safety margin, is preferable to leaving

visiting fans outside the ground, where they may be

let loose on the windows of neighbouring shopkeepers.



            It was therefore predictable that a number of

fans would turn up without tickets.    If the South

Yorkshire Police did not know of these practices their

intelligence gathering section should be ashamed of

itself.   We do not for one minute suggest that they did

not, and we submit that it was more convenient for the

police case to claim that it all came as an unwelcome

surprise.



            Those who drink in moderation - or not at all -

will have been nauseated by the evidence, which we do not

seek to challenge in substance   (though some of the detail

may have been somewhat exaggerated), of the excess

drinking of alcohol by a minority of the fans prior to

the game and the conduct of a few in urinating in gardens
                           48.




near the ground.    It must however be emphasised

that this is not a problem confined to football

generally still less to Liverpool supporters

specifically.   Alcohol abuse has now developed into a

serious national problem, and the only groups who do

not acknowledge it as such are those who abuse alcohol.



            Problems relating to and arising from alcohol

abuse are not unknown in some police forces - particularly

problems arising from the 'macho1 approach to a man's

ability to 'take his liquor'; some of my clients even

allege that excess consumption of alcohol is not entirely

unknown in Fleet Street or in the district of Wapping.

Headlines luridly encapsulating police allegations of

insobriety among spectators must be kept in perspective.



            To what extent did drunkenness affect the

pressures in and outside the turnstile area?    There is

of course a wealth of police evidence that it was a major

contributory factor.    It is not submitted that individual

police officers lied to the Inquiry.    What is submitted

is that when a number of people witness an occurrence,

different aspects of it will later be etched on their

memories.
                           49.




          To police officers, hemmed in on their

horses or on foot by a crowd, gradually increasing

in numbers and impatience, a lasting impression will

have been created by the behaviour of those who were

actually drunk, or whose behaviour and language

disgusted them.   To spectators, some fearing for their

own or their childrens' safety, and anxious in any

event to enter the ground, the lasting impression will

have been the inability of the police to control the

chaos, and the language and behaviour of individual

officers who were venting their anger and frustration

at the fans in general, and their city of origin.



          We therefore do not seek to rely wholly on

those witnesses who claim that no fans were drunk or

ill-behaved- their attention may not have been drawn to

them, or they may not, in the circumstances, have

remained in their recollection;   similarly we submit

that the picture drawn from the evidence of the officers

under pressure at the time, or under criticism during

the course of the Inquiry, is one that should be viewed

with some scepticism.   Undoubtedly some bad behaviour

took place, either as a result of drink or impatience

to get to the turnstiles   (or even on one occasion late

on, to deliberate fooling about) but in our submission
                          50.




this was not as widespread as some police officers have

come to believe, nor did it have more than a marginal

effect on the intense crowd pressures much further forward.



          It is highly significant that a police officer

passing the rear <a'f the crowd at 2.52 p.m. and who

consequently had a close view of the very part of the

crowd said to have been behaving worst of all, did not

even mention drunkenness or ill-behaviour at all.



          In our submission the truth probably lies

somewhere between the two extreme and partisan accounts.

Undoubtedly there were some fans - possibly hundreds,

most certainly not thousands - waiting near the bridge,

without tickets in the hope of being allowed in, and they

may well have joined the rear of the crowd at about

the time Gate C was opened.



          Equally undoubtedly some of them, and many

others who had been drinking in the town and had for

that reason arrived late, were the worse for drink, that

is, excess consumption of alcohol was affecting their

 behaviour.   However, there were too few of them in

relation to the remaining thousands and too far away

from the turnstiles wall to have had much effect on
the severe crushing in that area.   However disgusting

their conduct they should not be made the scapegoats

for the real causes of the chaos, one of which was

inept policing.



          We accept that by 2.47 p.m. the situation

was so dangerous and so potentially lethal that Supt.

Marshall was justified in making his first, and of

course subsequent, reque&ts for the gates to be opened.



          The necessity for those requests - which would

not necessarily have led to fatalities, and would not

have done but for Chief Supt. Duckinfield1s blunder -

arose because the uneven arrival of the crowd had not been

foreseen prior to the day of the tie, had not even been

foreseen after 2 p.m. on the day, because the turnstiles

could not cope, the area in front of them dangerously

restricted, and because Supt. Marshall failed to devise

suitable means to deal with the situation.



          Whilst the plan we submitted may not, unamended,

provide the ideal answer to the problem   (we would suggest

a straight turnstile wall to enable long parallel

queuing) Dr Eastwood accepted that it was perfectly

possible so to alter the Lappings Lane end as to provide
                           52.




for parallel queuing, far more turnstiles and an area

between them and the gate which would safely accommodate

far more people - enabling in addition police horses to

manoeuvre more freely.   If S.W.F.C. can not afford the

alterations, then capacity crowds will inevitably lead

to danger and the ground is unfit to stage a semi-final

tie.



           Similarly we submit that the Tribunal should

reject police arguments that it would have been

impractical to have filtered and controlled the crowd

some distance from the turnstile area.   Quite apart from

the evidence suggesting that this had been done in previous

years, we submit that there would have been nothing to

prevent the early closing of the road and the placing

of police cordons with loud hailers near the roundabout

and on the far side of the Don bridge, with the twin

objectives of refusing further passage to non-ticket

holders and obvious drunks, and controlling the flow of

ticket holders to the turnstile area.



           I have now dealt with what were in our

submission the fundamental causes of the tragedy.   It

is now necessary to deal briefly with a number of

miscellaneous matters.   Some of these issues are
major ones, but we do not conceive it as our task to

consider in depth issues that may not have had a direct

causative link with the deaths and injuries.



            Whe,n the fatal crushing took place after

£.■52 p.m. the perimeter police were beyond doubt slow

to respond, and they were inactive during several

minutes when great suffering was being endured in pens

three and four.    Many of our clients, who have viewed

these scenes on television, accuse the police of

indifference to this suffering.    The evidence however

points unequivocally to a different reason.



            The young police officers on the perimeter

fence, and indeed their superiors, were conditioned by

their training and briefing to have in mind hooliganism

and pitch invasion.    Some blame for this must of course

lie with hooligans and pitch invaders themselves, but

police training should be sufficiently sophisticated to

enable more than one problem to be dealt with at a time.



            Similarly, once the nature of the problem had

been recognised the police response was to say the least

variable.   Some police officers used their own

initiatives; foremost among these was P.C. Philip
                            54.




Hooson      , who believing he was flouting orders -j(he

almost certainly was!_l nevertheless decided to risk

a reprimand and opened a perimeter gate.     Other police

officers were active, but to no useful effect; it was

little use, for the same reasons as given in relation

to the crowd in the turnstile area, to tell the crushed

people at the front to move back.     Others, again, were

completely inactive.



            The basic cause of the confused actions and

inactivity was in our submission, lack of leadership,

though it may also be that some of the younger officers

were in a state of shock once the bodies were on the

pitch.   Whatever the reason it was not until the arrival

of Det. Chief Supt. Nesbitt that order was produced out

of chaos.     More than one police officer testified to

his immediate assumption of authority, of his organisation

of a chain rescue through the gates and of his tireless

energy {"covered in sweat^ said one young officer]?..

The value of example shown by senior ranks cannot be

overstated.



            Did the initial inaction and subsequent short

term disorganisation cause death or injury?.    The medical

evidence doubted this; whilst it must remain a possibility

there is no evidence which would support a submission
                            55.




that these delays actually caused death or serious

injury.     The doctors, including Dr Phillips, a fairly

vehement critic of the police, were of the view that

probably <though not certainly? all deaths were the

immediate result of the surge at 2."52 p.m., and that

those who were not then dead, probably all in the end

survived.    The delays must, however, have caused

increased and unnecessary suffering among the injured.



            The same considerations apply to the gates

in the perimeter fence.     These did not conform to the

sizes advised by the Green Guide.     In regard to these

fences the Guide is in fact unhelpful.



            It became clear during the course of the

evidence, as frankly it should have been to the authors

of the Green Guide, that gates are required in the

perimeter fence for two quite distinct reasons, to

enable the police to enter a pen for public order

reasons and to enable the escape from the pen of

spectators in distress.    For the former purpose the

gates should be as narrow as possible to prevent an

incipient pitch invasion; for the latter they should be

as wide as is^consistent with the integrity of the

fence.    In this regard, thought and money could produce
                           56.




perfectly safe fences e.g. large sliding panels or

sections.



            However the Green Guide does not cater for

this dual role, and as it transpired the gates in pens

three and four were too narrow to confirm to the

requirements of an exit gate.    It is therefore little

wonder that difficulty was encountered in pulling dead

and injured from the pens, and it is submitted that this

undoubtedly contributed significantly to the suffering

of the injured.



            I now turn to the perimeter fences themselves.

It must be recalled that the lowest step of the terraces

was well below the level of the original wall which

formed the base of the fence.    Consequently, in the

absence of the fence all but the tallest of those at

the front would still have been crushed and received

serious injuries or suffered death when the final surge

took place.



            The absence of the fence may well have made

a substantial difference prior to 2.52 p.m.    The crowd

pressure in pens three and four caused initially slight

discomfort and then progressively worse discomfort and

ultimately injuries and possibly death.    If there had been
                          57.




no fence, those at the front would have escaped onto

the perimeter track before the pressure grew so intense

that injuries resulted; this in turn would have relieved

the pressure inside the pens.



          On the evidence it would appear that so long

as fences are necessary to prevent pitch invasions,

no danger will result from them so long as there is no

danger of fire on the terraces and so long as effective

steps are taken to avoid overcrowding.   The latter may

not be a simple task; even if proper safe capacities

are designated and monitored by computer, means will

have to be devised to overcome the problems of forged

tickets, bribed gatemen, the abuse of visiting stewards^

tabards   and other devious means adopted to effect

unlawful entry.   Regrettably, whilst the fences remain

terraces will never be entirely safe places.



          Allegations were made relating to the absence

or shortage of equipment to deal with the injured.

Having heard the evidence we do not feel justified in

making any submissions critical of the Club, the St.

John's Ambulance Service or S.Y.M.A.S.   Certainly

S.W.F.C. were hardly lavish in their treatment of the

Ambulance service and were in a muddle over the duties
                            58.




of their doctor, but none of this could have had any

material effect on the victims; it would be unreasonable

to expect every large stadium to anticipate and cater

for a disaster causing so many deaths and injuries -

but nothing could in any event have ’helped those killed

within a minute or two, and the injured, on the evidence,

probably all survived.



             We would however submit that S.W.F.C. having

erected an immoveable fence containing gates suitable

for entry rather than exit, most certainly ought to have

had suitable belt or wire cutters.     Their absence may

not have caused death but the suffering of injured men

women and children was thereby undoubtedly prolonged.



             I turn next to the safety barriers, two of

which may be very relevant to the tragedy.     One barrier

collapsed.     Three questions are thereby raised.   First,

would it have collapsed if reasonably foreseeable pressure

had been applied to it?     In other words, was the pressure

created by the surge of supporters after 2.52 p.m. so

great that a perfectly constructed barrier would also

have collapsed?     Second, suppose that the barrier had

been sufficiently strong to withstand the pressure,

would it have made any difference?     Third, if the barrier
                          59.




was faulty, was anyone to blame?



          If (and this is by no means certain!) we have

understood the technical evidence the first question

is not susceptible of an answer, since there is no way

of measuring the load sustained by the barrier at the

time of its collapse.



          The answer to the second question is not easy.

If the barrier had not collapsed, not so many spectators

would have fallen a n d .been trampled on; but if they

had remained upright in front of the barrier they would

for certain   have been crushed to death against it.

Possibly some spectators in front of the barrier may

have been felled and subsequently killed by the collapse,

and if so, these may have been saved had the barrier

remained in place.   We do not consider ourselves to be

in a position to make firm submissions on this issue.



          Similarly, it is clear that there are two

views as to the proper approach to testing the barriers.

We make no submissions in this respect since even if

on an objective scientific analysis Dr Eastwood's

method is unsatisfactory he cannot be criticised if he

has adopted a method approved by a reasonable body of
                            60.




skilled engineers.



          The other barrier in issue - no. 144 - was

considered by the police to be a hindrance to the

smooth flow of spectators into pens three and four,

since it sat astride the tunnel exit itself; consequently,

so the theory ran, it was a prime viewing point, behind

the goal and raised, and early spectators tended to

congregate there, thus blocking entry to later arriving

spectators and creating the danger of a build-up in the

tunnel.



          The removal of the barrier, however, involved

the creation of a barrier free corridor from the

tunnel down to the barrier which collapsed, in total

contradiction to the fundamental philosophy of barrier

placement and function.



          In our submission there could not on any

sensible appraisal of the facts have been any contest

between the two theories.     We do not criticise the police

for making the initial suggestion; they were after all

raising a legitimate worry; but they should have been

told flatly by Dr Eastwood that the removal of a lesser

risk would give rise to a far greater one.      As it was
                            61.




a snap decision of the"Officer Working Party"was made

to remove barrier 144.     Dr Eastwood's explanation was

that, whatever the merits of the decision, he "was

ordered to take it down".



          Regrettably we are driven to submit that this

extraordinary interpretation of events fell far below

the standard of evidence expected of a professional man.



          Mr Bownes, who adjudicated on behalf of the

current Licencing Authority, on his own admission, knew

little about football grounds; his familiarity with the

problems was derived from a fairly cursory reading of

the files inherited from the County Council; he relied,

he said, on the experts.



          The expert was Dr Eastwood.     He had argued in

1985 for the retention of the barrier.     He now was

'influenced by the police view' which was    'tenable'.

It was removed 'on the instruction of the Working Party';

he was not, he insisted, in a position to make a ruling.

It was the Licencing Authority who ruled.



          In our submission the main blame for what was

yet another major blunder lies with Dr Eastwood, an expert
                            62.




and consultant on safety, who in all probability made

an error of judgement at the time and at the hearing

produced an ex post facto explanation in an attempt

to make the police and Mr Bownes scapegoats.



          For major blunder it turned out to be.     The

surge of spectators entering at 2.52 p.m. cut a swathe

through the crowd, unhindered by a barrier, and caused

the terrible crush in pen three which was the direct

cause of the barrier collapsing.



          I now turn to a consideration of how blunders

of the type which caused the disaster could have occurred

when, subsequent to the Wheatley Report there has been

leglisation to prevent a recurrence of tragedies caused

by overcrowded terraces.



          Pursuant to legislation certain grounds can only

operate if licenced.   However it is plain from the dismal

history of the S.W.F.C.    licence that the system is only as

strong as the Licencing Authority choose it to be, and

each separate watchdog has a discretion as to the sharpness

of its set of teeth.



          In the case of S.W.F.C., the South Yorks. County
                            63.




Council appear to have erred on the side of near

toothlessness.     The conditions originally laid down

did not embrace the need for stewarding, save in

respect of keeping exits and gangways clear; there

was no provision for the even spreading of spectators

on the Kop and West terrace.      No consideration appears

to have been given to the potentially lethal layout,

in the event of a capacity crowd, at the Leppings Lane

turnstile.



          Furthermore, without any alteration to the

licence, the radial fences were permitted to be installed

without the provision of separate turnstiles.      The

history of the licence in the hands of the successor -

and current - authority, the Sheffield City Council is

somewhat somnolent.      The Officer Working Party has never

been properly convened     and further alterations to the

ground permitted    (including the removal of barrier 144)

without alterations to the licence conditions.      For two

years the licence has been 'under consideration'.



          It is a criminal offence for a Club to breach

the conditions of a licence.      There is no sanction on a

licencing authority to impose any particular conditions.

It is our submission that this reflects a weakness in the
                            64.




legislation which must be cured.



             On the whole, the Green Guide is an excellent

piece of work.     Defects have, during the course of

the Inquiry, been uncovered.      The perimeter gates

have already been mentioned.      There may   (but we do not

necessarily accept it to be so) be an ambiguity in

relation to the requirement for separate entrances for

separate sections.     Some amendments to the Guide are

clearly called for.



             However, the major weakness of the Guide was

demonstrated several times during the questioning of Dr

Eastwood by Mr Collins.     On each occasion when the latter

pointed to a breach of the Guide, Dr Eastwood's fore­

finger was raised aloft in admonition.        There could be

no breach of the Guide, he several times insisted, since

it contained advice only, and that advice had to be

applied by experts with common sense and professional

judgement.



             We have no means of knowing whether this

attitude is confined to Dr Eastwood or is general.          It

is certainly dangerous and likely to undermine the

effectiveness of the Guide.       This is not the time to
consider the detail, but in our submission, where

practicable, the advice given in the Guide should now

be enshrined in Regulatoins with a criminal sanction.



          Prior to the Hillsborough disaster some

spectators may have looked to the Football Association

to supervise safety arrangements in relation to the major

events staged by them.     After all, they had the task

of choosing from the hundreds available, the grounds

suitable for staging events likely to attract great

crowds - such as semi-finals.     Surely, in making their

choice they would carry out inspections and enquiries

with a view to acting as a safety umbrella.



          Some umbrella!     We now know that in 1989

Mr Kelly wrote to thirteen clubs asking them if they

would be prepared to stage a semi-final.     Twelve replied

in the affirmative.   One of these was Sheffield United

who did not at the time hold a current Safety Certificate

this was apparently unknown to the F.A.     Asked what

would have happened if Bramhall Lane had been chosen as

the venue, Mr Bownes replied that the police would

presumably have refused to police the event.     We

certainly hope sol    However such an occurrence would

have attracted a certain degree of criticism of
                           66.




the F .A.   (and, we suspect, no little mirth at their

expense).



            The truth is that the enquiries made by the

F .A. are fairly cursory, and inspections are limited

to a visit on the day of a tie by a representative

who makes a report in relation to such things as crowd

trouble.    For more fundamental matters, the F.A. rely

on the Safety Certificates, the existence of which they

assume, and of the conditions of which they must of

necessity be ignorant.



            Much evidence was given in relation to a

breakdown in radio communication.     We have no technical

evidence to justify the making of any submissions bar

one - namely that if, which we do not accept,

communication between Police Control and others was

thereby inhibited, it would have been a matter of thirty

seconds or so for messengers from Control to carry orders

to serials on either side of the turnstiles.



            Nor do we accept the inevitability of a break­

down in communication between police on the ground

and Control due to crowd noise drowning the radio.       Many

cricket umpires would, we feel sure, be prepared to give
                           67.




lessons if necessary in the efficacy of hand and arm

signals.



           In summary, therefore, it is our submission

that this tragedy was caused by



(a)        overcrowding of pens three and four prior to

           2.52 p.m. caused by



           (i)     the installation of the radial fences

                   without the installation of separate

                   turnstiles;



           (ii)    the failure   to institute any other system

                   for monitoring the numbers entering

                   the new pens three and four;



           (iii)   the failure   to institute a clear system

                   - understood by club and police - to

                   monitor by observation the density of

                   the crowds in the separate sections;



           (iv)    the failure   of police and club alike

                   actually on the day to monitor or control

                   the numbers   entering pens three and four;
(v)     the failure of the police and club

        alike on the day to observe and

        appreciate before 2.52 p.m. that pens

        three and four were dangerously over­

        crowded;



overcrowding at or shortly after 2.52 p.m.

caused by



(i)     the failure of Chief Supt. Duckinfield

        to order the sealing of the tunnel

        before permitting the opening of the

        gates;



(ii)    the failure of the police and club alike

        to appreciate as early as 2 p.m. that by

        reason of the low number of Liverpool

        supporters in the ground, a problem was

        almost certain to arise in the ensuing

        hour;



(iii)   the failure to police adequately the

        crowd arriving between 2 p.m. and 2.52

        p.m. at the Leppings Lane end including

        failure to plan for the contingency which
                         69.




                 occurred, failure to communicate necessary

                 information from Police Control to

                 Supt. Marshall, failure to control and

                 filter' the crowd before it reached the

                 turnstile area and permitting the turn­

                 stile area to become packed;



          (iv)   the provision of inadequate turnstiles,

                 poor signposting, and a restricted

                 turnstile area at the Leppings Lane end,

                 providing no margin for safety in the

                 event of a capacity crowd being

                 expected;



(c)       the removal of barrier 144



          We attach Appendices, listing our complaints

against the Police, S.W.F.C., the two Licencing

Authorities, Dr Eastwood and the F.A.   These complaints

are not intended to be exhaustive, they are confined

in any event to those which in our submission were

causative of deaths or injuries, and they do not

necessarily import criminal or civil liability.
                    APPENDIX I




      FAILURES OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE




1.       Failed When devising a plan     for the policing

of the crowd to ensure that clear arrangements were made

with Sheffield Wednesday Football Club    (S.W.F.C.)

for the control of the numbers entering each separate

pen in the West Terrace.




2.       Requested the installation of radial fences

on the West Terraces without ensuring that by separate

turnstiles or otherwise the safe capacities of each

pen would not be exceeded.




3.       Failed to ascertain, and/or     brief Ground

Commanders in the anticipated flow rates through the

turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end.
                           2.




4.       Failed adequately or at all to brief police

officers in attendance at Hillsborough in Police

Control, Club Control, and West Stand and on the

perimeter at the West end that it was their duty to

monitor the numbers of spectators in the separate

pens on the West Terraces and in particular to observe

and report to Police Control if and when any particular

pen was approaching capacity, particularly when they

knew or ought to have known that S.W.F.C. had ignored

a police warning that the capacity of the West Terraces

as a whole was too high.




5.       Failed adequately or at all to monitor the

numbers of spectators in the separate pens on the West

Terraces from the Police Control Room, and/or the Club

Control Room and/or by Police Officers in the West Stand

and/or by Police Officers on the perimeter fence, but to

the contrary operated a policy of allowing spectators "to

find their own level" on the whole terrace, and on the

basis that so long as spaces existed in any part of a

pen, that pen could not have reached capacity.




6   .     Failed to appreciate or ignored the fact that
                           3.




brick walls at the exit from the tunnel into pens three

and four and the position and size of gates at the rear

of the pens hindered in practice "self levelling" of

spectators throughout the whole terrace.




7.          Failed as early as 2 p.m. when informed that

8,000 fewer were in the ground than the previous year,

and that the majority of those were expected at the

Leppings Lane end to appreciate that a crowd problem

at the Leppings Lane turnstiles was likely to occur and

failed to warn         Superintendent Marshall accordingly.




8.          Failed to observe and report that by 2.45 at

the latest, pens three and four were for all practical

purposes full to, or at the very least were approaching,

capacity.




9.          The officers in Police Control or elsewhere

failed to report to S.W.F.C. by their proper officers

whether the Head Steward or otherwise and/or to the

Stewards in the area between the turnstiles and the

tunnel that by 2.45 at the latest pens three and four
                         4.




were for all practical purposes full to, or at the

very least were approaching capacity.




10.       Failed to warn the F.A. and/or the Sheffield

City Council and/or S.W.F.C. that in the event of as few

as one third of the total capacity of the North and

West Stands and the West Terraces arriving in Leppings

Lane within a period of fifteen minutes or so, the

police would not be capable of controlling the crowd

and that a dangerous crushing situation was likely to

or might develop.




11.             Superintendent Marshall,



(a)       failed at 2.17, on requesting the closure of

          Lepping Lane, or at any material time thereafter,

          to seek information from Police Control as to

          the approximate numbers still expected through

          the Leppings Lane turnstiles;



(b)       failed between 2.17 and 2.30, or at any material

          time thereafter adequately to respond to a

          situation which he believed to be unprecedented
                         5.




          (namely the arrival at Leppings Lane,

          including the turnstiles area, of sufficient

          numbers to justify the closure of the road

          and which had caused some six to eight

          thousand people to be in the lane with more

          expected) by evaluating the situation and by

          giving orders for the control of the numbers

          joining the crowd already in the bottleneck

          of the turnstile area;



(c)      failed prior to 2.35 to inform Police Control

          that a dangerous situation was developing and   to

          seek advice and guidance from Control and in

         particular from Chief Superintendent Duckinfield.




12.      The officers patrolling the turnstile area and

or Leppings Lane, both mounted and on foot:-



(a)      caused or permitted the area between the

         turnstiles and the blue perimeter fence to

         become jammed with spectators thereby causing

         crowd pressure and rendering movement through

          the turnstiles insufficient;
                         6.




(b)      failed after 2.25 to control the crowd

          approaching the turnstiles area from Leppings

          Lane from both directions adequately or at all,

          if necessary by cordons across the road and the

          use of horses on Leppings Lane nearer the

         roundabout then the turnstiles;



(c)      permitted the build up of several thousand

          spectators with forward impetus when those at

          the front were liable to be crushed either

          against the perimeter gates or against the

          turnstiles wall;



(d)      permitted horses to become trapped within the

          turnstiles area where their presence was

          counterproductive or at least useless when

          they were in fact needed on Leppings Lane.




13.      Failed at 2.17 or at any time thereafter to

inform       Superintendent Marshall of the numbers still

expected to arrive at the ground at the Leppings Lane

end.
   Chief Superintendent Duckinfield:



having at 2.47 been warned by the said Marshall

that a dangerous situation existed outside the

turnstiles and that "the gates" should be

opened, failed, despite two intervening and

urgently expressed identical requests to give

an answer until 2.52;



failed between 2.47 and 2.52 to evaluate the

consequence inside the ground of opening the

gates and in particular the danger that those

entering by Gate C would be likely to or

might enter pens three and four via the tunnel;



having correctly decided at 2.52 to order the

opening of the gates failed prior to transmitting

such an order to warn S.W.F.C. and his own

officers in the area of his intended action in

order to prevent further ingress into pens three

and four by sealing the tunnel;



failed to inform the Ground Commander, Superintendent

Greenwood that he had ordered the opening of the

gates and that there was a likelihood   (or even
                             8.




            a possibility)   that further spectators might

            have entered the already packed pens three and

            four.




15.         The officers in Police Control, Club Control,

in the West Stand and/or on the West perimeter fence,

failed to appreciate sufficiently quickly that the

problems obviously existing in pens three and four were

nOt due to hooliganism or an attempted 'pitch invasion1

but were to the contrary due to overcrowding and in

consequence failed in time to take action to save further

crushing.




16.         Failed to train, instruct and/or   brief the

officers on the perimeter fence adequately in the

dangers of and consequent upon overcrowding, but to

the contrary so concentrated their minds on the problems

consequent on hooliganism and pitch invasions that their

judgement was likely to be clouded.




17.         Failed, by tannoy and/or signals   or otherwise

to order or arrange for the immediate evacuation through
                           9.




the tunnel of spectators at the rear of the pens

three and four to relieve pressure to enable those at

the front to comply with otherwise impossible demands

by police on the perimeter fence to move backwards.




18.         Failed at 2.15 p.m. or at any other material

time thereafter to arrange for the postponement of the

kick-off.




19.         The senior officers on the perimeter fence

failed in the period between it becoming apparent to

them that there was overcrowding resulting in injuries

and the arrival of Chief Superintendent Nesbitt, to

organise a rescue operation.




20.         Failed to institute a system of hand and arm

signals to enable officers on the ground to communicate

with Police Control in the event of crowd noise or

breakdown causing the radios to be inaudible.




            The officers both outside the ground and on the
                          10.




perimeter fence failed to appreciate that where crowd

pressure had developed, the proper way to relieve

such pressure was to achieve it from the rear forwards

and not from the front backwards.




22.      Operated a general policy of   crowd control on

the false assumptions:-



(a)      that a crowd arriving in large numbers at a

          football match in 1989 would be wholly sober,

          patient and self disciplined, all with tickets

          and with a desire for 'policing by consent'

          and that in consequence little control by

          police officers would be called for; and



(b)      that because no problems had   arisen from their

          policing plan in the past, no problems would

          arise in the future.
                      APPENDIX II




      FAILURES OF SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB




1.          Failed to provide at the Leppings Lane end

adequate turnstiles facilities to accommodate a crowd

of 2 4,000; such facilities would have included:



(a)         at least 30 turnstiles;



(b)         turnstiles accommodated on a straight     wall or

             on two or more straight walls to enable

             spectators to queue parallel to each other;



(c)         adequate space between the turnstiles and the

            public part of Leppings Lane to permit longer

            parallel queuing than at present possible, and

             to accommodate in the region of 7,000

             spectators, but certainly more than 5,000;
                           2.




(d)       the provision of parallel rails at right

           angles to the turnstiles to delineate the

           queues at each turnstile;



(e)       clear signs, plainly visible to approaching

           spectators indicating the separate turnstiles

           for the North and West Stands and the West

           End Terraces.




2.        Failed within the ground at the Leppings Lane

end to sign clearly the existence of, and way to,

pens 1/2 and 6/7.




3.        Failed to provide any mechanical or any other

means of monitoring the numbers in the individual pens

o n :the West Terraces.




4.        Ignored a warning from the police that the

designated capacity of the West Terraces as a whole was

too high for safety.
                         3.




5.       Failed to co-ordinate with the police and

agree a clear division of responsibility for the

visual monitoring of the numbers in the pens on the

West Terraces.




6.       Obtained a Safety Certificate on a representation

to the City Council that they had agreed a system of

crowd control with the police, when no clear system had

been agreed which would in a semi-final have monitored

effectively the numbers in each pen or section.




7.        Failed to appreciate that by reason of the

existence of the radial fences, the projecting walls

at the rear of pens three and four and the size and

position of the gates in the radial fences, the crowd

required assistance from stewards and/or police to

enable even spread to be achieved.




8.        Failed to inform the police of the estimated

flow rate through the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane

end.
                           4.




9.          Failed to observe that by 2.45 at the latest

pens three and four were full or at the least

approaching capacity.




10.         Failed to institute any or any adequate

system for informing stewards and/or police in the

concourse between the turnstiles and the West Stand

wall that pens three and four were approaching

capacity.




11.         Failed to station any or sufficient stewards

in :the concourse between the turnstiles and the West

Stand Wall to enable them if and when necessary to

direct spectators from any pen which was approaching or

had reached capacity, and failed to formulate any plan

for the sealing of the tunnel   (by closing one or both

doors, by moveable barriers or by a cordon of police or

stewards or otherwise).




12.         Failed to inform stewards and/or police between

the turnstiles and the West Stand wall that by 2.45 at

the very latest pens three and four were full or at the
                            5.




least approaching capacity, and when this was or

ought to have been visible on the Club's C.C.T.V.

monitors.




13.         Placed   in the perimeter fence, in particular

in pens three and four, gates which were too small to

be exit gates.




14.         Failed   to place stewards at the gates in

the perimeter fence, with clear instructions as to

when to open the them.




15.         Failed   to ensure that the crush barriers in

pens three and four were of adequate strength and

permitted the removal of barrier 144.
                    APPENDIX III




              FAILURES OF DR EASTWOOD




1.        Failed as the Club's     Safety Consultant to

advise against the erection of radial fences without

the installation of separate turnstiles.




2.        Failed, when his own     plans for new turnstiles

had been abandoned, to advise the Club of the necessity

to remove the radial fences.




3.        Accepted assurances that the Club and the

Police had agreed a system of monitoring the numbers

entering the pens at the Leppings Lane e n d , when on

a proper analysis, it should have been clear that no

such system could operate efficiently, particularly if

the pens were not filled one by one.
                         2.




4.        Regarded the pens formed by the radial

fences as still constituting one individual terrace.




5.        Failed to advise against the removal of

barrier 144, and failed to warn the Club, the Officer

Working Party and/or the Sheffield City Council of the

dangers thereof.
                    APPENDIX IV




       FAILURES OF THE LICENCING AUTHORITIES



South Yorks C.C.



1.        Granted S.W.F.C. a licence containing

inadequate conditions:     adequate conditions would have

provided for:



(a)      suitable   exit gates in the perimeter fences;



(b)      adequate   stewarding to prevent uneven spread

          of spectators and overcrowding;



(c)      separate   entrances for each separate section

          of the ground.




2.       Permitted the erection     of radial fences without

the simultaneous installation of separate turnstile

entrances.
                           2.




Sheffield City Council




1.       Failed adequately      timeously or at all to

review the S.W.F.C. licence.




2.       Failed to convene      meetings of the Officer

Working Party.




3.        Permitted the removal of barrier 144 without

considered advice from the Officer Working Party and

without having adequately analysed and considered the

views of the Police and Dr Eastwood.




4.       Renewed the S.W.F.C.     licence when   the conditions

thereon were inadequate.
                     APPENDIX V




       FAILURES OF THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION




          Chose Hillsborough as a venue for semi­

final ties when they:



1..      Had   failed to consider the terms of the

          S.W.F.C.   licence.



2.       Had   failed to make a detailed inspection

          of the stadium and its approaches and/or an

          appraisal of its facilities.



3*       Had   failed to ascertain the means whereby the

          numbers entering the Leppings Lane pens would

          be monitored.



4.       Had   failed to consider whether, whichever

          team was allocated the West and North Stands

          and West Terraces, the Leppings Lane end turnstiles

          could comfortably cope with a crowd of 24,300.
