                                                                                        MIR.15


 GTHIR-DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and time raised                                          782.
 Tit,e                 ^            -C,               . \
 (Include source and any document number if relevant)                                            i^HdbiX                •

 Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Yes^Wo _
                                                                                                             Receiver




Document registered/indoxctf as indicated ^   I T      g    i                                                Indexer

No(s) of actions raised    ^ ^ *7             V
                                                                                                           h <H
Statement reader's instructions                                                                        Statement Reader




Indexed as indicated                                                                                         Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken
                                                                                                       1W
                                                                                                       O/M         SIO




Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                        CD .              M|tf
                                                               f. VMv.


                                                Merseyside

                                                24 May, 1989
Lord Justice Taylor,
Hillsborough Disaster Enquiry,
Sheffield Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD.



Dear Sir,
After hearing the report of evidence given by a lady at the Enquiry last
Friday regarding the behaviour of certain Liverpool Supporters on Saturday,
15th April, I felt I had to write to you.
I attended the Match at Hillsborough, and whilst I was in the North Stand
was only a spectator to the horrific events, and therefore felt I didn't
have any first-hand evidence that would be of use to your Enquiry.
However, after hearing that lady's evidence, I felt you should be aware that
until one entered the ground no toilets were available whatsoever for the
use of visitors.    Our party of four arrived about 12.30 p.m. and decided to
walk to the ground and back before eating our lunch. We asked three
separate groups of policemen where there were toilets and the answer in each
case was "There aren't any on this side of the ground, the only public
toilets are on the other side of the ground where the Nottingham Forest
supporters are, and you wouldn't be allowed to go over there. You will
have to wait until you go into the ground." As that was well over an hour
away, I asked what if I couldn't wait, and the only response was a shrug of
the shoulders.    Surely the powers that be should have made some arrangement
for toilets to be available - this must point to very bad organisation. We
are all human and have to obey the calls of nature, and whilst nothing can
condone the behaviour of certain fans for urinating in this lady's garden,
one can only assume that with no facilities being made available when nature
calls needs must!
I am not a "football hooligan" but a middle-aged lady who just loves to
follow Liverpool Football Club in a law-abiding way.

I felt I had to write to acquaint you of the fact that appalling
organisation existed outside the ground.

Yours faithfully,
