                   SheffieldArchives Ref: fci. | ^ 111                                   M I R . 15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and tim e raised   £       de\          •       Num ber
                                                                                            n
T itle   Lcth/         SvaAW                                                                          M fc843 .
      de source and any c/ocument number i f r e le v a n t r \
(Include                                                          ,

Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No              W ir     ^c> \hisJ
                                                                                                                      Receiver
                                                   (aa)          iifa* Av/<?v
                                                        ii3 ki IIolfe*
                                                      ) lic
                                                                                                                      Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                   A 4 I5 I                                                                         1044.
                                                                                                                  Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                      Indexer
Indexed as indicated
                       ic>W
No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                      Indexer
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
                                                             West Midlands,


                                                            26th April 1989


The Secretary to the Inquiry,
Room 662,
50 Queen Anns Gate,
London,
SW1H 9AT


Dear Sir,

I understand from my reading of the national press that you are taking
written submissions from those who were at the Hillsborough Stadium on
Saturday, April 15th 1989.

I am unaware if my recollections of events leading up to the incident or my
observations will be useful to the Inquiry Team but as a supporter of
Liverpool Football Club for some twenty-five years, I did not feel that I
couTd iet matters pass without comment.

I travelled with two friends from Birmingham to the game, the journey was
without incident and we arrived in the centre of Sheffield at approximately
1.30 p.m. After parking the car we had two drinks in a nearby public house
which was full but by no means overcrowded.     We were made to feel most
welcome by the bar staff and the customers, up to the time we left at
approximately 2.10 p.m., were a mixture of Liverpool and Nottingham Forest
supporters and local Sheffield people. All three groups appeared to be on
the best of terms. If there was any rowdyism then it was not apparent to
either myself or my friends and no-one was refused service by the bar staff
for any reason.

On leaving the public house, we walked the 1% miles to the ground mixing
along the road with some extremely ebullient Nottingham Forest supporters
who I felt, if it had not been for the strong Police presence on the route,
might have turned to more violent activites as in the side streets off the
main road along which we were walking and on passing public houses which
were still open and extremely crowded, there were signs of loutish
behaviour and vandalism to private property.

We were approaching the ground at approximately 2.40 p.m. and I questioned
a Constable on duty opposite the public park which is adjacent to the
ground if the Leppings Lane End was at the road junction at the top of that
particular road.   At this time there did not appear to be anyone making
toward the ground in particular haste and the number of people in the road
opposite the park seemed somewhat small considering the anticipated
capacity crowd.




                                                              Continued/.
                                   -   2   -




On turning into Leppings Lane, approaching the entrances to both the
terracing and North Stand turnstiles, it appeared by that time, i.e.
approximately 2.45 p.m., that the numbers outside the stadium were far too
large for there to be any orderly entrance into the ground in time for the
scheduled kick-off at 3 p.m.

A third friend who was holding a ticket for one of us who had travelled
from Birmingham found us in the crowd and confirmed that he had been
waiting for us since 2.10 p.m. but that the build-up outside the stadium
had only really occurred some 10 minutes priorto our arrival, i.e.          at
approximately 2.35 p.m. He stated that it seemed that there wasno Police
control of the crowd and this was confirmed by my own observations in that
I had no difficulty in circumventing a line of approximately 5 Police
horses and entering a crowd which I estimate in excess of 500 people who
were trying, with no particular success, to enter the North Stand through
only four narrow turnstiles. I did not atteiripTT'to pugtrniy way forward into'
liriTs~~crowd nearer the -tnrnstiles as there was an obvious danger of being
crushed although the Police presence at the turnstiles themselves appeared
to be non-existent. The 5 mounted Police remained at the rear of the crowd
and my only direct confrontation with any Police presence was one Constable
on foot who appeared to be pushing his way away from the large, blue
concertina-style gates to the left hand side of the turnstiles who made a
remark in passing to both one of my friends and I, "I've had enough of
 this, I'm getting out of here".

By this time I believe that most people had abandoned any attempt of being
in their seats at the time of the scheduled kick-off and a certain section
of the crowd at the front of the crush had moved away from their attempts
to get in by the correct entry and were shaking the above mentioned gates
quite violently and pleading with the Police inside those gates to open
them to relieve the crush.. For no apparent reason, the gates were suddenly
opened and I was swept in past a line of Police who were standing against
the left hand wall behind the gates.   The passage through these gates was
an extremely frightening experience owing to the number of people involved
and the speed at which they swept through once the gates were opened.
There was no attempt by the Police immediately inside these gates to check
that everyone had a ticket, although I believe that almost all the people
would have had tickets as it would have been pointless attempting to enter
the stands without an allocated seat as the individual concerned would have
only been risking ejection from the ground by either the Police or
stewards.

After somewhat regaining my composure, I proceeded to the gangway indicated
on my match ticket where it was checked by a steward at the foot of the
steps and I was then guided at the top of the steps by another steward to
my allocated seat. It was then 3.04 p.m.




                                                               Continued/.
                                  -   3   -




The match in progress was being played at high-speed in a very competitive
manner and the atmosphere in the stadium was highly charged.    In a period
of sustained attacking by Liverpool, an attempt by Beardsley hit the
Nottingham crossbar. It was at this point, I am advised by media coverage,
that there was a surge behind the Leppings Lane terracing to the front. It
seems to me in retrospect that this surge was caused by the goalmouth
incident at the other end of the ground and the disaster occurred as it
coincided precisely with the arrival of the thousands of fans who had been
let through the gate adjacent to the terracing turnstile by the Police in
their vain attempt to avoid casualties in the crush outside the stadium.

Although it seemed to all those who were not on the terracing or in the
stand behind that the crowd coming over the fencing onto the pitch
constituted some form of pitch invasion sparked off by some unknown factor,
it was clear to the Police Officer who ran onto the pitch to ask the
Referee to stop the game that a serious incident had occurred although he
at the time would not have been in a position to know the extent of the
casualties.

It appears that there was no-one in overall Police control on the pitch
surrounding the Leppings Lane fencing and some five to ten minutes after
the game had been stopped and with several hundred Liverpool supporters on
the pitch, the only Police reaction was to attempt to precipitate any
rampaging by the supporters towards the Nottingham Forest end which was
becoming more likely as no-one had seen fit to use the public address
system to advise the majority of the crowd that there had been a major
incident resulting in the not unnatural reaction of the Nottingham
supporters to the game being stopped.

It is assumed that all Policemen now carry personal radios and therefore
must have been aware of the need for them to assist in the removal onto the
pitch from the terracing of the dead and injured. It is apparent, however,
that an order had been given initially to the seventy or so Officers lined
up across the pitch that under no circumstances were they to break rank.
This formation was held until approximately 3.30 p.m. when there was an
announcement that those who were not awaiting treatment on the pitch should
clear the playing area.   I believe that this announcement was made by a
Police Officer and I can only conclude that by this time a fuller picture
had emerged. The line of Police remained inactive and if the announcement
was in some way an instruction for them to clear the pitch then it did not
have the desired effect. By 3.45 p.m., having watched as at least a dozen
bodies were removed mainly by Liverpool supporters on makeshift stretchers,
one of the crowd advised us that it had been announced on the radio that
the game had been abandoned and we duly left the stadium.

At the stadium entrance we were passed by a fireman carrying wire cutting
equipment, this being some forty minutes after the incident occurred.    On
our journey on foot back to the car we were passed by numerous ambulances
under Police escort only then making their way to the ground, this being up
to 1% hours after the deaths and injuries had occurred.




                                                            Continued/.
It is this more than anything that epitomises the reaction of all
authorities concerned in that too little was done until it was far too
late.

Some enlightened observations have been made by, or on behalf of, the South
Yorkshire Police Authority in      that   they were   satisfied with    the
arrangements for the safety and control of the crowd as the same match 12
months previously had passed off without incident. I can only observe that
the authority's only surprise should not have been that the incident
happened on the scale that it did but that in the rapidly deteriorating
conditions under which standing supporters are forced to watch football
matches, it has taken until 1989 for something on this scale to have
occurred.

In conclusion I would state that whilst the Police were prepared to
sanction some 54,000 people arriving in one area, all within approximately
one hour of each other, there does not appear to have run through the chain
of Police command any clear idea of what action they should take of a
concerted nature should anything go wrong. I believe that on the day their
thinking as a body could not extend beyond any thought of containing the
problem and isolating one from another what they initially wrongly assumed
were trouble-makers in the crowd.     It should have been obvious to the
controlling Officer inside the ground with the evidence of his own eyes
that what was needed was urgent assistance to relieve the pressure behind
the fencing and to get as many people as possible onto the pitch in the
shortest available time. It is quite clear that this was not the uppermost
thought in the minds of the Police Authorities.

In a crowd control situation the role of the Police must be one of
"controlling the crowd". This did not happen either inside or outside the
stadium and therefore in that duty the Police have negated their
responsibility making their presence both inside and outside sports stadia
superfluous.

Yours faithfully
