08-JJBC."'57(MON) 14:21                                   TEL:01 1 429631 13   3 1 13    P. 014
  '     '                                                                                 ill

             * •UCENT AT HTLLSDOHOUOHI TOCNBALL GROUND - SHEFFIELD
              SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989


           I am ROY WARING, a Chief Inspector in the Headquarters Operations Division of
           South Yorkshire Police. On Saturday, 15 April 1989, I was detailed for duty
           at the Hillsborough Football Ground in connection with the Semi-Final match
           between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. I was working Sector 2 under the
           command of Superintendent Roger Marshall. This sector was divided into two
           halves and I was responsible for Sector 2A. This sub-sector covered serials
           22 to 33 and set ^als 44, 46, 47 and 48. All these serials were deployed outside
           the ground, the lower numbered serials being responsible for patrolling
           Middlewood Road from the Hillsborough shopping precinct through to the top of
           Leppings Lane and as far as Crofton Avenue. Other officers were deployed in
           Leppings Lane itself in the Catchbar Lane area and other serials manned the
           barriers which block off the small side streets off Leppings Lane and Penistone
           Road known locally as the triangle. Other serials have responsibility for
           policing the traffic island area at Leppings Lane/Penistone Road with a view
           to preventing clashes of supporters from opposing sides. Serial 33 is
           responsible for policing that part of Penistone Road North from the Travellers
           Best Public House to Wardsend Road North. The serials having responsibility
           for the barriers on the side roads are static points, the other serials have
           a patrol responsibility in the particular area laid out in the operation order.

             > Saturday, 15 April 1989, I commenced duty at 9.00 am at the Niagara Stables.
             intended meeting officers who were attending on a mutual aid basis from other
           ,orces. On arrival at Niagara I saw that Superintendent Marsh was already u:
           attendance there and since I had to attend the briefing at Hillsborough at 9.45
           am I left Niagara at 9.30 am and made my way to the ground. On arrival at: the
           'ground I drew a radio and went to the North Stand where the briefing commenced
           at 10.00 am. Following the briefing refreshments were available and serial-;
           were instructed to be in position by 11,00 am. Having had something to eat
           and a drink, I went out into the street on the Penis tone Road side of the ground
           just before 11.00 am. My initial patrol was around the triangle area where
           I noticed that all officers and barriers were in position. I had a short
           conversation with each pair of constables as I walked round this area and was
           satisfied that it was properly contained. I continued and walked out into the
           Catchbar Lane and then Middlewood Road area where I saw that officers were
           deployed on their patrols and it was at this time that I noticed that the Park
           Hotel on Wadsley Lane was obviously closed and the windows boarded up. I took
           particular notice of this because at the Semi-Final 1988 I had to close these
           premises at 2.15 pm following trouble with persons drinking therein. I then
           walked back along the length of Leppings Lane to the traffic roundabout end,
           again seeing that o-^icers were deployed on their patrols as required and I
           spent some time at         end considering the segregation of supporters after
           the match. This pro.,i to be somewhat problematical last year when large
           numbers of people left the ground because opposing fans' coaches are often
           parked in i    H e m e s Road area and this is one of the. closest points that the
           two opposing sides come together. Last year I had had to deploy a large cordon
           across the road here to ensure that segregation, and I spent some time wondering
           how this could be. achieved this year.

            During my initial walk round there were supporters already about but there were
            not that many. I am not aware what time the turnstiles at Leppings Lane
            actually opened. I recall from the briefing that some gates were to be. opened
            at 11.00 am but that the majority were to be. opened at 12 noon.
08-J3E-C. ’ i ? (MON) 14:21                               TEL: 01 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 1 3   31 13   P. 01 5




            As the morning progressed I patrolled on foot in the area I have previously
            described but I did not go right down to the. Hillsborough shopping precinct,
            having had a short conversation with Inspector Humphries who stated that things
            were relatively quiet at that end. Pedestrian traffic on the Middlewood
            Road/Leppings Lane/Pen.ustone Road area gradually increased as time went by
            particularly with the commencement of the arrival of coaches which were
            initially parked in Claywheels Lane and then later directed to Halifax Road
            for parking. As the pedestrian traffic increased, and particularly with the
            weather being good at the time, groups of people were making their way to the
            ground while others were sitting on walls or standing in groups on spare land
            and a significant number of these were drinking alcohol from tins and large
            plastic bottles. I myself advised numerous people that they would not be
            allowed to take alcohol into the ground nor would they be admitted if they were
            drunk and I heard other officers regularly advising people, the same. I am
            satisfied that officers on patrol in the areas were paying active attention
            to the cro-,..is as they built up. With regard to the behaviour of the Liverpool
            fans as th-y approached the ground, I would describe it as boisterous but there
            were no outbreaks that I saw of public order problems although I do recall
            hearing transmissions on the radio regarding trouble at the Fox Public House
            on Foxhill Road.

            At about 1.30 pm   X walked along Leppings Lane which was very busy on both  sides
            of the road with pedestrian traffic and as I passed the Leppings Lane end    I
            saw that it was very busy. I remember stopping there a few moments and * ng
               'ted officers encouraging people to enter the ground or to clear awa, .
                rear pen if they were not ticket holders. I then walked out into Middlewood
                 vhere it was again fairly busy, Liverpool supporters being encouraged to
                  heir cars in that area, particularly in side roads.

                   tiled that the one special train expected was due to arrive at around
                   ; with that in mind I returned along Leppings Lane intending •. go t
                       5 Land end and observe the movement of spectators with regard to
                      -on. As I walked from Catchbar Lane I saw that the area around the
               ■u'je over the river was very busy indeed with people and that the Leppings
            ^ane enclosure was similarly extremely busy although apparently under control,
            i continued along Leppings Lane which was also extremely busy toward the traffic
            island end- As I approached the traffic island I saw the front end of the
            escorted fans who I assumed were the occupants of the special train. They were
            being escorted by mounted officers, foot officers, and I saw at least one dog
            van. The majority of these people appeared confined to the footpath and there
            was a considerable number of them. I arrived at the traffic island end of
            Leppings Lane and saw that there were no difficulties regarding segregation
            and T remained at that: traffic island for some time..

            If         ,;-cult to be precise but I think it would be approaching 2.30 pm when
            I he-.ctra -Message on my radio which was officers at the Leppings Lane entrance
            to the ground asking for vehiclular traffic to be stopped along Leppings Lane.
            I recall this particularly because I was standing next to the PC working traffic
            duty on the island who had an altercation with a driver who had driven at speed
            through persons crossing the road while sounding his horn but making no attempt
            to slow down. The officer advised this driver quite properly but in no
                         VI
i-JDE-C. ’ 57 (MON) 14   im im                           TEL: 01 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 13   31 13   P. 016
                                                                                              £11

              3 -


          uncertain terms and as he set off he was in fact the first vehicle to be- denied
          access to Leppings Lane. Still being busy with pedestrian traffic tout with
          apparently no threat of segregation problems, I left the traffic island end
          of Leppings Lane and started to walk back towards the Leppings Lane entrance
          to the ground. As I was walking along it was fairly evident to me that the
          persons approaching the ground were those who had either been to licensed
          premises or had stayed away frcm the ground in other places drinking because
          the proportion of people who I would describe as boisterous through drink seemed
          to have significantly increased. As I neared the Leppings Lane end of the
          ground J could see that the number of people waiting to enter the ground had
          increased significantly and now stretched certainly to the, roadway of Leppings
          Lane but I do not recall it completely blocking it. By the time X reached this
          point it must have been between quarter to and ten minutes to three. I stood
          at the back of the crowd in the area of the sweet shop in Leppings Lane and
          I in fact was standing in the roadway itself but not in the middle of the r.;-.id.
          T could see mounted officers among the crowd and from where I was standing,
          although the crowd was very large there was no indication to me. that there was
          any serious problem by the turnstiles themselves. From my position I could
          see the right hand side of Gate A and turnstiles 1 - 16. I could not see Gate-
          B or Gate C. While standing in this position people were continually U-r.iin'
          up and I was jostled among the. crowd and continually bombarded by people asiw.-;
          which was the North Stand, West Stand, standing areas etc. Even though t iok<-is
           -h entrances were colour coded, this did not seem to have been readily
               ■ iated by spectators.

          The t.iiiie now must have been approaching three o'clock as I recall hearing a
          concerted roar from the crowd inside the ground as though the teams had co-re
          out. As I recall it was not the start of the gams, as I am sure it was ii..
            • ior to three o'clock. While standing in this position among the crown •
          due to the noise from the. stadium I cannot recall hearing specific radio
          transmissions although at about this time I became aware of the police lanci
          rover pulling up on my left and an Inspector using the public address system
          asking the crowd to stop pushing forward and he repeated this message several
          times. A moment or so after this I recall seeing Gate A being t u g g e d open
          although I could not see due to the crowd in front of me who was opening it.
          I remember thinking to myself that if that gate was opened it would never be.
          managed to be closed again. However, after some few seconds the. gate in fact
          was pulled to. During that time a Significant number of people passed through
          Gate A. I am not in a position to estimate how many but I can say that after
          that gate had been closed the numbers in the Leppings Lane entrance pen had
          reduced significantly. Whether other gates were opened at about the s c t .to
          I am unable, to say. After the closing of Gate A, people, continued to entei
          via the turnstiles and the numbers in trial: entrance pen further reduced, in
          tv • - . moments that followed things seemed to have quietened down considerably
                  then heard a transmission to the effect that all available personnel were
              enter the ground. Also at this time I could see Superintendent Roger
           •arshall who was standing some 10 - 15 yards to my right. There were quite
          a number of PCs in the vicinity also. Superintendent Marshall obviously having
          heard t Is message walked towards me and shouted words to the effect that he
          would take1the majority of the men with him into the ground and that I was to
          keep a grxp of this back end. I recall        particular using the words 'keep
          a grip'. He went into the ground through either Gate B or Gate C taking with
08-JJBC.-’ 5? (MON) 16 : 0 2                              T E L : 0 1 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 13   31 13   P. 001



             _   4   _



            him the majority of the PCs and. leaving me with about one dozen. 1 formed these
            officers into a loose cordon across the entrance pen and remained there- It
            was unknown to me or the officers with me at that time what had happened within
            the ground and I assumed it was some sort of public order problem. I then heard
            a message on my radio to the effect that no further persons were to be allowed
            into the ground and almost immediately the. narrow blue turnstile gates behind
            me were all closed. I instructed the officers who were, with me to clear the
            Leppings Lane entrance pen of people and not to allow any further persons in-
            We commenced to do this but had a great deal of difficulty and altercation with
            people arriving late who were ticket holders. However, I was able, using these
            officers, to hold the rear of Leppings Lane fairly sterile. There, were still
            quite a large number of people out in Leppings Lane itself. While holding the
            rear of Leppings Lane outside, the ground other officers began to turn up
            presumably in response to the radio message. After some few minutes
            Superintendent Marshall returned to my position and having had a short
            conversation with him we estimated that we had some. 40 or so officers with us
            and available. Superintendent Marshall attempted to use his radio to ask
            control where these officers could be best deployed but he received no reply.
            In view of this inability to communicate he instructed me. to go personally to
            the control box and advise regarding the situation in Leppings Lane. I entered
            the ground by Gate C and headed for the police control box. I saw numerous
            people together with police officers in that open area behind the West Stand
               -1 some of the people appeared to be injured. I continued towards the control
              oom and climbed the stairs. On looking over the playing area my initial
              npression was that there had been some sort of pitch invasion but I then
             .iv?t there were what appeared to be numerous casualties. I entered the con* •
             'ox and spoke to, I think, Superintendent Murray. I explained that we. bar!
            ■>f‘ icers available for deployment in Leppings Lane and he said words to .
            .-*£f-?.Ct that we were to hold the back end. I returned to Leppings Lane ar
            Co; -eyed the message to Mr Marshall.

            Realising that something fairly major had occurred and hearing snatches of
            transmission referring to ambulances and casualties I decided to clear as far
            as possible the rear of the Leppings Lane entrances and rraintain an open roadway
            in Leppings Lane. I instructed the PCs with ire? to keep the rear of the service
            road and the entrance pen as clear as at all possible and I asked Sergeant
            Thomas of the Mounted Branch to try and clear, again as far as possible, people
            away from that back end. I walked out into Leppings Lane itself the roadway
            of which was reasonably clear and stopped a traffic mobile. I asked officers
            an that mobile, to close Leppings Lane at the traffic light junction with
            Catchbar Lane. I similarly spoke to a traffic motorcyclist and then to a
            traffic supervisor although I cannot recall who that was. Shortly after this
            fire appliances began to arrive and ambulances. I tried to maintain a through
            route so that ambulances could enter the service road at the Leppings Lane end,
            collect casualties near to Gate C and then leave the ground via the service
            road into Penistone Road. People began then to leave the ground in large
            numbers which made Leppings Lane again very congested. However, emergency
            vehicles were able to get through.

            As more and more people began to leave the ground there was an extremely
            belligerent mood taking over and a great deal of abuse was directed at police
            officers. There was in my view a grave risk of a public order situation
