, DO € V?7 John Peter HILL.                                       ^


 SATURDAY 15th April 1989 .

 At 9s® on the above date, in company with other officers in uniform I went to the
 HILLSBOROUGH Football stadium situated at Penistone Road Sheffield, the venue for
 the Semi- final of the FA Cup between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

  10am Attend Briefing at above location.Serial Sgt Tissington*

  10.50am In company with other officers of serial 38 to a point on Wards End Road
          duty was to supervise the arrival of Mini-Busses arriving at the scene*
          Checks to be made to ensure no alcohol taken to the ground. There was a steady
          flow of vehicles some contained small quantity of alcohol which was left in the
          vehicles*

  2.15pm    Flow of vehicles arriving became continuous, we had difficulty in supervising
            the unloading and checking for alcohol, ones that were checked seemed to contain
            more cans etc and the occupants of the vehicles seemed worse for drink. Vehicles
            continued to arrive up until 2.55P® when it could be seen that all persons allightinf
            were rushing to get to the ground.

  3pm       Serial 38 * Began to walk towards Claywheels lane where our serial weire to stand by
 |          after mealing* On approaching a point a point on that road, we met with a number
             ofother serials who were obviously heading to Claywheels for meal. I saw one serial
             being led by Inspector Charles. An assistance call was heard on the radio and
             Inspector Charles asked if our assistance was required* From the Instructions he
             he then gave us we began to move towards the Leppings lane entrance to the ground*
             While on the way I saw that the road and gardens to dwelling houses seemed littered
             with cans of beer and lager* On approaching the entrance I could see that there was j
             a large number of Liverpool supporters both on the road and outside the entrance to j
             Leppings lane entrance* Once outside the entrance we were with approximately 6 other;
             serials, DI Charles and DS Tissington organised serials into lines, the control room
             was then told that we were available to be utilised. The message returned for us to
             enter the ground immediately via the Lepping lane entrance* The serials then watered
             via the large metal gates. On entering the large enclosed area I could see that theri
             were approximately J>00 persons there, some appeared Hysterical, some were running
             towards the entrance carrying bodies and asking for help. I could see a number of
             bodies littering the enclosure some appeared a bluish colour and appeared lifeless*
             The next 30-^0rainute^ I spent attending to the injured attempting to get them outsidt
             the entrance to where ambulances would be arriving. I spent approximate 10 minutes
             with a man who I would describe as follows; Appro* 55 years 5*1OB in height, Black
             Greying hair which was collar length. He was wearing light grey trousers black shoes
             and a white string vest. I checked his pockets for idenfication but there was none.
             This man appeared to be suffering from the effects of being crushed, while attending
             to him a doctor examined him and suggested he be given the first available place
             on an ambulance. I saw this man onto an ambulance outside the entrance then conJrinue<
             helping other injured* What was apparent was the fact that throughout the time mysel:
             and other officers were attending to the dead and injured, some Liverpool supporters
             worse for drink were continually running up to us and shouting obscenities at us*
             Thiggslike ( YOU MURDERING BASTARDS) I saw a number of Policeman spat upon*

  if.^pm      Assist with the clearing ofsupporters   from the Lepping lane stand*

  5.15l®i     Return to Korth Stand withserial members

  6.15p®      Return to Claywheels.

  7.15P®      Return to MSPS

  7.30pm      Off Duty
