                      Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                                        *       K<rrT^r1
10 March 2000

Mr W W W Jackson
c/o South Yorkshire Police

Dear Mr Jackson

R v. Duckenfield and Murray

I am disappointed to read your response to my letter o f 22 February, asking you to assist
further in the prosecution. I had hoped that you would consider it a public duty to assist the
Crown.

I enclose for your information a copy o f the indictment. I should perhaps explain that the case
was committed for trial by a stipendiary magistrate in July 1999 on charges o f manslaughter
and misfeasance. A submission o f no case to answer was rejected. Until the committal, it
was a private prosecution following information laid by me before the Magistrates Court in
July 1998. Now, o f course, as a trial on indictment, it is conducted in the name o f the Crown.

Various unsuccessful attempts have been made to quash the proceedings. An application was
made by the defence in July 1998 to the Crown Prosecution Service to take over and
discontinue the prosecution. It was rejected in December 1998. An application was made to
the Divisional Court seeking judicial review o f that decision. It failed in March 1999, except
for a charge o f attempting to pervert the course o f justice, which the Divisional Court asked
the CPS to reconsider.

The magistrate rejected a submission that the prosecution was oppressive and an abuse o f
process o f the court, as did Mr Justice Hooper at the Leeds Crown Court in February 2000.
Count 4, which has been deleted from the indictment, was an allegation o f attempting to
pervert the course o f justice in respect o f which the Attorney-General has issued a nolle
prosequi.

Count 5 refers to the alleged lies told by Mr Duckenfield to a number o f parties at the match
that the crush had been caused by spectators breaking down the exit gates. That count has
been added since committal, and we understand that there will be an application to quash it at
the outset o f the trial. However, even if it is quashed, the alleged lies will be relied on in
support o f the other charges.

The case is founded on a number o f spectators present at the match, videos, documentary
material such as operational orders, and the oral and written evidence o f the defendants given
to the Taylor inquiry, and the oral evidence given by them to the Coroner.

                                               -   1
                                                   -




              Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail inftK2>hfsg.org
            1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
The areas which we wish to question you about are principally these;

      your knowledge, if any, o f crushing at previous semi-finals, particularly 1987 and 88;

      your knowledge as to why manpower levels were reduced from the 1988 semi finals to
      the 1989 semi-final;

      whether you were concerned with the change o f senior ranks involved with the
      Hillsborough disaster;

      the origins, purpose and composition o f the Operational Order for 15/4/89;

      the extent o f your personal involvement in the construction o f the Operational Order
      for 1989.

      whether Mr Duckenfield contacted you with a request for additional resources before
      operational order was finalised. If so, what resources were requested and what was
      your response;

      the origins o f and justification o f the “find your own level policy” for filling the
      terraces;

      your knowledge o f relations between the South Yorkshire police and the football club,
      and their respective responsibilities for ensuring the safety o f spectators;

       your knowledge o f the briefing given to stewards by former Insp White;

       your movements between 12-3pm on 15th April 1989. In particular, did you visit the
       Niagara club during this period;

       what practices existed for closing off the tunnel under the west stand when the central
       pens were closed;

       what you told James Sharpies, the former Chief Constable o f Merseyside, in the
       corridor leading to the directors’ rooms at approximately 3.30 pm on the day o f the
       disaster;

       the causes o f the disaster from your expert perspective,

       whether you made contemporary notes after the disaster,

       when you made your first statement in writing about this;

       whether your statement was edited or vetted before it was finalised; if so, why and by
       whom;
        what you heard on 15* April 1989 o f the allegation that supporters had broken down
        the gates;


         what Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray said about this allegation in internal South
         Yorkshire meetings after the disaster.

You will be aware that you did not deal with many o f these matters in your original statement
and evidence.

We are engaged upon wholly normal investigative activities As I said before, the defence have
positively asked us to call senior officers from the force, and we are now taking the
conventional course o f interviewing them about relevant matters and preparing the evidence
for trial.

I invite you again to attend for an interview. If you decline please deal with these matters in
writing as a matter o f urgency. I note that although your response to my letter o f 22 February
was dated 2ndMarch, it was not posted until 7thMarch at Sheffield, reaching this office on 8
March. I cannot emphasise too strongly the tight timescale to which the prosecution is
working.

Would you please provide me with your address so that I can communicate with you directly.
I undertake not to disclose your address beyond the prosecution team.

Yours sincerely




~Ff
 Ann Adlington
 Solicitor
In the Crown Court sitting at Leeds
Hooper J


                                R v. Duckenfield and M urray


Count 1        Statement o f Offence

               Manslaughter

               Particulars o f Offence

               David Godfrey DuckenfieJd and Bernard Dean Murray on 15th April 1989 ^
               uni awfully killed John Alfred Anderson at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield,
               by gross negligence, that is. by failing to prevent a crush in pen 4 o f the west
               terraces, in particular by tailing between 2.40 and 3.0(3 pm to procure the
               diversion o f spectators entering the ground from the entrance to that pen.


Count 2        Statement o f Offence

               Manslaughter

               Particulars o f Offence

                David Godfrey Duckenfield and Bernard Dean M urray on 1.5lh April. 1989
                unlawfully killed James Gary Aspinall at Hillsborough Stadium. Sheffield, by-
                gross negligence, that is, by failing to prevent a crush in pen 3 o f the west
                terraces, in particular by failing between 2.40 and 3.06 pro to procure the
                diversion o f spectators entering the ground from the entrance to that pen.

 Count 3        Statement o f Offence

                M isconduct in public office

                Particulars o f Offence

                David Bernard Duckenfield and Bernard Dean Murray, on 15* April 1989.
                wilfullv nee! acted. as senior officers o f the South Yorkshire police jorce. to
                ensure die safety o f supporters at the H illsborough football ground. Sheffield.

                 by failing after 2.20 pm to ensure through, the use o f extra police officers in
                 Leppings Lane that a dangerous crush did not develop at the turnstiles at the
                 west end o f the stadium

                 by failing to procure a delay m the start of the match,

                 by failing to prevent a crush in pen? 3 and 4 ot the w e st terraces.
          by failing to procure the diversion o f spectators entering the ground between
          2.40 and 3.06 pro from the entrance to that pen.

          by faiiing adequately to monitor the numbers and distribution o f the spectators
          in pens 3 and 4 before 3.06 pm.

Count 5   Statement o f Offence

          M isconduct in public office

          Particulars o f Offence

          David Bernard Duckenfield, on. 1.5,fc April 1989. w ilfu lly neglected, as a senior
          officer o f the South Yorkshire police force, to perform his public duty by:

          (a) telling persons inquiring into the causes o f the fatal overcrowding in the
          Hillsborough football ground. Sheffield, tb atthe overcrowding and casualties
          had been caused by supporters who had broken down a gate or gates to enter
          the ground; and

          (b) allowing other persons so inquiring to continue to believe that the
          overcrowding and casualties had been caused by supporters who had broken,
           down a gate or gates to enter the ground.
