Michael James Francis Griffith
Police Constable l6l5 Voodseats Police Station, Sheffield
South Yorkshire Police.


I aa a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, presently attached to
the plain, clothes dept at Moodseats Police Station* Sheffield.
At 8,30am on Saturday 15 April 1989 , 1 ooameneed duty in full Police uniform
at woodseats Police Station, Sheffield, is relation to a football ’Special*
duty at Hillsborough football ground for the semi final cup match between
Liverpool .and Hottin.gh.airi Forste football d a b s ,
1 was, together with other officers trahsported to lill.3boroa.gh and attended
a briefing, which took place in the North Stand of the ground. 1 later had a.
packed lunch prior to commencing duties with serial 12.
At approximatly 11.15am that date, 1 commenced duties pa company with Police
Constable   69   Pearsons patrolling the car park gate situated at the rear of the
gymnasium in P.nistone Hoad, Sheffield.
At intervals whilst patrolling the entrance and together with FC Pearson, 1
walked out and along Penistone 3oad on. numerous occasions and it was during these
walkabouts, that 1 noticed that there were a large number of football supporters
carrying and drinking from beer cans and bottles® A large goupr of fans of
approsiraatly 20 male supporters were sat for the majority o f the time, opposite
the entrance to the car park in Pensitoae load. A H       the youths were drinking
very heavily. I later appoached and spoke to these supporters, who were all in
good humour and advised them regarding entering the ground under the influence
of alcohol.

At 2,20psi that date, 1 walked onto the playing area at the ground to view the
build up of the crowd inside the ground* 1 aae sappised to see that although the
Cop end of the ground (Penistone Hoad) was almost full or seemed to be, the
opposite end (Lappings Lane} eras only slightly filled, the majority of the supporters
standing in the central section behind the goal area. I then returned to the
entrance to the car park,
Prioi? to the kick off time of 3»oopa, there appeared to be an unusual amount
of supporters attempting to enter the ground at the last minute. A large number
of supporters both alone and in large groups attempted to enter the ground via.
the   car park gates at my location. These were all directed to the ^eppiags Lana
end of the ground. A large number of thees supporters were under the influence
of intoxicants, but were not drun'k. Bui to this large amount of supporters
attempting to enter at the ear park, the large metal gates were closed and locked
in. order that we were protected and guarded against any attempted late rash inside
the ground.

It approximatly 3.01pm,    1, walked from the entarn.ee and along the walkway which
leads from tue
is situated between the cop and the North stand. As I reahcde the perimter track
around the playing surface, I noticed that the match was in progress. I then
assisted an officer who had detained a youth and was walking along the track
ar=a to the police room. I accompanied the officer to the Police room, and the
youth was detained.
Whilst assisting that officer, I heard from within the ground a loud Yell by the
crowd find as it was only short lived, I knew from previous experience at such
matches that, it was a near miss a goal bji one of the teams playing.
At about 3*08pm I returned to the walkway at the side of the North stand, and
noticed that the players were off the pitch. There was a large growd of
supporters standing around the goal mouth of the Leppings Lane end of the pitch
and I presumed that there had been a pitch invasion by the crowd. I then went
to the Leppings Lane end of the ground and as I did so I noticed that thafce
were a nunber of officers, standing on the fence and shouting and pointing
at the supporteres inside the leppings Lane end of the ground. Even at this
stage, being without a personal radio, I still beleived that it was a pitch
invasion by the supporters. As I reached the perimeter fencing to the Leppings
Lane end o§ the ground, I noticed the fans within the qrea behind the ground
appeared to be a blurr, and there didn't appear to be any movement within it. The
only movement I could detect ware the offieers along the fencing and the
supporters around the goal mouth area.
As I reached a small gate, which allows access to the terrace, I was passed
by and officer (identity unkovn) a white.male, who at this time appeared
to be dead. His face was a blue colour and his eyes were staring wildly. I
then pulled this youth onto the grassed area of the ground, and checked for
any vital signs. There were none. I then attenpted heart massage and mouth
to mouth on the youth in an attempt to revive him. Whilst attempting these
acts, I sensed that there was a great deal of activity around me, but I didn’t
notice anything in particular. I believed at that point that the youth I was
attempting to revive was the only sudden death within the ground.
Whilst kaelt over the deceased body, using mouth to mouth, I suddenly felt
a pain ail the base of my back, and 1 was pushed onto the body itself by what
i believe was a kick. As I fell over the body, I heard someone scream, 'Wou
Basterd*. I didn't react to the kick in the normal manner, for some reason,
I just continued to attempt to revive the youth laying on the floor. After a
short time it was obvious that life was extinct and with the assitance of
either officers or fans, I cannot remember which, the youth was taken to the
rear of the North stand near to the gymnasium area.
After covering the body with my coat, I then returned onto the pitch area in order
to assist other officers.
                               Page three



Upon returning to the pitch area, it was then and only then that I realised
that other bodies had been taken from the Leppings ^ane terrace and placed
onto the pitch area.
I assisted other officers in the goal mouth area attempting to revive youths
laying on the pitch area,   and checking that the conscious supporters had the
assistance they needed. I then assisted and officer to carry a body from the
pitch area to the rear of the North stand.
Again I returned to the pitch area, and there saw Police Constable 1529 Friend,
who was standing over the body of a young male supporter. With   the assistance
of supporters who were passing with a large boarding, thebody    was then taken
to the rear of the North stand.
I then checked that the original body I had removed from the pitch area had
remained untouched and as I did so an order was given outthat    all the bodies
should be taken into the gymnasium area. With the assistance of other officers
I placed my body with the area of the gymnasium.
I then examined the body and I would descibe the youth as follows: Kale, white,
20 - 22 years, dark brown short hair which was slightly curly, ginger coloured
moustache, 5' 10" tall and of normal build. He was wearing, blue jeans, blue
jean shirt, white *T* shirt and white socks. I then checked for any identification
and there was none. The property on the body was as follows:-
1. Quartz watch with a two face dial.
2. fA .31 in cash.
3. A packet of cigarrets and mactehs
k m Ticket for the semi-final Leppings lane terrace.
At ^.05pm, Dr Bedgrave attended at the Gymnasium and after examing the body he
certified that life was extinct.
A form Gen/l8 was then part completed with all the detaisl known at the time.
The deceased was subsequently photographed and the photo was marked with the
number allocated to the body, that number being number 71•
I remained with the body at the gymnasium until 5«30am the following day, Sunday
16 April 1989« At that time after the body had not been identified by any person
it was taken by ambulance to the Medico Legal centre, Watery Street, Sheffield.
At that location the body was stripped and was handed over to officers already
in attendance. The property was also handed to those officers.
I later return d to Woodseats Police station and went off duty at 6.^3am.
I later found out from enquiries made that the decased name was C0P0C and that
he was later formally identified at the Medico Legal centre.
I will state that prior to the match begining, there appeared to be a large amount
of supporters just wlaking around and ariound the ground, drinking from cans and
bottles. Although there was no obvious trouble, I sensed at the time that something
#




                          Page Four



    was going to occur.
