                                                                                 -           9
                                                                                             4^' io
                       PC 2560 BALL.     MAIN STREET POLICE STATION,KOTJIHREAK.
        S’
                       REPORT RE HILLSBOROUGH INCIDENT 15TH APRIL I9 S9 .



I am a Police Constable in the South. Yorkshire Police Force presently stationed at Rotherham


On Saturday 15 th April I9 S9 I wes assigned to ex S.pOar. until 7«3Qpm shift working the
FA Cup Semi Final between Liverpool PC and Nottingham Forest FC at Hillsborough Football
Ground,Sheffield.I was assigned to Serial 39 and my Serial commanders were Inspector Meek
and PS Doyle..


I connenced duty at Kain Street Police St ation from where the seriris were ti'snspcrted. to
Hillsbcrct-igh.At 9.1'>an the serials.        briefed by senior officers in the North Stand.
At the conclusion of the briefing officers vere instructed to sec their serif 1 corrr.fne’er


•
tc ascertrin their ir.di.vidi;.fl duties for tie tour of duty.


At 10.50am I commenced duty on Halifax Road in conpcxy v.dth PC ??75 V’yer.Cur duties were
the supervision of the Liverpool star'orters ccacher •..'hie!:, vrcrc ir.struct :-d vie re tc pro:I:
on this road and the supporters were then directed to the Leppings Lane end of the ground.
/sithough thf» Liverpool fans appeared in good humour a v?st r:ajcrity cf ther.,vhilst net
being drunk, v/ere sh.cv.ing.physical signs of being affected by intord.cr.nts..In fact a large
number of arriving coaches had beer and lager cans (empties) left on the them,strewn all
over the floor.Some Liverpool Fans alighted from the coaches carrying fulls cans of beer
and lager but it had been mentioned earlier by senior officers,although I cannot name them,
that it would be icsrpossible to enforce this offence due to the nur'c-or of fans involved.
Many of the fans crossed Halifax Road to purchase alcohol from the White Horse Public House
and I could see that a large group of fans congregated on the frontage tf the pub drinking
jgr a period of approximately 2 hours.Some entered the nesrby.Thr&hers Off Licence purchasini
alcohol which had to close after an hour or so because of Liverpool fans helping themselves
to pscks cf canned beer sr.d lager sad leaving fc.e shop without paying.fhis information
was giver, to us by officers that had tc attend th* shop due to these incidents occurring.


A large number of Liverpool coaches were still arriving 2.45pm and some of the Liverpool
fans were intoxicated and unsteady o" their feet.At 2.35vm ®y serial began making our way
to the top of Claywheels Lane where it could be seer that Halifax Road wse a continuous line
             seer ~"d lager car.a: which had been placed on the top of garden wnlls.'.’hile I ’a s
    comp-r.y vith PC 555 Vfair. ard FC 57 ? Bosley ve had occaasion to escort a drunker Liverpool
  ■ fror the front of a garden on Halifax Road as he had been urinating in. it.



                                                                               CONTINUED
                                                         REPORT CONTINUED                                       Qlo
 £t approximately 3.05p~ v;hil~t tsy serial were making their way towards Claywheels Lane
Traffic Depot for our meal there was a message passed over the r; die that rrsint-rce vr~
required, inside the prcurd rc ?rr.* n r e Veir.=". crushed.This message was heard on PS Doyle’s
radio,as he and Inspector Meek were the onljr officers issued with radios.Serial 39 and 40
made their way towards                          the Lepping- Lane end of the ground end or arrivtl there at r.ppro;-:-
imately 3* 10pm I saw a                         cordor. of officers lined up ?cro~s the entrarcc to the ground r.rd
I heard on a nearbfr radio that dead and injured people were being brought out of the ground
 from the West Terrace.I immediately entered the ground rt the Leppings Lane entrance with
 several officers from my serial in order to give assistance to the injured fans.At the
 entrance of the tunnel leading to the West Terrace I saw about 15 male bodies lying on
the floor spread out near to the tunnel entrance.I immediately went to a youth who I descib*
as male,\*hite ,1?-13 years and sli*n build who had no                             of any pulse and was not breathing
Myself and P.C 205c Lister began sinr.iltan eoxt.sly to give artificial respiration to the youth.
I began mouth to mouth resusitation whilst PC Lister and PC 3136 Sherbum assisted in givin.j
heart massage .V?e continued this for approxirja t*ly ? r.i:rtrfces "her a registered nurse took ov<
         resusitation with a Liverpool Fan.The nurse was of the same opinion that this fan was
obviously dead and beyond being revived.I then went to look for other injured fans and gave
mouth to mouth resusitation to several fans.The injured fans appeared to be suffering from
asphixia and obvious signs of death.They were pale,their lips were blue which showed
cyanosis had developed                      and they had no pulse or any signs of breathing.An ambulance arrived
about 5 minutes later and one of the crew began                             to use anaspirator bag on the fans showing
these signs.


I examined three other Liverpool fans who were in their late teens who were lying on their
backs unconscious and chocking on their own vomit.I immediately turned them over onto their
fronts into the recovery position,clearing their aifcawy and allowing their vomit to
discharge freely.I instructed some nearby Liverpool Fans to stay with these unconcious
^ p n s and to check their breathing remained regular and to call .for medical assistance if
required.The majority of fans I gave assistance to I noticed their breath smelled of
intoxicants.


The dead and injured v.«ere being taken to nearby ambulances and I stood with several other
officers forcing r cordon across the entrance of the tunnel leading to the V'est Terrace
in order to prevent                   fans entering the          ground and hindering      the evacuation of the de?d an
injured fans.h’hilrt                  1 \r-= i.. thir* cordon some Liverpool fans were urinating on officer." fro?
the stand above the                   ''e^t Herrrce. and         some fans were being      hostile towards theofficers i
the cordon,shouting                   and using aburixre         language tov;ards the     officer:-- .I'ventr^llythe serial
  rendfc?versed a+ the Cyrinasiir- and a briefing was held i” the T’crth -Itand .Our serial
Fiend 6.C-r: -nd             instructed to make our way to ClayvhhelF Lare,Traffic Depot where v:e rene
evertvally transported to MSPS arriving at 7.30pm.We were then de-brief%d by CID officers
fs nr3    e+n<->H H n v rr   fro m   d u ty .



PC ?560 Ball
3.6.*9
